BOSTON
PUBLIC
LIBRARY




Digitized by the Internet Arciiive

in 2009 with funding from

Boston Public Library



http://www.archive.org/detai.ls/celestialtelegraOOcaha



THE

CELESTIAL TELEGRAPH:

SECRETS OF THE LIFE TO COME,

REVEALED THROUGH

MAGNETISM;

Wheeeix the Existence, tue Foe.m, and the Occupations of itie Soul, aftee its

Separation from the Body, ark Proved by many Years' ExPERiiiENTS,

BY the means of

EIGHT ECSTATIC SOMNAMBULISTS,

WHO HAD

EIGiriT PERCEPTIONS OF THIRTY-SIX DECEASED PERSONS OF
VARIOUS CONDITIONS:

A DESCRIPTION OF THEM, THEIR CONVERSATION, ETC.,

WITH

PROOFS OF THEIR EXISTENCE IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD.
BY L. ALPH. CAHAGNET.



FIRST AMERICAN EDITIOX.

PARTRIDGE AND BRITTAN

SOO BEOADWAY.

1855.




INTRODUCTION.



" Death is but one of the hours of our dial, and our dial must turn for ever." —
Saint Martin.



The object of this work is not a desire to create or annihilate
such or such a system to favor any particular religion or creed,
more or less prominent in our age ; its sole object is to com-
mune with men who, like me, seek the truth with all the strength
of their soul. Pursue the track wherein I believe it to be, and
you will find it. Be prudent ; admit, reject naught without ma-
ture examination, and what you do not comprehend never pro-
claim to be impossible !

Somnambulism, ecstasy, promoted by magnetism, are the only
means of attaining the ends I have proposed to myself; any
other state, effected by the ordinary means of narcotics, leaves
the individual too much dependent on the resources of his be-
lief, the influence of desires, and naught but very suspicious
results are obtained. If, on the contrary, divers subjects, taken
from among all the conditions of civilized life, are directed by
men who have no other object but that of procuring informa-
tion, the results will be more complete; — and why? because
the isolated ecstatic is like unto a frail skiff on a boundless
ocean, having no decided course ; the account that he will give
of his voyage will portray the ensemhle of the picture he has
seen, without describing its parts ; if he is conducted by a will
stronger than his own toward a proposed object, we shall arrive
at the truth.

Once in this track, it would be wrong in us to be stopped by
the desire of knov/ing, comprehending, and defining the exist-
ence of God ; to doubt him, would be to erase one's self
from the list of reasonable beings ; to demonstrate him, would



4 INTRODUCTION.

"be to suppose him incapable of doing so himself; to speak of
his goodness, his justice, that is but right ! but of his wrath, that
would be assimilating him to ourselves ; to give him the form
of the sun, of a man, of a tortoise, of vegetables, would be to
repeat a multitude of systems, all of which do but end in keep-
ing our language in an eternal movement, and demonstrate how
foolish man is to wish to explain v/hat he can not rationally and
mathematically comprehend ; we will restrict ourselves to the
confession that, before explaining God, we should wish to be
able to explain ourselves.

The word God, or Jehovah, designates a being to whom we
attribute the innumerable mysteries surrounding us! — a think-
ing being, the author of all, the central focus toward which all
beings gravitate, and to which all are indebted for being what
they are. This ought to suffice us.

Immersed in these explorations, we will not imitate prophets
or their commentators, who have written only for a few, whose
intelligence more or less expanded, alone profited by their wri-
tings. No symbolical, cabalistical, or mystical figures ; — such is
not my purpose. I desire, if possible, to say to all beings :
" This work will offer you the proof of a better world than
ours, wherein you will live after having left your body in this,
and wherein a God, infinitely good, will reward you a hundred-
fold for the evils it was profitable for you to suffer in this world
of grief. I am about to prove to you that your relations, your
friends, therein await you with impatience ; that you can,
although on this globe, enter into communication with them,
speak to them, and obtain from them the information you deem
fit ; to effect this, deny not the existence of the soul, or at least
strive conscientiously to obtain the proofs you desire ; by som-
nambulism you may have as many as you please."

I can not pass over the word soul without addressing these
questions to whomsoever believes not in its existence. What
man of sense is there who can answer that there is not a being
within our body that seems separate from it, although intimate-
ly united to it ? This self that responds to the least desire of
reason, this mover, this mother-thought, around which are
grouped the thousand-arid-one thoughts constituting our whole
existence, something that invariably says to us : ** I am here, I
exist with you, I am a unity for you and a fraction for the mass ;
in my unity, I am as complicated as the mass. I am termed
soul, spirit, mover, essential part of God, without knowing pos-
itively the nature of my essence ; whether I be matter in its
most ethereal life, or a luminous substance apart, I am the slave
of this matter but for a moment in eternity, I undergo its laws
only because I am identified with it through necessity ; whether
I be of its nature or another, there nevertheless comes a mo-
ment when I separate from it : what represents death, restores
to the earth the atoms which the body borrowed from it, and I
restore to space the particle of spiritual substance of which I
am formed. I, immortal child of eternity, a traveller halting
for a moment on this petty heap of dust, return to my vast do-
main never more to quit it, and there enjoy the properties with
which my Creator has endowed me.

" If matter had me not to animate it, to think in it, and cause
it to act, this body, which would be but a compound of material
fluids and molecules, according to your philosophy, could be set
in motion by the harmony of these same fluids. When I quit
the body, with the combinations possessed by chemistry, phys-
ics, and medicine, why do they not succeed in reharmonizing
these molecules, and restoring to them existence ! Galvanism
has succeeded in setting in play the nervous mechanism after I
had abandoned my envelope ; but there stops its power; thought,
my inseparable property, can only be communicated by myself;
myself, alone. I am the grand lever that can cause all these
organs with whose ramifications I am acquainted, to perform
their functions; no motion can replace me — think and act for
me ! Wherefore 1 Because I am the life ; because I am an
individualized thought, and protected by my Creator. I alone
can be this self, this spirit, this soul 1 which can no more end
than the nature of its substance, which is whatsoever is ! Be-
cause you can not see me or touch me with your material or-
gans, you say that I am not a being apart, a power apart.."

Were it necessary to admit only what your material organs
can see and touch, you might deny thought, speech, electricity,
galvanism, sympathy, antipathy, attraction, repulsion, the prop-
erties of the loadstone, in short, the aggregations of the three
kingdoms, from the ethereal molecule in which are found the
principles of the diamond, to that of the plant and the animal !
How many things, however, exist which the eyes see not, or the
hands touch ; we can not, in the presence of the effects, deny
the causes which we know not how to explain.

Man alone possesses the power of becoming acquainted with
the various conditions of the matter constituting him, but not
through the ordinary means of material science ; to arrive at
this knowledge man must divest himself of his envelope, and
render himself homogeneous to the state of the thing with which
he desires to become acquainted. He may, in his material, ex-
ist, divide matter ad irtfinitum, combine it, but he can not be-
come acquainted with its life. This life is comprehensible only
in the spiritual state wherein is the source of whatsoever exists ;
we can explain laws only in the state in which we are. Let us
not, then, deny the existence of the soul, which we are com-
pelled to acknowledge, though not beholding it.

In the spiritual state the soul represents in man his whole
form and each of his parts — -his passions and pleasures, superi-
ority, inferiority, and intelligence; finds itself individualized as
on earth, has the recollection of its terrestial existence, its fam-
ily affections and friends, all which will be proved by psycho-
logical apparitions and discussions hereafter. My experiments
had been followed by no reflections since their commencement,
which goes back many years, because I wished to acquire an
intimate acquaintance with the subject I proposed treating of;
to take my time, in order to judge without enthusiasm the facts,
of which I have colle<ited a pretty large number, and learn
where to abide. I shall endeavor, therefore, to explain as clear-
ly as possible whatsoever appears to me important and consoling
for humanity in each revelation ; happy if I succeed in con-
firming in others that belief which I have acquired of the exist-
ence of a world of consolation, and penetrating a few souls
with all the happiness which I experience from so sweet a hope !



THE SECRETS OF THE FUTURE



REVEALED THROUGH



MAGNETISM.



FIRST ECSTATIC.



1st Sitting. — Binet (Bruno), my first ecstatic, was a young
man, twenty-seven years of age, of mild disposition, and very
limited intelligence in point of spiritualism, having read and
heard but little of magnetism. He submitted to my action
with confidence, and presented me with somewhat rare phe-
nomena ; he was not isolated, recollected all he said in his
crises, was sent to sleep by a single look from me, underwent
the laws of magnetic attraction with a great sensibility, was
completely dependent on my influence, and recovered his inde-
pendence instantaneously ; he beheld perfectly the interior of
bodies, and gave salutary counsels, possessed a retrospective
view of events and actions dating from a few years to half a
century, and described them remarkably well ; he beheld not
objects near him, but distinguished them perfectly well at a
distance, and gave me great proofs of singular lucidity. I kept
a journal devoted to his material views, from which I have ex-
tracted whatsoever related to metaphysics and the spiritual
world. It was about a week ago that I was magnetizing him,
when I beheld him thrown off his seat as if by a thunderbolt,
his countenance inflamed, and himself under the influence of a
fear, which he sought to disguise from me under the sem.blance
of a cou7-age he no longer possessed. *' What is the matter
with you?" said I to him. " I have just heard a voice on my
right, that told me your complaint was incurable, and that I
am no longer to trouble myself about it ; I thought no one was
near me, and then I was struck with a commotion that I can
not account for." — " Ask who it was spoke to you ?" " It was
my guide," is the reply. — "What is the guide's name V " Ga-
briel." — Bruno answered me in a low voice as the voice spoke
to him. He was at least a week in habituating himself to this
voice, which was hereafter to be the oracle to answer the ques-
tions I put to him with respect to the spiritual world.

As Bruno served me more particularly in medical experi-
ments, and as I was by no means disposed at that period to
speak of spiritualism, he invariably reverted to his communica-
tions. Whereupon, I took note of them, and assumed that
mystical language seriously only when I discovered in them
arguments sufficiently strong to be in oppugnancy to my reason.

I numbered these sittings in order to avoid relating the thou-
sand-and-odd details which ordinarily precede and follow these
sorts of communications, which we can not always provoke at
our will, but which should be seized upon whenever they pre-
sent themselves. As the multitude of questions which I address
to these ecstatics are naturally distanced by intervals which
can not be avoided, it will be impossible to find in them the
regularity of an ordinary dialogue, seeing that the most pre-
cious communications often arrived at the moment I least ex-
pected them ; therefore, I beg the reader to be patient, not to
lose sight of the most trivial questions, which he may afterward
arrange so as to form an instructive whole, worthy of medi-
tation.

2. " Could your voice tell me what magnetism is — what
its properties are ?" " Magnetism is a remedy that can cure all
curable diseases." — " Is magnetism a property of the body or the
soul ?" " It is a property of the soul : the body is the machine
through which it filters, the soul is the prime mover." — " What
are the other properties of the soul ? — is it free to do whatso-
ever it wills V "No, the soul is influenced by other souls ; it
is the latter that guide it in magnetism, as in all its other ac-
tions." — " They are, then, guides similar to yours V " Yes." —
" Have we all any ?" " Yes, a good and a bad one." — *' Where
are they placed ?" " My good angel is before me, hoverinof on
the road to virtue, which he points out to me, and the bad one
is on my left." — *' Is there a means of withdrawing one's self
from the influence of the bad one V " They are there to fulfil
their mission ; it is ordained so ; man can scarcely avoid one
more than the other."

3. " You spoke to me of souls the last time, could you tell
me what form they take after their separation from the body ]"
" No answer is made to your question." — " Ask if your father
lives, and is happy ?" " Yes, my father lives, and is very
happy.?"—" Could you see him 1" " Yes."—" When ?" " He
will appear to me suddenly, at the moment I am least think-
ing of him." — " Do you think there is a means of communi-
cating with angels or spirits'?" "Yes." — "What is it?"
" Prayer." — " What kind of prayer ?" " That from the heart;
but, in the state I now am, we have greater facility for being
with them — w^e have only to desire them, and they approach."

4. " Why have you had more difficulty in falling asleep to-
day than at other times ?" " It is on you that that depends." —
" Why have you moments of excellent lucidity and others far
inferior?" " That depends on ourselves." — " We fail, then, in
something ?" " We should pray." — " When ?" " At night, be-
fore getting into bed ; you on your behalf, I on mine." — "What
prayer should be said ? Can it be dictated to us ?" " No ; it
must proceed from the heart." — " Should it be said aloud or
inwardly ?" " Inwardly." — "Are all postures good ?" " No;
we should pray on our knees, with our eyes to heaven." —
" Why rather on our knees than otherwise ?" " Because we
ought to humble ourselves before the Being to whom we are
indebted for life ; we owe him submission, and it is not stand-
ing with pride, or lying at our ease, that v/e ought to address
a Being so superior, so good ; we can well make this slight
sacrifice to him who bestows with so much generosity. Infi-
nitely insignificant as we are, prostrate ourselves to the dust.
we can but crawl at his feet." — " Should we also pray to our
good angel V " Yes ; not for him who could not accept what
belongs to God alone ; but being nearer his throne, by his na-
ture and virtue, he serves us as an intermediate, by offering
our prayer to God, and the more we place ourselves under his
protection, the more he can inspire us with good thoughts." —
" You have told me that we had a bad spirit, whose influence
we were obliged to undergo ; this is not unlike destiny."
" Destiny is only in influences, and I will tell you how to pro-
vide against bad influence. We conceive a wicked thought ;
from the first stroke that we feel of its influence, we should
have recourse to the good angel, that he may not allow it to
take root in us, that it may not return to the charge seven or
eiffht times, until it draws us on to commit the bad action with
which it inspires us ; we may, by placing ourselves under the
protection of our good angel, that is divine protection, avoid
the snare laid for our ignorance." — " Suppose that bad actions
can not be avoided, as we perceive every day, is he who com-
mits the evil punished for it ?" " Yes ; for at his death he ap-
pears before God, who has ever counselled him to do good,
who desires naught but good ; he then reprimands him by
reminding him of all the bad acts of his life, pointing out to
him, with mildness, the road he ought to have taken ; recom-
mends him to improve his conduct, and places him in a society
suitable to his tastes." — " There is no hell, then, or place of
punishment V " I beg your pardon, there are different places
where suffering exists, not as it is presented to us ; they are
places of trial, wherein you are purified, without suffering, ex-
cept that of being deprived of the sight of God. As I have
told you, God is so good, he has so great love for us that he
punishes us merely by a reprimand ; but this punishment is
very sensitive, seeing that it is inflicted before all in heaven,
then it would be an impossibility for us to do evil, since the bad
thoughts which engender it are of the domain of the earth,
which is the real hell, and rest buried there with our mortal
remains. Then, again, in heaven, our whole interior is laid
bare ; we can not have a thought which may not be instantly
perceived by all those around us ; even if you had an evil
thought, but that is an impossibility — it v^^ould be impossible
for you to put it in execution : the rest, seeing our body laid
bare, and our utter inability to conceal a v^^eak part of it, would
advise us to think better." — " You speak of bodies; w^e have
one, then 1" " Yes; w^e are exactly as on earth, dress apart." —
" Swedenborg spoke of these things, does your angel know
him 1 Was he inspired by God V " My angel does know
Swedenborg ; he was inspired by God." — " Is all that he re-
vealed relative to the spiritual world exact?" " No." — "He
has committed errors then?" "No answer is made me to
your question." — " You have told me that in heaven all live in
society, what do they do there 1 is prayer your sole occupa-
tion ]" " Oh, no ! one is there as on earth, with one's family,
wife, children, friends." — " Can we gratify there our passions
for love, reading, music ?" " Yes ; but not such love as on
earth ; it is a holy, intimate friendship, a pleasure at finding
ourselves reunited to those whom we have always loved ; but
we know not there the love of woman, in such an acceptation of
the word as you, no doubt, mean. We read, play music,
have usages as on earth ; we demonstrate what we desire to
know, with this difference, that there are no haughty masters as
on earth, but all are friends, who take a pleasure in serving
you ; we learn there much quicker than here below — in a few
lessons we know what we desire." — " Do we return to the
earth"?" *■ No." — "Do we remember what we have done on
earth V " Yes and no. No, because it is a state so different
from the terrestrial one, we find ourselves so happy that we
are not tempted to think of the earth ; but we know that we
have lived there, left relations and friends there whom we long
to see again." — " How can we meet again among such an im-
mense number, and after a time more or less long 1" " That is
accomplished by the power of God ; it is an enchantment in-
comprehensible." — "You say that we all meet again in families;
but those poor families that have neither father nor mother,
who receives them?" " There are no fatherless and mother-
less children ; if they are forsaken by their parents, they find
them again in heaven, where nothing is lost ; in the meanwhile
they are received by their grandfather or grandmother, they
find a family awaiting them, and are placed, although among
millions and millions of beings, as quickly as you would place
a book in your library ; I tell you it is so miraculous that it can
not be comprehended or explained." — " Is it still Gabriel who
tells you these things V " Yes ; then again I am sensible of
and comprehend them."

Here are two answers on which I beg to fix for a moment
the attention. Bruno says that in heaven it is impossible to
have an evil thought, because our interior is laid bare. Swe-
denborg has already said that in his Treatise on Heaven and
Hell ; this revelation contains nothing incomprehensible before
the communication of thoughts in the somnambulic state.

The second answer is that in heaven we meet again our
family and friends as if by enchantment. We behold the same
miracle — must we say on earth — through the facility that
clairvoyants have of seeing at immense distances, designated
places, without having any communication with them.

Bruno, as I have said, has no notion of psychology, is by no
means inclined to devotion ; 1 can not influence him by my
manner of thinking, which, as will be seen, is almost always
heterogeneous to his own. It is in order that the reader may-
judge of my impartiality that I give an account of all my
questions and the answers obtained, without, in the least, per-
verting their meaning.

5. *' I should be much more lucid were you not possessed by
an evil spirit." — "What do you mean by that?" "I mean
that a person with whom you have no longer friendly relations
is the cause of your being beset by an evil spirit." — " What
power can this spirit have over me. I in no wise dread him ;
I have never experienced any effect from him V " Ah ! such
are men who dread nothing ; but know, once for all, that your
power is a complete nullity before the spirit; it is the spirit
that moves matter ; it is that which possesses action and force,
and God alone knows what force a spirit can display? You
Bay that you have never felt the influence of the one I speak
of; do you not recollect that about three years ago, you
experienced a painful oppression in your slumbers ; you had
dreadful visions, and, if you would confess it, you were raised
up in your bed, and even now you must experience much
difficulty in going to sleep," — " True it is that for a long time
I have had at night nervous attacks which I attribute to the
weakness of my constitution. I have had also painful dreams ;
but that does not prove to me that it is a spirit sent especially
by the person you have mentioned, who can have caused this
trouble." " Let it suffice you to know that you ought to have
been aware of the power of a spirit, because you desired to
see one, touch one ; you have been heard. You do not tell
me the whole truth ; my guide says so, and he adds that if
the angel of light who guides you had not been so powerful
you would have seen others; you might have been beaten,
thrown out of your bed ; you are fortunate at having got
off with so little ; pray, and you will soon be rid of it." — " I
do not very well understand what you tell me ; things have
passed which in truth have caused me much surprise and
suffering ; but I always attributed these facts to nervous irri-
tation or some other material cause." " It is true that the
sufferings you have experienced are owing to your nervous
system : but all that has reference to the intelligence, was under
the dependence of this evil spirit." — " You say that it was a
spirit sent to me ; this person is altogether innocent of intrigu-
ing, and I am certain that you are in error." " I will explain
to you how it has been brought about. The difference that
happened between you and this person, who is several leagues
off, took place by correspondence; you wrote something that
offended this person, who has ever been jealous of you ; he
answered you under the influence of the contrariety he expe-
rienced. This person has very acrid humors, very ardent
desires, he could have wished you at the very deuce : he wrote
to you things that gave you much pain ; the letter was the
conductor of this bad choleric fluid ; the nervous state in
which you then were conduced to your being invaded by this
fluid ; the disposition of mind in which you were, independent
of this circumstance, facilitated the introduction of this spirit
within you ; under the nature of this fluid, you directly asked
to see spirits, in which you did not then believe, and both
circumstances contributed toward placing you in a state of
obsession. Drive back with all your might this fluid on the
person I have named ; pray, and you will be released, and I
shall be lucid."

As may be naturally supposed, I made minute researches to
confront the date he gave me with that of this soi-disant letter.
The very next day a person to whom I spoke of this reve-
lation set me on the right track of this quarrel, which dated,
indeed, from the time when I received a letter producing such
an effect of contrariety on my mind that T passed more than
three hours in a wood, a prey to such agitation that I knew not
what had become of me. it is true that from this period I had
extraordinary visions ; it is certain that I experienced effects
of attraction in bed though wide awake, that I was obliged,
once especially, to cling to it, seeing that I was being carried
away, and that half my body was quite out of bed. It is true
that at that period I wrote down a few conjurations in order to
enter into communication with spirits, and satisfy myself
respecting them ; then kept a journal of those visions and cor-
poreal phenomena, and afterward classed the facts among
those of nervous diseases, and I do not understand how Bruno
can otherwise class them ; I am unable to perceive in this
revelation any communication of thought, since I could not
think myself, as I was presumed to be under the influence
of possession, and he was totally unacquainted with those facts
to which I attached no importance.

6. " To-day will you be able to see your father better than
the last time?" "I see him." — "Can you speak to him?"
" Yes." — " How is he dressed ?" " He is in the same dress as
he wore on earth — blue waistcoat, pantaloons of striped vel-
vet, felt hat, somewhat worn." — " Ask him where he is now."
" In heaven." — " Is he happy V " He is very happy." —
"What are his occupations?" "He reads a great deal and
promenades, as he did on earth." — " Can he protect you V*
" He can give me wholesome advice ; lie will come and see me
again when I ask for him." — " Who, pray, thus awakes you at
the moment I least expected it?" "Gabriel." — "For what
reason ?" " Because he foresees that the evil genius could
answer me in his place, and, in order to thwart his designs, he
will awake me thus whenever he deems il not fit, for the
moment, to answer your questions."

7. "Have evil spirits a chief whom we term the Devil]"
"No." — "Have all spirits existed on earth?" *'Yes." —
" Angels and spirits, are they not equal 1" *' No : angels
and spirits are men who have inhabited the earth, but there
is a great difference in their attributions, understanding, and
wisdom. The angels are nearer to God, better acquainted
with his designs, and put them in execution." — " Have angels
wings 1" " The wings represented on their shoulders are
merely symbols, figurative of the speed with which they clear
space, seeing that for them there is no space. Positively
speaking, they have none; but to those who believe, and desire
to see them with wings, they appear thus." — " Do spirits work
in heaven ? Do they eat and drink]" " They do in heaven
precisely what is done on earth, with this difference, that it
is no longer a want, but a pleasure. It is not for money that
they w^ork, but for pleasure's sake." — " Can spirits carry
material objects ]" " Some have this property : their strength
is incomprehensible, when they are allowed to make use of it."

8. At this sitting I obtained no information worth mention-
ing. Bruno is aroused, and if, perchance, I put to hira a
question previously submitted to him (a circumstance fraught
with great difficulties to me, unable as I am to recollect exactly
whether I have put such or such a question), he is suddenly
aroused, saying, " You have already been answered." This
has occurred several times, even in medical consultations.
I am consequently, obliged to take every possible precaution.

9. " AVliat is the substance of a spirit ]" " It is a substance
similar to air, for which reason it can traverse all bodies with-
out encountering obstacles." — " What is the special form of a
spirit ?" " That of man, since all spirits have been men on
earth ; but it can assume the form it desires when disengaged
from matter." — *' You say that there are wicked spirits around
the earth: are there any also in heaven]" "There are no
wicked spirits in heaven : they wander around the earth."
— " Why is it thus V " To gratify their desire to do evil,
which is rather the accompHshment of a mission, which, when
terminated, restores them to the state of the good, and then
they go to heaven, as the rest. No one is excluded." — " Who
orders them to do evil V " Evil is useful ; without it there
would be no good. We could not appreciate the one without
the other. Evil is the consequence of good ; the good of one
is the evil of another, and the latter tends to the good of
the former. God has deemed fit thus to act, and we must be
satisfied."

10. Bruno is in a powerful ecstasy ; he goes to heaven for
the first time ; sees there his father, who is reading whi'le
seated at a small table. " What book is that your father has
in his hands ?" " It is similar to ours, but the impression is not
the same." — *'0f what form is the impression?" "There are
letters in the form of a D ; then, again, others similar to a
school-boy's pot-hooks, &c. I can scarcely describe it to you.
My father closes the book, and says that we should not compre-
hend this writing. Suffer me a moment to return to heaven."
At the lapse of a quarter of an hour he awakes, looks at his
bed with an air of contempt, and exclaims, " Oh ! I can very
well understand why the dead regret not the earth. Who,
pray, would desire to vegetate on this heap of dust after seeing
what I have just seen?" — "What, then, have you seen?"
"Heaven." — "Well, let me hear all about it." "Oh! I was
in a place having no horizon, illumed by a superb light ; before
me was a being whom I believe to be God, seated on a throne.
On his head was a brilliant cap ; his beard was gray, I believe ;
his arm resting on that of his fauteuil ; and he wore a robe of
crimson velvet spangled all over with golden flowers-de-luce.
His air v/as majestic. He was speaking to his ministers, six
or seven in number ; I did not count them. They were all
seated on the steps of the throne, and attired in a robe of the
same stuiF and color as that of God ; but I do not think I saw
any gold embroidery on them. Around, them, and in the
distance, were a multitude of beings, promenading. Oh ! how
ugly are the men of earth, compared with those beautiful
countenances — those complexions so fair ! Over one shoulder
they had a covering of gauze in the form of a scarf, then a
small robe of gauze so fine that their whole form was easily
perceived ; their feet were in sandals fastened to buskins ; but,
oh God, how beautiful it was ! I was raised into the air ;
I beheld the earth under my feet, and all those insignificant
beings, men, so vain, so proud, that they appeared to me paltry
and mean compared with the divine beings before me ! How
dirty and dark, too, appears to me this room compared with
the places I beheld. Oh ! I could have wished never to wake
again. I can very well understand the colonel who attaches
no value to the 200,000 francs he has lost. What are the
riches of the earth compared with those of heaven ? What
would I not have given could you but have beheld this sublime
sight !" — " My dear Bruno, you were in a superior ecstasy. I
am sorry that I was not aware of it : I should have counselled
you to a thorough observation of many things. We ought,
however, to deem ourselves fortunate that you have the power
of recollection, as it gives you so much pleasure and me pre-
cious information, only I think that you have been mistaken
with respect to the personage you take for God ; it could not
be the Supreme Being. We will inquire by-and-by."

11. " Ask your guide whether it was God. whom you, in
your ecstasy, saw the other day ?" " No, it was Gabriel him-
self." — *' Why did he appear to you thus presiding at his
council ?" " He was not presiding at a council that day, he
wished to give me a sitting." — " For what purpose ?" *' To
display to me the glories and riches that God has in store for
those who love him." — " What do you mean by glories and
riches V* " I mean the faculties with which the soul obtains
what constitutes its joy." — " Is he always attired thus ?" *'No ;
it was to impart more charms to my vision." — " Ask him if
Gabriel is his real name?" " No; the angels in heaven have
no name; they may take one to visit men : that of Gabriel
signifies God's angel of light."

12. " You once told me that Gabriel was also my angel ; he
may then be the guide of several persons at once." " Thousands."
— '* But how can that be 1 It is incomprehensible." " Precise-
ly, because it is extraordinary, it is so ; did it seem an easy
matter to us, they would not be our superiors ; from the fact
of their accomplishing things which we do not comprehend,
they surpass us."

13. " Ask Gabriel why, despite my wish to believe all I see,
all you predict, I am still incredulous, and unable to attain that
faith which is said to be so necessary to arrive at great mathe-
matical solutions." " You will believe by-and-by, doubt is not
forbidden ; the more one has doubted the stronger the faith
becomes. You will believe ; follow your impulsions, it is no
crime. Important revelations are prepared for you, you will
be instructed by degrees."

14. " You have told me that you beheld heaven as an immen-
sity without bounds, could you give me a fuller description of
it V " It is an immensity boundless, ever illumed by a most
brilliant light, consequently there is no night." — " Is time reck-
oned there as on earth V^ " No." — " Do angels like yours be-
hold God ?" " Yes."— '* In what form 1" " That of the sun."—
" Is it our terrestrial sun ?" " No ; there is in heaven but one
sun which is the spiritual sun, in the form in which God appears ;
oar terrestrial sun is itself but the reflector of the rays he re-
ceives." — '" Are there distances in heaven for those who dwell
in a particular place than they are there." — " How are spirits
in it V " They know none ; for no sooner do they desire to be
found there, assembled or dispersed V " They are in societies,
according to their tastes, and walk about as on earth." — " Are
there several heavens V " Yes ; there are three." — " Give me
some idea of them." " They are placed one above another like
clouds ; according to their qualities, men after their death go to
one or the other."

15. " You told me there were three heavens placed one above
another, like clouds." " Yes j they are kinds of spheres, for
all that exists has a sphere. Gabriel can envelop in his, every
being under his segis ; in like manner, man has a particular
circle surrounding him, and within w^hich is contained all that it
is necessary for him to possess." — " Some authors have already
spoken of these kinds of spheres, and even gone so far as to
say that man contained within his own a universe in miniature."
" Do not let that astonish you ; man, it is true, possesses a ma-
terial universe in miniature." — " Those heavens, no doubt, are
the beautiful azure field studded with stars, which we admire
above our heads." " No, it is above us, above our earth ; but
in an atmosphere more pure and of immense extent, and these
heavens seem to form but one, they present no difficulty to
traverse."-^" How after death do we ascend to heaven ] " As
a bubble, a little air ascending on water." — " Have we a form
when quitting the body '?" " No ; but it delineates itself grad-
ually, and on entering heaven has that of man, which it ever
preserves, without, as you may suppose, undergoing change as
on earth."

16. Bruno furnishes me with still further details as to spirits.
" A spirit is air," said he, " but it can assume the form it de-
sires, carries very heavy burdens. In the state I am now, I am
a spirit like them ; I am out of my body, I perceive it seated
on the chair ; I walk about in my room without being seen or
felt by you whom I touch. I even see myself at my shop-
board preparing to go to work. I see myself wherever I
wish ; this would make me believe that I am several beings.
As images impressed in each place, I regard my soul — at this
moment it is similar in everything to anybody, only I perceive
in it a whiter brow, and I am more comely than my body."

17. " Why at times do you answer me almost before I have
finished questioning you — you can not have time to reproduce
my words ?" " That astonishes you, and you w^ill be still more
astonished when I tell you that I myself am at times a quiet
spectator of the words pronounced by my mouth ; it often hap-
pens that I take no part in the discussions carried on between
you and Gabriel; it is he who insinuates himself into my body,
answers by ray voice your questions, and I find myself a mere
auditor of your discussions ; you can not believe this since you
do not believe in spirits." — " I think I have sufficiently proved
to you that I believed in the existence of the soul after its sep-
aration from the body, and consequently in the existence of spir-
its, since the soul is one ; but I can not comprehend and place
a blind faith in all you tell me, w^ithout annihilating the facul-
ties of the soul : I can not very well appreciate them without
unexceptionable proofs." " You will not want for proofs ; but
they will not always respond to those demanded by material
reason, because I have already told you that the two states of
being are so incompatible (although linked with each other),
that they can not be proved by each other ; one appears to ex-
ist only by the other, and it is the spiritual which is the real life,
the material life being only a copy of the former, and encom-
passed with errors."

18. For some time I had not magnetized Bruno, when one
day he came to me quite ill, and making many apologies for his
neglect toward me, begged me to cure him as I had already
done several times before. Scarcely was he sent to sleep than
he said to me : " You would never believe that the complaint I
labor under is caused by evil spirits that have taken up their
abode in my stomach." Had I not known Bruno for a kind
and frank friend, I should have thought that he wanted to mys-
tify me ; but I was assured of his good faith in all he said to
me, and could only fancy that he was very susceptible of hallu-
cination. However, it came into my head that Swedenborg af-
firmed in his writings that spirits often assembled in society in
some part of the body. The possessions operated at Loudun, and
a thousand other analogous facts seem to impart a sort of truth-
fulness to this assertion. I let Bruno utter before me his system
at his ease, contenting myself with always questioning whenever
he appeared obscure. I said to him, therefore, *' Explain to
me how that appears to you possible." " People often say, my
complaint lies here, I have a swelling, a pain, complaints that
we attribute to a cold, or something else, when properly speak-
ing, it is the work of spirits that insinuate themselves into our
bodies to disturb, by all possible means, the harmony of life, to
create distress and unhappiness, in order to gratify their pro-
pensity for mischief and trouble. The world would look upon
him as as madman who should say that a spirit, in the form of
wind or a swelling, produced the colic or inflammation, in order
to paralyze our action by keeping us in bed, or confined to our
room at a moment when we ought to be out attending to busi-
ness, which often, by an apparently trifling delay, suffers much,
and sometimes the most important effects thus depend on the
most insignificant causes. The cause is otherwise seen, or to
speak more correctly, not seen at all, and poor humanity finds
itself blinded by its foolish pride, which would be unwilling to
descend so low as to admit what I say."

19. " You told me yesterday that spirits in some form or
other, introduced themselves into our bodies, to torment us at
their pleasure under the mask of disease ; we are, then, the
veriest slaves of the universe ; it is by no means to be presumed
that we are the sport of such or such a spirit, according to his
caprice." " What I told you yesterday, is the fruit of my knowl-
edge in the state I am ; it is my conviction. I speak of what I
behold with my own eyes, and I defy any somnambulist, having
the light I have, to belie me." — *' How is it that a spirit that
must have some form, can take that of a trifling swelling, of
wind, &c. ; it is impossible, incomprehensible !" " It is owing
to our inability to comprehend it that they do so ; were there
nothing miraculous in their actions, they would not be superior
to us ; could they do the mischief to each other that they do to
us, they would not make us their victims, but as they can nei-
ther deceive nor influence one another, they of necessity torment
us; and, as I have already told you, the man who by their
counsels devotes himself to the doing of evil, calls them even
to his assistance. When he quits the earth, he takes the place
of the spirit who led him into evil, and the latter passes into a
sphere where his evil thoughts no longer accompany him ; thus
proceeds the purification from the earth to God." — " You have,
however, told me that wicked spirits had a mission for evil ;
that this evil was beneficial; that God punished not the guilty."
" I told you, it is true, that evil was beneficial, but in order to
be put in execution it must assume a form. It is not your good
angel who will give a form to evil ; his mission is to give or ap-
ply a form to good : it is, therefn'e, the evil one that is obliged
to apply evil in order to satisfy his want of enjoying his work.
If he had not the taste of acting thus, evil could not exist ; then
he can draw from it, and raise up for us a host of evils, each
of which represents an evil spirit or its action. The good one
acts quite the reverse, and thus it happens that this perpetual
conflict of good and evil can not terminate so long as the mate-
rial man exists. This, then, was the reason for my telling you,
and I repeat it, that all the angels and the evil spirits that are on
the earth in pairs beside us to lead us to good and evil, as we
lead a child, have been men on earth ; it is only since they quit-
ted it that they are what they are, and it may easily be divined
from his very inclinations what part a man living on earth will
play after quitting it : the more he has desired to do evil, the
more he will cause to be done when, in his turn, he shall be
called upon as a guide, instead of being, as he was on earth,
guided ; it is a chain that runs ad infinitum ^ many links of which
are still hidden from us." — "You just now told me that spirits
can not influence each other, how is it that a little ptisan or a
cataplasm cures the swelling or inflammation which you repre-
sent as an evil spirit?" " I told you that they had no influence
over each other in the spiritual world ; but on earth it is
different, seeing that it is on this continual influence that
our life depends ; and I will answer you that the remedy
you apply is the influence of the good spirit in the form of a
•flower or grain, and thus it is that they drive each other out by
remedial applications, or their contraries, in material forms
which they can influence at will." — " In that case all that exists
is but a compound of spirits." " Certainly, in so far as they
can invest all the forms of it, that there is nothing dead in nature,
and that all that exists is divided into two camps, the one good,
the other bad, or I should rightly say" " While you are
about it, say ; keep back nothing ; your system does not dis-
please me." ** Well, I wall tell you that good and evil are what
they are only because we find ourselves in positions wherein
we are unable to appreciate their effects ; for, according to the
position, evil is a good for one, and good is an evil for the other.
Such we perceive to be the case with fire, which effects the
greatest good when we stand in need of it, and annoys when it
is not required ; not that I pretend by this that a man who
breaks his thigh derives good from it; but, although this acci-
dent in our eyes is in the category of evil, the doctor, and all
those who live on the evil of others, find therein as much good
as the patient does evil : so, judge." — " I acknowledge that you
are ingenious." " I am right." — " I don't deny it."

I must not terminate this sitting without making mention of
a somewhat similar revelation of which I was once a witness at
a party to which I had been invited to see a somnambulist who
was singularly susceptible of the physical influence of her mag-
netizer. A gentleman approaches her to consult her as to an
indisposition he experienced, and, I believe, to know at the
same time what to think of somnambulism. Scarcely was she
in communication with him than she said to him : " Your com-
plaint is not in the least dangerous ; it is an inflammation caus-
ed by an unfortunate passion you have." — " What passion V*
asked he. " You will not take offence if I mention it before
company." — " Mention it ; I have naught to reproach myself
with." " You are too often thirsty." — Every one began to laugh,
following the example of the consulter. " I have not always
had this failing," replied he. " I perceive it, and I also per-
ceive the cause," — " What is it ?" " A long, long time ago, you
passionately loved a young person ; she did not return your
love, because you were not disposed to wed her, for good rea-
sons which you then had. You left that part of the country in
which she lives, and since that time she conceived such a hatred
toward you that she wished you all possible harm; you be-
came a victim to her evil influence." — " What do you mean by
that V " I mean that from that period you have been under
the influence of an evil spirit, that has disordered your conduct,
by kindling in you a fire which you always thought you could
extinguish or moderate, by giving yourself up to drink ; and,
what is more, those desires for drink are in you periodical." —
" What you tell me is exact as to the circumstance and my fail-
ing ; but I can not believe that such is the real cause." *' You
clearly perceive, hovt^ever, that I tell you the truth on
one point, I do not deceive you on the other; but don't be
down-hearted, there is a remedy." — " Drinking no more,
doubtless '?" " Oh ! you could not leave it off of yourself;
there is no power but that 1 shall point out to you that can set
you free." — " Tell me what that power is ?" ** At night, before
going to bed, kneel down, pray to God from the bottom of your
heart to deliver you from this failing ; then, rise, animate your
thoughts by the recollection of what I tell you, strive to pass
into a state of exaltation, then raise your arms, fancying to
yourself that this person is present before you, and cast at her,
with disdain and wrath, the evil fluid with which you are im-
pregnated, saying, ' Evil spirit who besettest me, flee far from
me, in the name of God, the sole Creator, thy master and mine;
return to the source whence thou earnest.' Pray your good angel
to aid you in this operation ; do this until you are released, and
you will not be long before being so, I assure you." — " How
would you have the fluid of which you speak rejoin that woman
who is more than a hundred and fifty leagues from here ?"
" Fancying to yourself that she is in your room, she will no
longer be a hundred and fifty leagues off." — " I can't compre-
hend that." " Act withou*t comprehending, and you will see."
The magnetizer, who believes not in spirits, but takes much
delight in rendering his somnambulist cataleptic, resumed his
experiments without paying any attention to what he had just
heard. As this revelation bore so close an affinity to those of
Bl^uno and my other ecstatics, I took note of it, and now men-
tion it, deeming this to be an appropriate place, in order to fix
the thoughts of the reader on this kind of possession. True
that this is raising new difficulties as to the existence or non-
existence of free-will, and apparently in favor of the latter be-
lief. However, this kind of alienation of the faculties of men
could not be generalized, and this power of a few beings over
their fellows would rather seem merely an assemblage of two
organizations, one of which is destined to subdue or dominate
the other for a time and similar enough to the power of mag-
netism, which is null before an organization that enters not
into correspondence with it ; unfortunate, indeed, would it be
were it otherwise ; the mere wish of an enemy would suffice to
reduce you to a state the most abject and dependent; I repeat,
however, that it is possible.

20. After a moment's concentration, Bruno perceives coming
toward him an angel, in celestial costume — transparent robe,
wavy hair, feminine physiognomy, legs bare, feet in buskined
sandals ; this angel carries oif Bruno, who tells me he is leav-
ing his body and going away ; at the lapse of an instant, he
says : " I have traversed clouds ; my angel conducted me to
my father, and left me alone with him." — " "What was your
father doing?" "He is still reading." — "Is he happy]"
♦* Yes." — '* Does he eat, drink, and sleep ?" " He eats, drinks,
and sleeps, only when disposed to do so for pleasure's sake,
and not through necessity ; if he has a mind for a pear or any
other fruit, he gathers it and eats it ; but I repeat, it is not
through necessity, for spirits have no wants of this kind in
heaven." — " What are their usages and occupations ?" " The
same as on eai-th, what best pleases them." — " What are their
acquirements V " Such as they are pleased to have, they study
and learn by themselves what they desire to know." — " Can
your father be deceived?" "No." — "Can he answer me a
few questions V " Yes." — " Was it a good spirit that came at
the last sitting ?" " No, I suspected him ; but they are all so very
malicious, and wrap themselves up in so much precaution that
one has some difficulty in recognising them." — " What now
tells you that it is really your father who speaks to you 1 Can
an evil spirit assume his form ?" " Yes : but my father will
make himself known by placing his hand on his breast, a sign
that an evil spirit can not take, because God permits only the
good to make use of these kinds of signs : — an angel, for in-
stance, will be recognised by a star, a crescent, a diamond, or
precious stone. Were it not for this we should never distin-
guish between a good and an evil spirit."

21. " I see an angel that I can scarcely fix my eye on. Oh !
it is an angel of light !" — " Ask liim his name !" "He answers
me, G-abriel ; but I can not speak to him, because he himself is
speaking to a throng of persons assembled around him ; he is
holding two crowns which he displays to me ; they are for us
two." — "When will he give -us these crowns V " In heaven." —
" We have plenty of time." " You have less than you imagine."
— " How should you know V "I can perceive it." — " How so 1"
" I am shown a very brilliant six, which signifies six years ;
then again I perceive your body before me deprived of life, or
at least life quitting it." — " Look at it dying, no doubt it is from
a disease of the chest." " No, of the side, which will work its
way up to the throat and suffocate you — must I say it — sud-
denly." — " Look and describe to me this scene." "I perceive
your soul in the form of smoke from incense, issuing through
all your pores, gradually assuming the form of your body, then
you ascend as gradually, traverse the two circles, arrive at the
third ; you receive the remonstrance due to your faults from
the part of God ; you are not pure enough to remain in this
circle which is the most divine, you descend again to complete
your purification ; there, I perceive you receiving the crown
of a green color, which has been just shown me ; you are of a
dazzling whiteness ; your figure is more graceful, your hair
glossy, forehead open, in short like all spirits, without losing
the form of your features, they are more delicate, and set off
by that celestial whiteness which renders all spirits so beauti-
ful to behold ! You give yourself up to the study of books ;
you have pens, ink, and paper ; you write, and as you are very
fond of little children, you have several around you ; you are
holding a little boy who is indebted to you for life ; you will
not be long before you go up to the higher heaven. How
singular it is ! I see you in heaven without ceasing to perceive
you on earth ! You appear to me clad in white like many
others." — " You see me read and write ; since we obtained a
knowledge of all we desire without having recourse to those
means, they appear to me useless !" " I have already told you
that in heaven we were not as mummies, we possess there the
same passions as on earth, especially those which render us as
happy as possible ; so, you who love study devote yom'self to
it, you write down your reflections; but, as you may imagine,
on subjects otherwise grave and curious than on earth : they
are true writings, while on earth they are but romances, trifles;
you will know as much as you desire, and you will not fail de-
siring." — " When my soul left my body, did it appear to you
to form a body similar to mine in all its organs 1" " I have
just told you that it was delineated perfectly well, but became
more distinct as it rose, and when at length conveyed to its
abode in heaven, it was in all similar to the body, apart the de-
licacy of the features and the whiteness of the skin. In the
circle you will be, you will have the j^ower of visiting the
earth."

21h. *' My guide is near me, have you any questions to put
to him ]" "Can your guide see matter 1" *' Yes." — "Other
spirits answer the contrary." " Because they have not that
power ; mine can see it. If certain spirits could not see matter,
how would you have them convey objects, cause obsessions,
upset furniture, and all material things ? To strike a blow on
this chest of drawers, it is necessary to see it ; to ring this bell
it must be seen ; to upset this vase it must be known where it
stands ; to bring a letter or anything else it must be held. My
guide says that he can see at will material objects." — " Which
is it, matter or spirit, that is sensible V " It is spirit that
renders matter sensible and supports it." — " If spirit supports
matter, why should a person whose leg has been amputated
-stand in need of a wooden leg, seeing that he has a spiritual
leg, since, according to you, the soul is in all similar to the
body?" "Such person has a spiritual leg that no power
in the world can separate from his" body; but this leg no
longer having the material organs in which it performed its
functions, it can not, any more than a workman without tools,
do anything where they are necessary." — " If it be matter ani-
mated by the spirit which suffers or is sensible, why should
this same person suffer at times as if he had his m.aterial leg;
the spirit then can suffer alone V " I see at this moment one
who has undergone an operation. I perceive his spiritual leg,
which is much whiter than the other, I assure you, although I
equally perceive the wooden leg that supports him ; and my
guide makes it clearly perceptible to me that the suffering
which this man experiences owes its sensibility merely to its al-
liance with the material body; it is subject to all the sensations
of this material leg of which it is the prolongation ; but this
painful sensibility can not exist when the perishable body is
totally separated from the soul." — ** Could you tell me how it
was that the fanatics of the 18th century who were subject to
convulsive fits, being submitted to tests which metals can not
resist, were not crushed by these experiments ?" " All that
was operated by the will and power of God, and as you are
aware, nothing is impossible to him, the spirit withdrew from
these bodies ; this rendered them insensible, and then God sup-
ported them in these cruel experiments ; it is impossible for us
to comprehend this miracle." — *' The spirit of God lent itself,
therefore, to such farces 1" '* I have no answer for your ques-
tion, God is not an actor, whom we may hiss or applaud ! !"

22. " Ask your guide whether we are reunited in heaven to
the woman we loved on earth V " Not always ; we are re-
united to the woman who was created after our own image,
having the same affections, wants, and tastes, as ourselves." —
" What am I to understand by this ? the wife of the earth may
not be the wife of heaven." " No, in heaven, as I have told
you, we can neither dissemble nor conceal aught from each
other ; every one can read in your heart and know your real
affections ; on earth it is very different, the material body con-
ceals the defects of the soul ; we fancy the existence of a mu-
tual feeling, we meet ; but as soon as our gross passions are
satisfied, directly the body has no longer any want, we resume our
liberty of acting, thinking ; we no longer dissemble, and perceive
too Ibte that we should be best far away from each other. As
every one bears with him to heaven his earthly affections, as
we can not make a sacrifice of them to any one, but, on the
contrary, must gratify them, we no longer seek each other to
give rise to mutual vexation, but to add to our bliss ; then, the
woman whom you have lived with on earth not being what you
could wish, God bestows on you another who is the half of
yourself." — " Herein you seem to explain as the Bible — that
man was created male and female. Can it be that a material
body contains two bodies which undouble themselves at death V*
" No, it is not thus man w^as created male and female; but not
androgynous, nor two bodies in each other, as you say, but sep-
arately, that is, he is born double and lives separately. Every
being has his complement awaiting him in heaven." — " I don't
understand this explanation." " I tell you that every being
that is born is double, whether man or woman ; that we meet
each other in heaven even though we may not have met on
earth." — •* Then, according to you, on earth we are disjoined V
"Yes, the better to make you understand, my guide presents
to me a picture showing the manner in which this is performed.
I see before me several women, the first o£ whom being enceinte
brings into the world a boy who undoubles himself instantly,
enabling me to see a little girl who issues from him, resembles
him in all, and she enters like a germ into the body of the second
woman in order to be bred there and to receive life in its en-
tirety. This little girl will be the complement or wife of the
little boy from whom she issued, and whom she would rather
take for her little twin- brother ; they will rejoin each other in
heaven, no matter at what time and in what place they ai'e
born, because my guide tells me that the little girl who is the
half of the little boy, may, according to the order and will of
God, not be bred in due succession nor in the same country,
yet for all this they meet again at the same time in heaven ;
but, though born at a different period, she will, nevertheless,
rejoin her half to complete it, and live with it in a union as
pure as holy ; when this second half is born the same process
will be renew^ed, and from the girl will issue a boy, w^ho can
not be completed until there issues from him a half in the same
manner, which will be a little girl, and so on ad infinitum
Now do you understand ? I explain to you herein the mystery
of our appearance on earth which is revealed to you." — " I
thank you ; if it be thus, God is infinitely good !" "Can you
comprehend the goodness of God in your wretched state of
ignorance ? What would the learned say of such a mystery,
which they should take for a system, they who have formed,
and will continue to form, so many, if they perceived, like me,
that there is no possible simple unity, that all is in pairs ; each
thing to infinity possesses two halves, two sides, the union of
the two constitutes happiness, their separation unhappiness." —
'' Thus you believe that everything has a half of himself un-
doubled, ad infinitum V " Yes." — " You believe that the first
half rejoins or awaits the second V " Yes." — " That when
they meet in heaven their happiness is real, and their union
eternal "?" "Yes; I neither should nor could have believed
this in my ordinary state, because it is a truth, and we accept
only errors."

Here is a revelation which I am unable to prop up with my
reflection ; if not true, it is, at least, consolatory.

23. " The other day, through the medium of my somnambu-
list, Adele, I asked the spirit Mallet, whether there were any
cities in heaven as on earth ; he said he did not know ; can
your guide tell you '?" " Yes ; there are cities in heaven for
him who desires to dwell in cities. If Mallet did not answer
you clearly, it arises from the circumstance of his having
no taste for studying and frequenting cities." — '' Mallet seems
cramped in his answers, I don't know why ?" " Because you
ask him things which he is not permitted to acquaint you
with, and others with which he is unacquainted. I have already
told you that a spirit in heaven knew only what it desired
to know ; its happiness consists in the knowledge of one thing,
little matter to it the rest." — " Still, all spirits must behold
cities, groups of houses and people, since they are in places
inhabited as on earth V^ " Spirits see only what they wish to
see ; if they delight in a house, they see only a house ; if in a
city, they see a city ; the same with gardens, the country, pub-
lic places, and assemblies ; if they wish to travel they do so.
There is something of everything in heaven, and there is
nothing." — " How nothing % I can not understand how some-
ihino- should be nothing^." "But I do, I can understand it ;
they are images, appearances ; they are trees, furniture, effects,
and nothing, since the desire once gone, all disappears, nothing
remains ; they are images appropriated by the goodness of
God to the nature of beings." — " Is it really your guide who
answers you these things 1 You answer me so quick that T
much doubt it." " I answer you quicker than I should, were
it not my guide who does it in my place." — " Your guide,
then, is in you ?" ''I have already told you that a spirit may
be in me, speak through my mouth, without my knowing how;
my lips move despite myself, and I articulate words briefly;
sometimes T hear words beside me. Frequently I await the
enswers — sometimes I do not obtain them; but from the
moment my guide is not positively in me, he is, perhaps, five
hundred leagues off. I communicate with him by a sympathetic
thread, a sort of ray ; to express my meaning better, I regard
myself as the speaking-trumpet in which he speaks at a dis-
tance." — " It is very surprising that you should hear thus, and
operate by the means of this sympathetic wire." " All appears
lo you astonishing, but it is not the same with me ; a spirit
might speak to me from the end of the universe, had the uni-
verse an end : distance does not exist for us. What will
ustoTiish you still more is, that a spirit can speak with several
persons at once, though in different places, and appear to them
at once, but know that very often it is only his image, a sort of
rtndoubling of his person, which can assume all forms, cos-
tumes, &c., and be at difl^erent places without quitting the one
>ie occupies in heaven. I am not the only person whom my
guide answers, he has mauy others under his influence." — " By
iinswering us thus he takes delight, then, in the science of
vv^hich we speak 1" " It is his speciality." — '* I push my in-
quiries further, but the reply is, * One can not answer those
t;uestions, what is revealed to- you by other somnambulists is
effected by the assistance of spirits whom God appoints to
instruct you ; spirits do not prejudice each other, and can not
always answer what is asked them ; as for me I communicate
to you a '"certain light, another does the same in another way.
You have no reason to complain as you know many hidden
things.' "

I was for a moment astonished at learning that a spirit can
be in different places at once, and speak with several persons ;
but reflection has confirmed in me this fact, taking invariably
for point of departure, and as material proofs what we see
somnambulists do on earth for whom distance exists not ; they
could, therefore, were they in that state, at once see at the
same instant a designated place or person, speak with him and
give similar information. To these seers a spirit resembles an
orator on whom all eyes are fixed, though parting from differ-
ent points, and in like manner all intelligences, receiving at
once the word which is only one for him who utters it, and
a thousand times one for the thousand and one persons who
have received it. Another point may also be cleared up — the
image or undoubling of the man and the thing. We have also
material proofs of those facts in magnetic experiments, where
the image of a thing remains impressed in the place where
it has stood. M. Teste, in his journal, cites, with respect to
this, a curious experiment : A female somnambulist enters a
room, and exclaims, " What a pretty girl is sitting on that
chair !" At this exclamation, M. Teste observes to her that
she is mistaken, that no pretty girl is there. Far from giving
in to this declaration, she sees one on each chair, and there
were six of them. Unable to account for this hallucination,
M. Teste contented himself with gathering exact details of the
dress of these little girls, and confessed that a little girl pre-
cisely similar had been playing for a moment before the
somnambulist entered the room, and had jumped on the six
chairs, one after the other, sitting down on them. This vision
of hers alone would prove this sort of undoubling or image,
even did we not possess similar ones every day. There is not
a magnetizer who has not in the distant views of his seers dis-
covered a multitude of errors, surrounded with a large number
of truths ; without endeavoring to explain the cause of this,
they pass over it in silence, when, on the contrary, there is
often wherewith to amply gratify curiosity. A seer says ; " I
perceive in this room a commode, a scrutoire," objects not
there ; you exclaim against the error, the sorry lucidity, with-
out taking into consideration the state of the seer, or whether
there have not previously been in the room the articles of
furniture which he designates, but which are no longer there.
I have made this sort of experiment and researches. I have
often recognised that the image of material objects set in a
certain place remained there for a long time. Any one may
verify the fact, and thereby rectify his judgment on the pre-
tended errors of clairvoyants. There is even another influence
which equally leads astray — that is foresight, A somnambu-
list can see at present at such a place, a house, a garden,
which are not there, not even likely to be there ; and yet the
place, the object, exist for the seer, and will one day exist in
all the details given and foreseen.

The third revelation in this sitting is, that in heaven there
are only sorts of images. I am unable, as yet, to decide
respecting this, without fuller information. Already, on earth,
the spirit has the assurance to fancy that it creates what it
pleases, a creation unappreciated by our senses, but apparently
quite real to the spirit in a state of somnambulism. No one
exists who may not have assured himself of the pretended
reality of this creation. This creating power, which belongs
only to God, which man draws from the world, his type, can
attain such a degree of force that matter finds itself dependent
and paralyzed by it. All the harmony of its laws finds itself
anniliilated by the facts of attraction and suspension. It should
not be denied that an ecstatic can stand materially on a stool
created spiritually. These facts, without saying that in heaven
the objects which surround us are the offsprings of our imagi-
nation, tend, nevertheless, to prove it; when, on the contrary,
being then of the nature of the world of causes, we can dispose
of them to our advantage, floating in that atmosphere of images,
they group around us, according to the divine thought which
presides over them, in order to satisfy our wants by which they
find themselves denominated or called.

24. *' Since a spirit can introduce itself into our body, and
make us speak despite ourselves, can it make us act also ?"
" Yes." — " This question I put to you has reference to posses-
sions ; the possessed have always affirmed what you advance."
" It is a truth which, in my ordinary state, I should never wish
to believe ; but I believe it now because T am fully conscious
of it." — " In this kind of possession, since they can make use
of our body to operate what they desire, have they any influ-
ence over the destiny of man?" "Yes; in this way: A
man, such as Napoleon, any other warrior, or a savan, no
matter, finds himself destined by the Creator to be born into
the material world, and accomplish g)-eat things ; he is then
handed over by God to the care of spirits, who are charged to
protect his birth, life, and actions. The father and mother are
merely the machines destined alike to co-operate materially
with that which is ordained spiritually ; then, in this case, there
is a spirit specially charged to preside over the introduction of
this child into the woman, and watch over its welfare." — " In
that case an evil spirit could act a contrary part, and influence
in an evil way the rising germ "?" " Yes ; it is even useful ;
but God never allows such a being to be born without placing
near him a good guide to counteract the evil one."

25. "At the last sitting, you told me that your guide could
speak to you at five hundred leagues distance ; this revelation
for a moment astonished me ; but, in presence of daily experi-
ments, by the distant communications that take place, I have
yielded to this truth, that there is no distance appreciable to
spirits. I return to other revelations you have made me ; you
told me that in heaven are cities, places, according to the desire
of the spirit of each ; you told me, also, that one beheld only
the object desired, and this would induce me to think that this
must be an effect of the creation of the spirit, and not places
existing eternally." " They are places that exist eternally ;
but the facility which one has of communicating with them, and
the same facility of no longer seeing them, w^ould make us think
that they have no real existence like terrestrial objects. I will
give you an example : 1 am beside you, in any part of heaven ;
I desire to be on a plain, in a garden, or house, I myself find
and see what I desire, without stirring from the spot, if such be
my wish ; you also form a desire, but you wish to be in a
church, a ballroom, or any oilier place, you are there instanta-
neously, without however, quitting me for a moment; in like
manner, instead of a library, another will desire to see a pic-
ture, these two objects exist together, visible to the two desires,
and at the same place. Thus you see it is a mystery altogether
mcoraprehensible, which men will deny, although a grand
i!rulh." — " The description you give me would make me doubt
whether there be anything real in heaven." "All that is
there is more real than on earth, where everything perishes or
changes its form. As to heaven, all these objects are imperish-
able, and constitute your eternal joy : only, not being subject to
the same laws as matter, there is no need of pulling down a
house to build another in its place ; it disappears, and another
replaces it. Although disappeared, it nevertheless exists, be-
cause it can not be destroyed ; but as I repeat to you, it pre-
sents no obstacle to the admission of another in its stead." —
" Then, in heaven, every one, according to his inclination, may,
no doubt, build cities, temples, palaces." " No ; the desires
which spirits have are communicated to them by God, who is
the sole and grand architect. Man fancies himself the artificer
of all- these things, when he merely forms the wish for them ;
but the cities there are uniform, the palaces a hundred times
finer than all that human conception could bring forth or be-
lieve ; and all this is appropriated to the tastes and wants of the
societies inhabiting them. There is so much harmony between
your spiritual tastes that you could not desire what another
spirit would not wish, especially — mark it well — if this spirit
were a member of your society, who would be, as it were, a
fibre of your body ; for spirits can not influence each other,
and where they foresee what reigns not in accordance with their
desires, they associate not. They assemble to exercise usages
which are but pleasures, and not wants. In like manner, they
isolate themselves, if they think fit." — " If I wish to compose a
book and have it read, what means can I employ to gratify this
desire ]" " You compose your book, you desire to possess five
hundred copies of it; you desire to give them away, advertise,
or sell them ; all this is performed as on earth, with this differ-
ence, "however, that happiness is the result, and not trouble, as
on earth. You possess this work for ever, if such be your wish.
The spiritual life may be explained in a few words : you desire
only what it is agreeable to you to possess, and the goodness of
God gratifies you instantaneously." — " But if I desired the
wealth of my neighbor V " We can desire in heaven only what
we are able to obtain ; we do not enter heaven with thoughts
of robbery, disturbance, falsehood : all such thoughts are of the
domain of the earth, and can not accompany us on high." —
" You have told me also that a spirit could appear in several
places at once ; how is that V " They are only images of the
spirit that appear ; he may have as many as he pleases, and
send them to you." — '• Good ; but do these images speak ?"
"Yes." — "They are, then, so many individuals." "No; it is
ever the same one." — "All these images, you say, appearing in
different places at once, and answering different questions,
would make us suppose them masses of spirits, instead of one."
*' It is difficult enough to explain to you this mystery ; but T
will endeavor to do so for your instruction. The spirit who
directs me, and who is in heaven, can draw from himself,
by a sort of radiation, a multitude of threads, extending and
serving as a means of communication with those who desire to
correspond with him. The spirit can impart to each thread the
resemblance and sound of his speech, although, among them-
selves, spirits speak but little, thought being the only bond of
communication. Then he can at the same instant convey his
thought, which answers the questions of those in communica-
tion with him by means of these sympathetic threads ; he is but
one, multiplying himself according to circumstances, ad infini-
tum, and is seen by all at once, as the entire audience at a the-
atre sees an actor. We fancy him in a hundred places at once,
when, on the contrary, it is a hundred spirits that are enabled
to see him, and in the place where he is ; but his image can, in
like manner, fulfil this office, and this would make one believe
in the existence of a hundred individuals. This image proceed-
ing from him is in correspondence with his thoughts, and can,
like him, represent them, for thoughts are unalterable. I am
fatigued."

This sitting was the last that Bruno gave me. His summing
up has a reference to the observations I made at the close of
the twenty-third silting, to the effect that the image may remain
impressed on a place where the object has sojourned, and this
proves materially that spirits may possess the power of undoub-
ling themselves better than material objects do. These phenom-
ena can not be explained, nor can they be denied. As I wish to
keep within the limits I proposed to myself, to borrow nothing
from the books I have read, and which would no more be be-
lieved than ray word, I cite none of those proofs which, how-
ever, are very curious and instructive. Suffice it for me to rec-
ommend the reader to experimentalize by himself on all those
facts and the following ones, which are not less curious. We
can see well only by our own eyes, comprehend only by our
own judgment. I shall see hereafter whether I can throw any
light on these revelations.

I regretted Bruno, but I have been consoled for his loss by
the ecstatic Adele, who will appear in a proper time and place
to reveal as much as it is desirable to the eyes of the studious :
the proof of the existence of man after his separation from
matter. In the meantime I will introduce a few ecstatics who
have furnished me with no less evident proofs of what I pro-
pose to myself demonstrating to men.



SECOND ECSTATIC.



26. Mademoiselle Fanny Binet, sister of Bruno, a young
girl of seventeen years of age, the very model of candor and
virtue, said to me one day : " I had a very extraordinary dream
last night; you were magnetizing me and I fell asleep like my
brother ; I saw on the table a sphere, such as professors have
to teach astronomy; a prodigious quantity of circles surrounded
it ; I saw issuing from this globe a sort of smoke, which you
projected into the pit of my stomach." I induced her to be
magnetized, as her dream augured well ; she consented to it,
and in about twenty minutes fell into an ecstatic sleep. At this
sitting and the following ones I sought to turn to account this
state, and recognise her speciality ; it was ecstac}^ and here is
the result : " I perceive sometliing coming toward me." —
*' What is this something V " It is a person, I believe." — " Look
well ; have you asked for any one ?" " No." — " It is a person
of your acquaintance." "No." — "Is it a man?" "Yes." —
" What sort of a man 1" " His deportment is noble and very
imposing.; he is wrapped in a beautiful mantle of red velvet,
edged with gold ; he is sitting on a throne, I believe, covered
with blue; he has on his head a large and very beautiful crown
of gold ; he is holding a little child in his arms ; he seems to
wish to get rid of it; this child is quite naked." — " Do you see
this man's face 1" " No, not very distinctly." — " Beg him to
draw nearer to you, and tell you who he is." "I don't see
him better ; he does not approach." — " Then repeat from the
bottom of your heart these words, * In the name of God, thy
creator and mine, stranger, whom I behold, if thou comest not
from him, and art not a spirit of light, withdraw; I have no
need of thy services." " He is gone ; but a new face now pre-
sents itself much nearer." — " Repeat the same invocation, and
you will see how this spirit will act." " It stays ; it is a woman.
Oh ! what a beautiful countenance, never did I see such a one."
— " In what position, with respect to you, is she V *' Before
me, a little to the right."—" Does she appear to you alive V
" She does, indeed ; she is borne on clouds, and quite surround-
ed with such an azure as I never before saw, so lively, fresh,
and transparent is it." — " How is she attired V " In a beauti-
ful robe of red velvet, descending to her feet, bordered with
bands of gold ; her hair is black, and falls down upon her shoul-
ders, which are of an incomparable whiteness ; on her head is
a crown of gold, but much narrower than that of the first fig-
ure ; she has on a robe of light gauze. But, good heavens, how
beautiful she is," timidly said the young girl, her head drooping
on her bosom. — " Ask her if she is your angel or guide — request
lier to speak to you and tell you her name." " Oh ! she smiles
on me ; but I am so overcome with respect and admiration for it,
that I don't seem worthy of her answering me." — "Venture,
however, she is a celestial creature, who, no doubt, desires only
your good, and comes in order to be of service to you : she will
answer you." Fanny is so absorbed in admiration that I am
obliged to wake her, without obtaining any results but this vis-
ion. Scarcely is she awake than she sees herself in the glass,
and hides her face in her hands, exclaiming, " Oh, how ugly I
am compared to the beautiful creature I saw." — "Eh ! what?
you recollect then what you hav^ seen 1" " I recollect but too
well, as it furnishes me with a comparison which is all to my
disadvantage." — "You are wrong, I never saw you looking more
beautiful than at this moment." It is tiue that this young per-
son has a prepossessing countenance ; she had at this moment
that angelic expression that all ecstatics have in the height of
ecstacy, and it was impressed on all her features. She could
not be induced to look upon herself in such a light, and re-
mained the whole day under the influence of this vision, re-
counting it in all its details to the persons around her.

27. Fanny heartily desires to see again the same beautiful
person ; I put the question to her: " Do you see anything'?"
*' Yes ; but it is not the same fi^-ure." — " How is this one ?"
" It is a young man who is on his knees, and apparently pray-
ing to God with great humility." — " On what is he kneeling ?"
"On an estrade, to which there are two steps." — " He does not
seem to you in the air, then, as the other day 1" " No." —
"How is he dressed] Grive me a description of him."
" He is a dark man ; on his head is a crown of gold, the foi'm
of which is very different from that worn by the last appari-
tion ; he has on him a beautiful mantle of red velvet, worked
all over with stars of gold, and descending to his feet in the
form of a robe a queue ; I perceive a white robe under this
mantle ; his skin is very white." — " Make an effort to speak to
him; tell him to look at you?" "I dare not; he seems so
deeply absorbed in prayer that it would be more than indis-
creet in me to disturb him ; he looks very happy, and I am
not less so at gazing at him." — Bruno, Fanny's brother was
present when I magnetized his sister, and desired to be sent to
sleep with her. He soon beheld the vision of his sister, and
gave a full description of it almost in the same words as Fanny,
only he beheld the hands of the apparition joined below, while
Fanny saw them raised on high. " Who is this young man ]"
asked I of Bruno. " It is Gabriel." — " What is he doing ?"
" Praying for us, and giving us at the same time a lesson of
humility." — " Your sister, considering her religious practices,
might dispense with this lesson ; but to you it is necessary."
*' It is necessary to all three of us, we none of us know how to
jprayT — *' How is it that you see his hands in a different posi-
tion to what your sister does ]" " Because he never shows
himself to two persons at once precisely in the same posi-
tion." — "How is that?" "Because we should believe in in-
fluence and fascination, and that proves to me that what I told
you, some time ago, respecting the power they had of undoub-
ling themselves." — I woke them both.

I tried several times to magnetize Fanny, and reconduct
her to her visions, but I could not succeed; she had no longer
any wish to be sent to sleep. I have thought fit to make men-
tion of these two ecstasies, as one can riot collect too many
proofs of spiritual apparitions. Here is a fact contradicting
what many magnetizers advance, when they affirm that all
these visions are merely the fruit of a fatigued or disordered
imagination, and that clairvoyantes possess the faculty of creat-
ing for themselves images ; on this last point, I agree with
them. Thus a clairvoyante who has created for himself such
visions will ever have them at his disposition, and see them
whenever he pleases, obtain fiom them answers sympathizing
with his thoughts and his tastes; but Fanny is not in such a
position ; she sees not what she desires, and sees what she does
not expect. It is not for want of being in the lucid state, as we
may believe, since in these two visions she sees to the same de-
gree, and with the same facility. Moreover, we have other
facts to set forth which will easily do away with this objection.

THIRD ECSTATIC.

28. A YOUNG lady, named Fran^oise, having consulted my
somnambulist Adele on the state of her health, the latter ad-
vised her to get magnetized. She was in a hopeless condition,
and begged me to cure her if I could ; I undertook her case,
and she derived great benefit from ray treatment. Without
being cured, on account of the disordered state of her organs,
she furnished me, after a few magnetizations, with the follow-
ing phenomena : —

At one sitting, she tells me that she can see her father and
mother, who had been dead a long time, that they appear to
her really alive. Her mother was surrounded by a beautiful
blue sky, on her right, and ventured not to approach her ; she
was precisely in the same dress as she wore before her death ;
her father, too, was attired as on earth, and sought to conceal
himself behind a bush on her left. She contemplated them a
long time without speaking to them. This was the first day
she had been clairvoyant, and perceived her hopeless condi-
tion, assuring me that if I continued to magnetize her I should
have to take the greatest precautions, for my life was at stake,
as I had been already told by two clairvoyants. I took no
further account of these warnings than by guarding against her
baneful emanations. On awaking, she recollected having seen
her father and mother, but had not the least recollection of her
hopeless condition, or what she had said respecting it.

29. After a moment's sleep, " I hear," said she, " the voice
of God telling me that my niece, who is at this moment in her
confinement, will die in three weeks ; she can not get over it !''
Fran^oise was very fond of this niece ; she began to cry bitter-
ly. I wished to make her believe that it was a mere rambling
of her imagination, occasioned by the warm affection she felt
for her niece ; that it was not the voice of God she had heard.
She was highly offended at my doubts, and replied — " It was
assuredly God who spoke to me ; they who live long enough
will see."

30. "There's my father," said she; "I know not why he
dares not approach me." — " Ask him why ?" " He answers
me that he desired to see me before his death, and that I did
not come to receive his last farewell. He seems angry with
me." — After this reproach he moves away; then appears be-
fore her a little girl she had had, and lost at the age of eighteen
months, while out at nurse ; the child seemed to her bigger
than when she parted with it, being then only six days old. —
" How does this child appear to you ?" " Very well ; only
she has a somewhat suffering air ; she is naked, has little wings,
and a pink cap on her head." — " What ! naked, and a cap on
her head f " Yes, 'tis just so that I see her." — " Ask her
where she is V " In heaven." — " With whom V " Her
grandmother." — "What does she do there 1" ."She plays
vv^ith little girls whom she delights to teaze." — " She appears
to you suffering, ask her whether she suffers 1" " She longs
for me ; but, that apart, suffers not ; she says she is very happy;
she has often seen God, and goes to him." — " How does the
Deity appear to her?" "Like a man amidst a cloud of daz-
zling whiteness. She tells me that I shall live a long time yet in
pain." — " Why is not your grandmother with this child, since
she is under her care ; you should see her at least 1" " She
tells me that at this moment she is praying to God for me ;
my little girl has blue eyes ; I don't know what color they
were. Here is a little boy whom I don't know, but he calls
himself my nephew ; he died when nine years old, of convul-
sions, brought on by fits of passion, which have not yet left
him, although dead. He says that he has at times seen God ;
he entertains the hope of being with him by-and-by, when he
improves in disposition." He announces to Francoise that his
mother is suffering from a disease in the chest that will by-
and-by become a catarrh. Fran^oise sees many persons who
claim relationship with her, although she does not know them;
she does not even remember ever having seen them ; she de-
sires to see her daughter when awake, and points out the
means of effecting this, which succeeds perfectly well ; she no
longer recollects anything. This greatly astonishes her, and
especially tlie cap which she sees when awake on her child's
head.

31. Franqoise says that she hears again the voice of God,
telling her that the little girl her niece is brought to bed with
will die soon after her. " Have you any presentiments of these
events when awake 1" *' No, none ; my niece is not well, but
still I have no reason to be alarmed at her condition." — " And
her little girl 1" *' She is at nurse, and I see her only in my
sleep ; but nothing makes me forebode that she will die soon." —
*' Your nephew told you the last time that his mother, your
sister, was ill ; did you know it V " I knew it only to day ; I
have heard from her, and she is not well ; but before I knew
nothing about it." — '' Could you learn why your little girl ap-
peared to you naked, and with only a pink cap on her head 1"
" I will ask her." — After a momentary pause she said to me :
*' I gave her nurse some good baby-linen, which she returned
to me after the child's death. I desired her to put in the coffin
one of the child's best caps ; she afterward told me that she
had done so, but I had my doubts about the matter, and pre-
sumed that she had not, especially with respect to the cap in
which tlie child appears to me at this moment, by the permis-
sion of God, who desires that I should no longer deem this
woman guilty of theft. I could never have believed that she
would have acted thus, especially with an expensive cap like
this, and having such a large family, to whom it would have
been more useful than to this child."

I had no more revelations from Francoise ; she got better,
and I saw her no more. I will make a few observations on
what has been just stated. Franqoise possessed a singular
clairvoyance for distant views, reproduced conversations held
in remote places, of which I obtained unanswerable proofs ;
she was of a frank disposition, and by no means cunning ; she
did not deceive me when announcing her sister's illness, of
which she had no knowledge till two days after. Was it
really her little deceased nephew, whom she had never seen,
that confided this to her I or was it a view at distance that she
had taken ] One can only decide from her good faith and aver-
sion to falsehood. I believe that this child appeared to her be-
cause she said that he was still irascible, a truth that will be
proved by-and-by. Man parts not at once with his manners
and propensities on entering the next world, a thing that she
could not possibly learn or perceive in my thought, seeing that
then I neither knew nor suspected such things, and even now
can scarcely comprehend. I also believe in this revelation, be-
cause I have had similar ones since which have determined
me not to reject it. I therefore beg the reader not to lose sight
of this observation.

A voice, which she takes to be that of God, announces to
her that her niece and daughter will die within a short time of
each other. This prediction was literally accomplished.

She perceives her little girl, who had been dead a very long
time. The particularity of the cap which Fran9oise could not
invent in order either to appear ridiculous in my eyes, or to
make me appear so (by admitting such thoughts we might
doubt our own existence, if everywhere we perceived but cun-
ning and falsehood), this particularity alone is an undeniable
proof of the existence of the spiritual world ; to support it with
commentaries would be injuring it; let us, therefore, preserve
it in all its purity. A man may doubt and cry out hallucina-
tion, on seeing with his eyes, and touching with his hands a
person dead, because images may, for a moment, paralyze our
senses ; such a man will gradually lose the impression of what
he has seen, and end by doubting himself of his own good
sense. It is not the same when it is reasoning that speaks, and
is maintained by facts which he can not destroy, despite his in-
clination. A man vanquished by reasoning will be for ever
vanquished, and a man overcome by the senses will easily
recover from his state which he will class among those of fear,
hallucination, and absence of mind.


FOURTH ECSTATIC.

32. Being one day at Colonel R, — 's, I saw a lady who had
been magnetized during six months for a malady by this gen-
tleman, and afterward by several somnambulists; she had never
slept despite their assurance that she would one day sleep.
She begged me, after hearing what had been said respecting
me, to try and send her to sleep. In the course of five minutes
she slept and was in the state of a; somnambulist. " Why have
you not slept until to-day?" "You alone were able to send
me to sleep, because your fluid is in much better communi-
cation with mine than those of the persons who have hitherto
magnetized me." This lady, the wife of one of the first artists
of the capital, had received a good education, and, though she
had been cured by magnetism, she could not altogether believe
in the marvellous effects of somnambulism ; she wished to
judge for herself, and this no one was better enabled to do,
considering the reiterated physical experiments I made on her.
Her speciality was for maladies, and the communication of
thoughts ; I magnetized her for some time, and she presented
me at one sitting with a scene that I will relate.

33. " Madame," said I to her, "hitherto we have not occu-
pied ourselves with serious things in your sleep; you have
received a good education, which has developed in you very
skeptical thoughts ; you are strong-minded, you would not
allow yourself to be imposed upon by mere reveries ; will you
endeavor to enter into communication with the inhabitants of
the other world ?" " I do not believe in their existence ; but
if you can let me see them, I shall be most happy." — " In that
case, desire with all your heart to see your angel, I will request
him to appear to you." " Here he is." — " Already?" " Yes."
— •' Give me a description of him ?" " His countenance seems
to me noble and gracious, though rather stern." — " Angels, it
is said, are not ordinarily stern ; no doubt it is an evil spirit,
who, as usual, presents himself first ; if he is not an angel of
light, pray God that he may disappear." "He is gone." —
" Come, madame, no error on the part of your imagination ;
you are in a condition to enter into communication with the
inhabitants of the other world ; be pleased to regard with cir-
cumspection that you may be the better convinced of the results
we shall obtain." " I saw perfectly well this person, whose
sombre and stern physiognomy struck me so forcibly that I have
no wish to recommence the trial. I should prefer seeing
another, particularly my father, who has been dead a very long
time, in order to assure myself whether or not he still lives ;
let us leave the angels." — *' Since you prefer seeing your father,
call him." "Oh! here is another, a little angfel — oh! oh!"
Madame F. then goes off into a state difficult to describe ; she
weeps, calls on me to rouse her, falls back with her head
against the wall, her bosom swollen by sobs ; she seems to suf-
focate under the weight of her grief, and it is only at the
expiration of a few minutes that I can obtain an answer to this
question." — " What, then, do you see ?" " My son ! my poor
little Ernest; wake me !" — '* Wake you because you see your
son: what is there so dreadful in seeing^ one's son? How do
you see him, alive or dead 1" "Alive; although he has been
dead these fourteen years." — " A reason the more to rejoice at
seeing your child again; what age was he at. his death?"
"Six months." — "How old does he seem to you now?"
" About three years old." — " Since he would now be fourteen,
why does he appear to you only three years of age ? one would
think that he would rather appear to you not more than six
months old." " God wills it thus ; children that die before
they are three years old, seem not to exceed that age." —
" How is he dressed ?" " He is quite naked ; he has little
wings." — " Are you quite sure he is your son ? Repeat the
same invocation as that you addressed to the wicked angel,"
" Oh ! it is really my son ; he stays, assuredly ; I can recog-
nise him; how fair he is!" And she continued weeping. —
" Would you like to see him when you are wide awake, to
satisfy your curiosity and overcome your incredulity ?" " Oh !
yes." She becomes somewhat calm. I ask her if she can still
see her son. " Yes ; he is calling to some one who seems to
be unwilling to advance." — " Do you wish to see another per-
son 1" **Yes,- a friend whom I lost a very long time ago;
but I can not see licrr — " You ought not to have asked for this
friend before obtaining the result of your first wish, which was
to see your father; you ought to have waited for him." " It
is he whom my son is calling; he has no wish to come."
— *' That is, as I repeat to you, because you have a greater
desire to see another person in preference to him." She
awaits a few minutes longer, but her father does not appear.
She requests me to wake her. When I believe her to be
thoroughly aroused, I put to her several questions which prove
to me, as before, that she has no recollection of what she has
seen or said. She fixes her eyes on one point on her right, and
cries out, " Wake me, then." I disengage her as quickly as
possible, her eyes still remaining fixed in the same direction.
I ask her what she perceives there. " I don't know ; it is a
dark point that draws my attention thither, and I am unable to
turn my eyes away." — " Look at me." She does so, and
exclaims, " What does all this mean, monsieur ?" " I know less
than you, madame, but you will explain it to me presently." I
place my hand on the region of her heart, and she then cries out
that she perceives her son amid the clouds that attracted her
attention ; and says to me, " It is my first child, whom I thought
little of, having at his death bestowed all my affections on his
brothers and sister. It is very astonishing that this child, who
was then but six months old and would now be fourteen years
of age, should appear in your room : I should like to know
what this means!" "It means what you sought to know,
madame, that the dead exist as well as we do ; you desired, in
your sleep, to see your father, no doubt he preferred sending
you this child, whom you say you n» longer thought of, in
order that you may not think that in desiring to see your father,
and havinsf seen him, that is a mere effect of the imao^ination or
hallucination. You expressed a wish to see this child when
you were awaked in order to remove all your doubts in this
respect; you ought to be satisfied." — "Did you really see
him 1" " Yes, monsieur." — " Did you really recognise him ]"
*' Yes, but you, did you not see him?" ** No, madame, I was
not in your state." — " How surprising all this is ! it is enough
to derange the strongest mind. Assuredly I saw him ; I dare
not think of it, 'tis miraculous; a child that I had not thought
of for so many years !" " He still thinks of you, madame ;
those in heaven are not so forgetful as we are." The effect
experienced by this lady was not the same as in her sleep, she
looked upon her son without emotion, matter had resumed its
sway. She quitted me inveighing against magic and natural
philosophy ; I did not become attached to this somnambulist, as
it required much labor to obtain from her satisfactory results.
This sitting is not devoid of interest, and proves again that the
desire is not always the sole mover of spiritual visions. This
lady desires to see her father, and she sees a little creature that
she was far from thinking of at the moment; a scene ensues.
The father seems unwilling to obey the request of the mother
and son, the latter appears with little wings; like the child of
Francoise he is about three years old ; like the other, he is
naked ! Hence, conformity of apparition. It is to be attrib-
uted to this, that appearing in a more advanced age, they
would be less easily recognised, or do they remain in this state
of innocence ] We shall see hereafter in a revelation of the
same kind. This lady, I think, was not gified with an inven-
tive imagination, since she thought she should see nothing, and
what she did see she sought not, without being able to obtain
what she desired. This is a very singular apparition, and sets
all doubt aside.


FIFTH ECSTATIC.

34. I HAD been devoting for some time my attention to a
young person afflicted with a disease of the chest ; — one day,
Madame Reviere, her aunt, who was always present at my
sittings, requested me to try and send her to sleep : I suc-
ceeded in doing so. After being acted upon magnetically for
about twenty minutes, she was in a state of somnambulism,
and begged of me not to question her, but leave her in the
happy state she then was. Scarcely had a few minutes elapsed
before I could perceive that she was in an ecstatic state, from
which I roused her when I thought necessary, knowing that it
is often dangerous to prolong it ; she bitterly reproached me
on rny want of patience, saying, that she had never experienced
like happiness. " Where were you and what have you seen ?"
asked I. *' I was in a magnificent open country, illumed by a
superb day-light, the vegetation was admirably rich ! I felt
that I had abandoned my body, and I proceeded toward a
spot where I beheld beautiful sheep grazing, and judge of my
surprise, when I perceived my good father watching them.
When I begged of you to leave me alone for a moment, I had
been wishing to see my father, having heard you say that in
this state, one can see and speak with the dead. I had reason
to be astonished at perceiving him watching a flock. It is no
dream ; and had you not interrupted me, I should have spoken
to him," — " We will recommence the experiment when you
please, madame. Did your father ever tend flocks 1" " Oh !
no ; I am certain that I was not dreaming, I saw perfectly
well, and experienced a happiness unknown to me. Were I
at liberty to open my eyes I should believe that they are not
closed, so conscious am I of being in my normal condition ;
I beg you will open them for tub, for it is singular enough, that
I can't do it myself."

When this lady was roused she had a perfect recollection of
her ecstasy, and was not less surprised at it than when in her
sleep ; she could not conceive why her father had appeared to
her as the keeper of a flock. I told her that the ecstatics I
had hitherto known assured me that in the other world every-
one was occupied agreeably to his tastes. " In that case,"
replie.l she, "he would be a trader, for I never knew him to
quit Paris, and am not aware that he had any taste for rural
pursuits.*' That very day this lady recounted her vision to her
mother, whom she expressly went to in order to inquire
whether her father had ever been a shepherd. Her mother re-
plied that to her knowledge he had never been engaged in a like
occupation ; but that she perfectly remembered having heard
him say that when very young, he had an uncle in the country
at whose house he often passed some time and took delight in
playing the part of a little shepherd ; that he had even told her
that he had never been so happy as at that period, amid his
little flock. The surpiise, as may be supposed, was great on
both sides ; but for me this revelation was useful, inasmuch as
it proved to me that what Swedenborg said (I had studied him
after acquiring by myself proofs of a spiritual existence) was
correct on this point. Bruno had often said to me : " It
is ordained that you shall believe in these mysteries ! You
will believe in them because in your respect means will be
employed that will leave no room for doubt. You shall have
proofs !" He was not deceived ; for ten years have I been
collecting facts of this kind. This lady having removed to a
distance I obtained from her but one sitting.


SIXTH ECSTATIC.

35. We are now come to our best and most powerful ecsta-
tic ; the one whose light has opened our eyes ; the one who
refuses no spiritual experiment. Theology, metaphysics,
psychology, she answers all in a sense tinctured with neither
pride nor error. Should the materialist not obtain from her
the proofs he desires, he can not accuse her of entangling the
question, or of bad faith. For several years past, in her mag-
netic sleep, she lives with the beings of the other world ; give
her but the Christian and surname of the deceased persons,
no matter at what period we desire her to perceive or consult,
and she sees and converses with them at will. Hitherto, she
has never failed in one experiment, and we shall be astonished
at her clairvoyance, and the exact details she gives of persons
who have departed this life.

Adele Magnot, whom I have known for a long time, is a
somnambulist by birth. In her childhood she was sorely
afflicted with somnambulic fits, compelling her to get up at
night to terminate or continue her day's labors. I advised
her to be magnetized, in order to cure, or, at least, divert the
course of her fits of somnambulism ; she consented to it, and
since then her sleep is undisturbed. From the first sitting she
was a somnambulist, and her first speciality is for maladies.
She possesses, in this respect, a clairvoyance equivalent to that
she has for spiritual views, and for which, from her charitable
disposition, she had more taste. No interested views have
ever guided her ; she gives and receives not, I kept a journal
devoted to all she could tell me or do in her slumbers, and will
now collect from it whatsoever bears upon spiritualism. I
again claim the indulgence of the reader for a work which is
above my knowledge and strength ; let none behold in me, as
I have said at the commencement, any other pride but that of
opening or strengthening, in all who read me, a belief that con-
stitutes all my happiness. It is a debt which I owe to human-
ity, and would wish to discharge as I best can.



52 THE SECRETS OF THE FUTURE

36. Adele possesses all the qualities desirable in somnambu-
lism ; she is wholly isolated, totally independent of the mag-
netizer, sleeps the desired time, and has no recollection on
awaking.

" What is magnetism ?" " It is an influence of the nerves
conveying the greatest good wherever it is directed, particu-
larly if we are animated with the love of God and what is
good." — " And spiritually ?" "It is the quintessence of what
exists most pure in man ; it is a divine influence, the very
purity of God."

37. " AVhat creates in you this surprise ?" " It is my little
niece." — " Who is this niece ?" " My sister's little child who
died two years ago." — " How old was she then ?" ** Twelve
years old." — " Give me a description of her person." " She
is taller than she was on earth ; her complexion is of a daz-
zling whiteness ; she is dressed in white." — '* Ask her where
she lives." "In heaven." — "Is she happy there 1" "Yes."
— "What does she do there?" " She plays, walks about, and
is surrounded by my numerous family, who often speak of
me : my mother, father, and brothers, would be glad if I could,
soon rejoin them." — " The dead remember, then, their earthly
existence V^ " No one is dead in heaven ; all are alive, more
alive than we are ; they remember the relatives they left on
earth, and pray to God for them." — " Do we recollect the
details of our past life, or only remember our relatives ?" " We
do not remember the details that concern evil, or the earthly
passions appertaining to it ; all is forgotten in this respect." —
" Are all happy in heaven 1" " Indeed are they ; we have no
notion of such happiness on earth ! we live there in an atmo-
sphere so mild — neither too warm nor too cold. How can we
dread leaving this earth ! My little niece recommends me to pray
if I wish to go to heaven with her : it was for that that she came
to me last night at a moment when I was in a similar state to
what I am now,' and exhorted me to go and fetch a small chap-
let which she wore on her neck before her death, and pray to
God with it. This I did, though it was hidden in my commode.
She pretends that it was the prayer that procured me a speed-
ier admission into this state, and the happiness of seeing each
other again. My surprise was great when in the morning I
found this chaplet in my bed. I should wish to remember this
particularity, in order to remove the inquietude it has caused
me." — '* You knew, then, perfectly well how to find it, despite
the darkness V " In the state I was, there was no darkness for
me." — *' It is necessary, then, to enter into this state, in order
to see and speak to spirits ?" " Yes; without that it is impos-
sible to see them."—" Some persons, however, when wide
awake, have seen themT' *' They seemed awake, but they
were, although in communication with the two worlds, in a
state which is not normal." — "Is it really her hand that you
seemed to clasp in yours ?" " Oh, it is indeed ! I feel it better
than yours, as she presses it affectionately." — " Ask your niece
if it is true that we all have two angels beside us V " No, we
have but one ; the other is not an angel ; it is an evil spirit."
— " Can you see your angel ?" ** No ; she tells me that it is
near my right shoulder, but I see nothing."

38. " Do you think you will soon see your mother V " I
do n't know ; but here is my little niece ; she tells me I must
pray ; to hear her, we should do naught but pray ; we can not,
however, be continually praying." — '* Perhaps you don't pray
often enough." " I pray as every one does, morning and
night." — "When she speaks to you, has she a childish or ra-
tional air V " She looks just as frolicksome as when she was
on earth, is always wishing to be off, and laughs heartily at my
questions and ignorance ! You don't hear her then laugh ?" —
" You know that I am not in your state." " True ; let her go,
as she will not answer my questions." — *' You seem very blunt
with this young girl, who seems so glad to see you ; that is not
right !"

39. Louise, Adele's niece, comes in haste to tell her that her
brother is about to appear to her. " Oh, here he is ! It is my
brother Alphonse, who died in Africa." — "When?" "Four
years ago." — " On what day ?" " I don't know." — " Ask him."
" The 11th August." — " How is he attired 1" " In the uniform
of a dragoon." — "Is that his dress in heaven?" "No; it is
that of the corps in which he served before his death, and it was
in this costume that I saw him on earth." — " Why is he dressed
thus ]" " Spirits must surely ajDpear in the costume and con-
dition by which they were known on earth, otherwise we should,
be unable to recognise them." — " Since you did not ask for him
who told him to come and see you ?" " My little niece." — " Is
she with him at this moment?" "Yes; but how beautiful she
is ! her fine black hair falls in ringlets on her shoulders, as on
the day of her first communion." — " And Alphonse, does he
appear to you handsome 1" " Oh ! indeed he does. His fore-
head, which was, however, very dark, appears to me as white
as snow ; he tells me that it will not be long before I see my
mother, father, and brother-in-law. I have no wish, however,
to see the last-named one ; he was too wicked on earth." — *' If
in heaven there is no wickedness, you must not think of the
past." *' I won't see him !" — Adele stretches outlier arm to
detain her niece, who has just quitted her, despite her efforts ;
it is surprising to see the mimickry, the apparent mutual under-
standing, the contrariety ; one can not doubt the reality of the
scenes in which the imagination, as we may believe, is not
always strongest, for nothing appears to respond to the caprices
of the clairvoyant.

40. Louise, true to the promise she had made i^dele at the
last sitting, announces to her her second brother. " What
brother is this V ^' It is Jean Marie, who also died in Africa,
three years ago." — Adele contemplates with delight these three
members of her family ; the latter is also in the uniform of a
dragoon ; she talks, as in the preceding sittings, a long time
with them, acquaints me not with the subject of their conver-
sation. " What do your brothers do in heaven ?" *' They
amuse themselves, promenade." — "We can neither amuse our-
selves nor promenade a whole eternity without an object."
" Oh ! they play music, study tlie sciences ; they occupy them-
selves better, and with more pleasure, than we do."

41. " Here they are." — " Do they appear glad to see you ]"
" They do, indeed." — "Is your niece with them]" "No." —
" Are they glad that they are dead ]" " Who would not be ?
They are so happy. I am going to see my mother, they tell
me," — Adele awaits a moment, then suddenly extends her arms,
and seems to embrace her mother ; her heart beats violently,
her physiognomy is expressive, she is quite joyous and sheds
tears. *' Does your mother seem to be as glad to see you as
you her?" "Oh! yes." — "What does she do in heaven?"
" She is with my father, my brothers, in short, with my whole
family ; she is very uneasy about me, but withal very happy.
She reads, and delights in hearing my brothers play music." —
" There are books, then, in heaven." " I beg you to believe
that there are, and not such romances as on earth." — " Of what
do they treat V " Of the mysteries of God, and of science ;
but they are not written as on earth, my mother tells me.
How I should like to be with them. Let me go, I should soon
be in heaven." — " Yours is a very generous idea; what should
I do with your body ?" " Bury it, or do what you please with
it." — " And what should I say to justice ?" *' That I am gone."
' — Adele makes a few efforts to rise to the highest degree of
ecstasy. I wake her.

42. " You were not very reasonable in your last sleep, it was
a suicide you would have committed, and you know that is
very wrong !" " True, but once committed, one must needs
enter like the rest." — " What is the punishment that God re-
serves for suicide V " That which he inflicts on all those who
do evil, a public reprimand; after that, God renders it impos-
sible for them to do evil, by consigning them to a place apart."
— " What sort of place is it ? Is it the hell of which men
speak ]" " There is no such hell as is depicted on earth; there
are places of purification, which are termed places of punish-
ment, because one is there deprived of the sight of God and
his divine light ; but those who are there are happy." — " And
all great criminals, where are they ?" *' In similar places, as-
sembled in society ; but, as God is so good, he provides for
all, prevents evil, and re-establishes good in the hearts of all."
— " We are, then, in societies in heaven." " We seek one
another, and assemble toerether according: to our tastes." — *' Is
there any disturbance sometimes in these societies ?" " No,
because the thoughts of every one are laid bare ; consequently,
none can be deceived. The criminal, the passionate man, the
virtuous and good man, can not, the one any more than the
other, appear what they are not, or disguise their thoughts as
on earth ; it is a sort of stamp engraved within us, and not to
be effaced." — " In that case we ought to recollect all we have
done on earth." " No ; for the simple reason that we set no
value on it, all that is forgotten ; we no longer occupy ourselves
with such things ; we merely study the thoughts, the affections
present and necessary to the common happiness ; we pity those
who are still on earth, pray to God for them, and are delighted
v/hen they rejoin us ; for them it is a time of trial, which each
must undergo in liis turn." — " Do we meet again among
friends 1" " Yes ; but, if the affections are different, we sepa-
rate, each to enjoy apart what is agreeable to him." — " We
receive there instruction as on earth, I suppose, as every one is
not learned on entering heaven, the child as well as the old
man." " Instruction is not the same there as on earth, because,
on our arrival, our spirit comprehends forthwith whatever it
desires to know ; we speak there but one language, which is
that of thought ; all, from the infant to the old man, can speak
and comprehend it from their very entrance ; in like manner,
all can read. It is only for the superior sciences, the knowl-
edge of the laws of the spiritual world and the mysteries of
God, that there are teachers, who are more like friends than
masters, and we learn in a short time what we desire to know."
— " Who tells you these things ?" " My mother, who gives me
to understand that I want to learn a great deal in one day." —
*' Ask your mother whether we see God in heaven." '' Yes."
— " In what form ?" *' That of a sun, so dazzling that we can
not fix our eye on it ; no one can form an idea of its brilliancy."
The answers at this sitting are so much the more astonishing,
as Adele, in her state of vigil, is unacquainted with my way
of thinking on spiritual things, and which is not exactly in ac-
cordance with what she tells me in her sleep ; I can not, there-
fore, influence her in this respect; she has not the speciality for
the communication of thoughts, and this should remove the
idea, which might be conceived, of her reading in mine. I
have sufficiently studied her to this effect in circumstances
wherein she had a powerful interest to do so, but never was I
able to succeed in making her comprehend a single thought.
I have equally maintained the greatest reserve, by never re-
counting what my somnambulists tell me in their sleep. How
does she happen to accord so well with Bruno and others who
preceded him, and especially in all the reiterated questions
that I shall address, by-and-by, to various deceased person-
ages'? — questions far beyond the ordinary intelligence of
Adele.

43. *' Here is my mother" (same emotion as usual). She
announces to me the arrival of her father. "Here he is!"
Adele opens her arms, as she did at the first visit of her mother;
her agitation and joy are no less great ; she clasps her hands,
and humbly bends her head t(j receive her father's blessing ;
then talks of family affairs ; her brothers are present. What
surprises me most is, that she could see all her relations only
at intervals of time — more or less long; had it been merely
the fruit of imagfination in her, she could have seen them
at the same sitting, or the following one, at least; but their
arrival was announced by her niece, or her brothers, at fixed,
periods.

44. Can your mother answer me a few questions'?" "Yes;
according to the nature of them." — " Can she tell me what
sort of sensations we experience when dying ?" " We ex-
perience a painful sensation, for the internal quits not the ex-
ternal body without suffering ; but scarcely is it disengaged,
than it thinks no more of it, and finds itself of inconceivable
lightness ; it ascends forthwith to heaven, v»'here it is reunited.
to its family. All this takes place in so short a time that it
knows not how it could- have been accomplished." — " In what
form does the soul quit the body 1" " In that of the body." —
*' Is it composed, like the body, of all its exterior and interior
organs, such as arms, legs, heart, lungs, and all the other vis-
cera." " The soul is in all similar to the body ; one can not be
better assured of it, since we see all these interior organs like
the works of a watch under a glass." — " But how does such a
body manage to penetrate matter without obstacles, and unper-
ceived ]" " As my relations, who are four in number, here
present, and unseen by you ; there are no obstacles for the
spirit." — " Is it ideally your mother who still answers you V
" Yes ; and my father and brothers applaud." — " Since I have
just asked you a few particulars as to our exit from the world,
I should wish to obtain others on our entrance into it 1" Adele
seems embarrassed ; modesty apparently commands her to
elude my questions. I reassure her as to my intentions, tell-
ing her I only seek for instruction. " God creates, man sows,
and woman performs the office of a hen ; she broods. God
does the rest." — "Has the germ any form"?" "Yes; the
human form." — " Woman then stands for naught in this crea-
tion 1" " The woman broods ; supplies the juices necessary
for the material body, that's all. My mother is going away."

45. " Are all your relatives with you ?" " There are four of
them present." — " Do you expect others ?" " I expect my
sister, who also is dead, and whom I have not yet seen. Oh !
here she is ! and how beautiful ! Goodness me ! how we im-
prove in looks after death !" — " How is she attired ?" " In her
betrothal dress ; she died on the eve of the day fixed for her wed-
ding; she is in white ; her hair is turned back : she is also bare-
footed, like my little niece. How droll." — " Ask them why
they have not chaussures ?" " My mother answers, that where
they are, there are no stones." — "On what, then, are they 1"
" On a beautiful green turf." — " What have they around them V
" A vast and beautiful blue horizon." — '» What kind of light il-
lumes this horizon ?" " A very pure light, which I may compare
to that at the close of a fine summer day." — " You once told me
that, in order to have the perception of spiritual bodies, we
had to enter a state necessary for that purpose. Is it the same
with them, or do they see our material bodies ]" " Spirits see
only our spiritual bodies ; but no sooner do we desire to see
a deceased relative, than he is forthwith with us. If we can
enter into this state, we see him ; if not, it is not he who is at
default, but we who can not see him." — " Your father's coun-
tenance ; does it seem to you, as on earth, older than your
brother's ?" *' Yes ; and that you ought easily to conceive, it
being absolutely necessary that the dead should appear to us
just as they were on earth, in order to be recognised ; but it
is not their real heavenly countenance. There they all appear
to be of the same age, excepting those w^ho die w^hen children :
in that case, they continue growing, and become like the rest in
respect to the uniformity of age stamped on their physiognomy.
Although they all appear to be of the same age, each preserves
his individual look, apart the beauty which is common to them
all, and which surpasses all that the imagination can conceive
on earth." — " What appears to be the general age V* *' Thirty
to forty ; but this age would be taken by us for about twenty," —
*' Negroes, I suppose, are of a beautiful black there ?" " The
souls of negroes are as v/hite as ours ; it is only in the skin
they differ from us ; but in heaven every one is white." —
*' Since v/e meet again in families, no doubt the husband rejoins
his wife V* " Yes ; but they do not live as on earth, on our im-
pure love ; they live like brother and sister." — " What ! there
is no love in heaven 1" " There is a love unknown to the
earth, and incomprehensible to those who are on the earth ; it
may be compared to a chaste and pure friendship." — " Are all
beings assembled there in pairs 1" "Yes." — " But there are
beings that delight in isolation, and have never known love on
earth ; they have loved no one 1" " Not a being exists but
has loved some one on earth, or felt the want of loving; this
want has ever existed, and, perhaps, there are no beings in ex-
istence who may not have said to themselves, * I should have
dearly loved such a woman, or such a man.' This union of
tv/o beings is the foundation of all happiness." — " I am aware
of that ; but it seems to me that there is one difficulty : many
beings have not loved because they could not love conjointly
the same person, and hence spring the rivalries which cause so
much trouble." " It is not thus in heaven. Analyze earthly
love, v/iiich is a passion of possession, and you will find that it
is in order to possess the same woman to one's self that rivalry
eprings up : in heaven it is the contrary ; we love not for the
happiness of possessing, but for that of loving." — " You have,
however, told me, that in heaven we are in pairs, a proof
that we possess there, as on earth, the object of our affections.
Then, again, a vv^oman who has had two or three husbands,
how is that managed 1 I think you will be puzzled to give me
an answer V " By no means ; every being is created double,
and sooner or later united to his half; but in the world of
spirits, of which we now speak, we know not earthly love, or
the want of being united to the object of our affection. Thus,
we dream not there as on earth of the possession of the being
that often remains long unknown to us ; and then, again, we love
those around us like brothers and sisters." — '* You told me
that your brother was united there to his betrothed V " Yes ;
because it is she who is his half ; but every one meets not forth-
with with his own, and such union is in nowise similar to
our earthly love. A woman might be loved by a score of men,
since none would desire to possess her to himself alone. You
perceive, therefore, that you can not comprehend snch mys-
teries." — '* I fully comprehend that the idea of possession, in
love, as in everything else, is the foundation of all earthly
troubles ; but if this affection is at times misplaced, it, never-
theless, procures for the man and the woman a happiness
which it seems to me no easy matter to replace by aught else ?"
" It is not said that it is replaced, since, on the contrary, I
have already told you, that in heaven all beings, without dis-
tinction, were completed there ; but I replied to your question
of a woman who has had several husbands. In heaven, she
may love them all at once, as a mother loves all her children,
and may be loved by them all, as this mother is loved by all
her children. Were there a hundred to love her, they would
not be too many ; if the whole hundred wish always to be in
her presence and enjoy the pleasure of her conversation, they
may all do so, without jealousy, since we possess all that we
can desire to possess. So much for the heaven of spirits. But
in the superior heaven, where the reunion, the junction, of
bodies is definitely effected, each is penetrated with a holy
love for his partner, whom none can. either envy or dispute
with you, each having his own, from whom he could not divert
the least affection."

46. "You told me at the last sitting that spirits could pass
without difficulty through all bodies ; this would induce the
belief that their substance is but a compound of air ; can these
spirits assume any other form besides the human one ?"
" Yes, whatever form they desire, especially evil spirits, who
take delicrht in all sorts of diss^uises." — " This would make me
believe in the malicious spirits who cause those apparitions so
industriously circulated in the country." " It is a reality ; they
take delight only in troubles of this kind." — " Do you believe
that these spirits have the strength to upset articles of furniture
and a thousand other things, as it is said ] I can not accord
such power to air, a light fluid can not disturb a heavy one."
" You do n't believe it ! it is, however, this light fluid, as you
term it, that imparts motion to your body, and can also, by
transporting it from one place to another, charge it with a
heavy burden, without your knowing that it is the spirit alone
that possesses the strength to move this matter, though shackled
as it is by its bonds. Why should you refuse it a double or
triple force when it is freed from it ? Know that the spirit can
bear the heaviest burdens, light fluid as you believe it to be,
and can effect things of which you have no conception." — " I
accorded it this power within us because we furnish it with
'organs and fluids wherewith to operate, but I do not think that
out of matter it has any power over it." " It is as I have just
told you ; you can not conceive that it has the same organs,
that it is it which is the life, the strength, the action, the mover
of matter; and what has moved it a minute can also move it
an eternity." — " Can these spirits, as it is affirmed, repair to
your orders to obey you?" "They desire nothing better;
they obey you a few instants in order to draw you into their
society, and become, at a later period, their slaves." — " What
do you mean by that? — they have a leader, then?" "No,
they are all free and independent; but you become their slaves,
as the gam.bler is the slave of the places he frequents, of
the passions, the consequences, of which he undergoes; they
aided you to do evil, after your death you aid them to do what
you took a dehght in seeing them do for you." — " Many per-
sons doubt what you now say, because they have sought to
enter into communication with them and have not succeeded."
" That may be accounted for thus : in the first place, their good
angel diverted them from such a course ; secondly, if you ask
for a spirit out of the mass, as you would for a soldier out of
an army, none will answer only to his name ; we should know,
therefore, to whom we address ourselves ; do so in proper
form, and not make the request while dreading its execution.
A truce to such conversation ; I don't like it." — " Can you tell
me the name of my angel ?" " Gabriel." — " And the name of
yours ]" " Raphael." — " There are, then, many angels named
Grabriel ]" " There is no dearth of them — it is a society." —
" Can an angel convey messages and objects, as some religious
persons and magnetizers have said V* " Yes, but that happens
very seldom ; it can be effected only by quite a special pro-
tection of God. My mother tells me that I wish to know a
great deal." ** Tell her that it is in order to instruct yourself,
and avoid being laughed at by your brothers for your ignor-
ance." — "Could your mother be deceived!" "No." — "And
your niece V " She might, because she is yery young and
thoughtless; no doubt she has been forbidden to speak to me,
as she is much more quiet now."

47. For several sittings Adele's mother did not come, but at
this one she appears, and complains to her daughter of my in-
credulity in her presence, telling her that I had carried my
doubts so far the last time as to try and lay hold of her with
my hand ; that if ever I recommend such an experiment she
would come no more to visit her ; that I ought to have as much
confidence in her as she had in me ; and that, moreover, I could
never feel or touch a spirit. Adele is very much astonished at
this communication. I wish to assure her of the contrary, but
she believes her mother in preference to me. It is quite true
that I mechanically put out my arm toward the spot where I
supposed Adele's mother to be, without for a moment consider-
ing that I could not feel a spiritual body ; but this silly experi-
ment on my part has presented me with a solution which I
was far from expecting, as it assures me that no other being
but Adele's mother could have been acquainted with my then
present thoughts. Adele, as I have observed, not having this
speciality, and had she possessed it she would have given me
to understand forthwith that I was doing a silly act; neither
has she the speciality of seeing bocbes or objects present, she
sees only the interior of sick persons : she could not be aware
of this incident, and, had she divined it, she is incapable of
dissembling so far with me. We shall see, by-and-by, that she
is worthy of all confidence ; a single fact of this nature proved
may admit a hundred. This sitting was to be pregnant with
good results : Adele's mother predicting that one of her
daughters, Adele's sister, would get married in a short time,
that she would not be the first to acquaint her with this change
in her position, but that her brother, who was in the country,
would brinor \iqi^ the news. She also tells her the name of the
person to whom her sister was to be married, though he was
then unknown to both the latter and Adele. Her father in-
forms her, at the same time, that she will shortly hear that
another of her sisters had been brought to bed of a girl. The
prediction was realized, point for point, two years after, and
the communication was perfectly true. Here, then, are three
facts emanating from real communications, and not from any
other combination.

48. Adele exclaims : " Oh, here is a pretty little angel !
How fair, and how beautiful !"—'* Who is it 1" "My little
godson, who died in my arms when only a fortnight old."
" That's three years ago." 1 had magnetized Bruno the same
day with Adele, he also sees this little angel. He declares
that it has wings ; Adele says the contrary. After a moment's
contemplation, she appears to be afraid. '* What makes you
afraid ?" " My brother-in-law, who is come to see me, and
wants to take me by the hand. I could very well dispense with
his visit. I told my parents that I had no wish to see him.
Why does he come ] I won't have him touch me ; let him go.
Adele turns away in a pet from this man, who appears to her
on her left ; while, on the contrary, all good spirits ordinarily
appear on the right. I observed to her that it is very wrong
and unjust on her part; that she ought not, in the state she is,
to entertain ill-will toward any one. I desire her to give her hand
to her brother-in-law. She obstinately refuses, saying that he
is in a position well adapted for his malicious purposes ; that
he had made her sister miserable; that he still did all he could
to inspire her with disagreeable thoughts, but that when he had
passed over to the good side she would forgive him. I am
obliged to order off this man. One can not take this apparition
for an effect of the imagination, as she in nowise desired it,
and was horribly surprised and vexed at it. Never before had
I seen her so harsh and wilful as toward this man.

49. Second apparition of Adele's little godson. She seems
to take the greatest interest in this little being ; and when she
beheld him depart it seemed to her that he was going to fall.
She followed him, and entered into the comj^lement of ecstasy,
from which it was no easy matter for me to withdraw her.
She signified her displeasure at my attempts, saying to me as
before, " Why force me to return to this world of trouble and
misery ? I was so happy in accompanying this little being,
who has, indeed, pretty little white wings, such as M. Bruno
described. It is I who was wrong on this point." — " How far
did you go V " I ascended to a great height, then passed
through an immense vault, at the end of which were beautiful
gardens, containing all that is remarkable for freshness and
elegance. A great many persons were walking in the alleys,
some reading, others playing music — all seemed very happy.
The harmony among them appeared so perfect, that one could
only desire to be with them. I saw my father there, my
mother, the whole of my family. I wanted to stay, but my
mother and your will obliged me to descend again." — " How
were all those people dressed V " In a sort of gauze robe, of
all colors. Their physiognomy was totally different ; but I fuhy
recognised my relations, although if they appeared to us thus
attired it would be more difficult to recognise them. God has
done right in contriving otherwise."—-" How can males be dis-
tinguished from females'?" "By their form; for their light
dress is no mark of distinction. If the passions were the same
in heaven as on earth, we should be ashamed to see ourselves
thus. No attention is paid there to such things." — " Bruno
has already told me the same thing; this attire, however, is
very indecent." " Yes, for us here below, where love exists,
with its impure empire ; but there, no such thoughts are enter-
tained."

50. " Here is the partner of my brother Alphonse, Rosine,
one of my old friends, who was betrothed to him, as I have
told you, before he set off for Africa; she died four years after
him," — " Ask her if she is disposed to answer a few questions
I wish to put to her." *' Yes." — " Since you told me that she
is united to her betrothed in heaven, \vouid she tell you how
this reunion, which is now a real union, was accomj)lished ?
"Were there any ceremonies for this purpose 1" " Good
heavens ! no. Alphonse awaited Rosine, because he knew her
end was approaching. No sooner had she entered than they
were reunited without any ceremony — without requirin cr the
approbation or consent of a third party ; they were reunited to
each other as friends, and not as lovers, as she also says that
there is no love in heaven. They are like brother and sister,
perfectly in accord, since it can not be otherwise." — " Do they
sleep together ?" " We do not go to bed in heaven ; there is
no night as on earth ; we merely repose when we desire it, for
it is not fatigue that compels us to do so." — " Does Rosine re-
pose beside her friend?" "Certainly." — " On what ?" "On
a divan, cushions, whatever she pleases." — "Are they always
together?" " No, she goes to see him, and he her." — " Have
they a room for two 1" " No, they live in families and soci-
eties." — " There are no rooms, then, in which we can meditate
apart ?" " Positively speaking, there are no houses as on
earth, but separations that stand in their stead, which every one
may occupy according to his taste ; but nothing on earth can
be compared to them in beauty and magnificence." — " We
may, then, meditate or perform usages agreeable to us for an
infinite time ?" *' Yes, we may read a book, a page, a phrase,
for a time without end, seeing that there is no time in heaven,
and still less of it, for aught that is agreeable to us ; we find
incessantly the same pleasure, the same enjoyment in the idea
we delight in. My brother-in-law is exasperated at my rancor
toward him ; but he indemnified himself for it last night, by
suffg-estinof to me bad dreams. I dreamed that I was cuttino; the
throat of his daughter, my little niece, who is in heaven and
comes to see me habitually ; I concealed her thus assassinated
under my bed. Grood heavens, how I suffered !" — " It was a
mere rambling of the imagination ; a spirit can not thus influence
us, were such the case, we should be slaves, a hundred times
worse off than the brutes.'* " It is so, however, not in all
dreams, but in some, spirits prefer the moment when the body
is left to repose, without any defence, and when the soul is less
vigilant over it, by seeking to avail itself of the body's sleep to
give itself up to researches, experiments, travels. Then it is
that evil spirits torment us, and we can rid ourselves of their
presence only by involving the name of Grod who drives them out
forthwith. What I tell you is a truth at which I should laugh
in my watchful state, but now appreciate at its proper value.
It was my brother-in-law who represented to me those horrible
images." — " But the good angel, beside us, can he not protect
us under such circumstances 1" " Not always ; our soul stands
in need of his counsels for a multitude of other actions, of
which it has no recollection ; for the spirit sleeps not, and our
angel can not always prevent by night, any more than by day,
the power of evil spirits."

We are now come, without the least desire, to the persua-
sions of M. Berbiofuer, with his hobo:oblins. I have thought fit
to give this sitting entire, that every one may judge of it as he
pleases. As one of the objects of this work is to engage all
magnetizers to make similar researches on the spiritual laws, I
doubt not but that many will be found to obtain similar results.
In all that has been hitherto told me, it is impossible to perceive
aught but mere sickly or dreamy organizations ; but there is
too much afHnity between them not to admit at least a mental
indisposition, the symptoms of which should be precisely the
same in each individaal ; but how admit such connection in the
ideas, without concluding therefrom that it is the magnetizer
himself who insinuates them 1 In that case I will reply: Do as
I do and you will know what to think of it. Continue the
perusal of this work to the end, and you will see that a magne-
tizer is not a god, that his properties must be limited to his
belief and his knowledge ; but that he is unable to influence
what he knows not, what he beHeves not, and if you meet not
with the solution you seek, do not say that my ecstatics were
wearisome fools.

51. " My niece tells me that my brother is ill, that he has
had medical advice in time, but that he will be attacked again
with the same malady and will die young. [This proved to be
true.] Here is my mother, she does not seem pleased." —
" Perhaps she is displeased at your propensity for the ecstatic
state in despite of her counsels ; ask her if such be the case."
*' True ; she says that this state is a very dangerous one for
me." — "How long ought you to remain in it?" "Five
minutes." — " Why does your little godson who comes to see
you appear to you as an angel V " Because he is really one ?"
— " Why should he be one, any more than your niece ?"
" Because he had not attained the age of three years at his
death." — "Why rather this age than any other?" "My
mother tells me that all children that die before this age grow
no bigger. God, who dearly loves them on account of the
state of purity in which they died (seeing that they have not
yet committed any evil), delights in being surrounded by them;
they are much nearer to him than any of the rest."

52. " When you rise, through ecstasy, toward heaven, the
sensation you experience is, I suppose, similar to that experi-
enced by a person dying." " No ; I rise in good health, expe-
rience no obstacle, whereas at death, the soul is much more
cramped in quitting the body disorganized by illness ; then there
is sufFeringr, but I feel none in the state I am." — " WTiat effect
is produced in you when you behold beneath you the earth,
which must appear very obscure compared to the brilliant light
of heaven V " We make no reflections; we neither think of
the earth nor of any one ; we rise in a sensation of happiness,
of joy impossible to describe, we would wish to remain there."
— " May it not be an error of your senses this pretended eleva-
tion toward heaven, or rather an interior nervous expansion,
illumed by bright electric rays surrounding the soul, which,
possibly is, in its corporeal interior, and enjoys the happiness
of this sight which it fancies it tastes from without." " How
admit such an error, when one feels as I feel, sees what I see ;
traverses clouds, space, and arrives in the midst of relations,
friends, who all stretch out to you their arms, overwhelm you
with caresses, and seek by all possible means to prove to you
the pleasure they feel in seeing you, and desire with a common
accord that you should soon rejoin them. If we look upon all
this as error, I know not then how we are to recognise truth."
— '* There are narcotics which produce hallucinations more or
less agreeable, and display to us pictures, scenes, somewhat
similar to ecstasy, and such, however, are errors." *' There
you are again at discussion and doubt. It is a practice with
men to treat as erro7's what they do not comprehend ; it is an
easy way of settling the matter. Narcotics convey trouble into
the nervous system, disturb the soul in its vital fnnctions, throw
it into the world of causes, when it makes unheard-of efforts to
remain in the world of effects. The soul confounds the domain
of the memory ; the pictures of the ineffaceable actions which
all men have within them, with the pictures of the world of
causes in which it wanders for a moment. It can perceive in
this state the most burlesque scenes tacked on to rational ones ;
because it knows not how to separate them, knows not where
it is, knows not what they are; the reservoir of its imagination
overflows, and hurries it into the absurd. But is it the same in
ecstasy : is all that I tell you under the empire of folly ? What
is predicted to me and which is accomplished, is it of the do-
main of error ? The views at distances, the descriptions of
places : what is done or said there ; are they errors ] All the
somnambulists who thus see do they not prove that they are no
longer in their body, since they reproduce to you facts, scenes,
conversations of which you have never heard speak, and
which take place for the first thxie at the very instant they are
communicated to you. What can you say to those facts ? Be
reasonable, then, and believe that all the savans in the world
can not deny what I have just cited, and which is operated ev-
ery day at each instant; they will be obliged to extend the prop-
erties of the body, if they are unwilling to give it a soul, and
these properties will be as obscure in their solution as those of
the soul, or they will accept the latter j then they will give it
the power of travelling out of the body, reading thouo-hts, see-
ing actions past and future, and when they have acknowledged
such a soul, they will not refuse its going in search of repose
to a place of recompense for all the sufferings which it has en-
dured in this world of grief." — " I thank you for your inoe-
nious and frank explanation. I have nothing to say against it."
53. " Once more, allow me to make an observation on the
last sitting. My reason for doubting that your soul was out of
your body, is, that scarcely have I spoken, than you answer
me ; and I do not perceive your body making any movement
when you say that you are receiving the caresses of your rela-
tives." " It is, however, this want of movement in my body, in
my grand ecstatic movements, which ought to prove to you that
I am no longer in it ; when my relatives, on the contrary, come
on earth to see me, you perceive my spiritual hand pressin<r
theirs, my body gesticulating, because they are really there
present and I also ; but when I am in heaven, my body can no
longer make the same gestures, since there is no longer a soul
within it. If I answer you immediately, it is because I still
cling to my body by sympathetic threads which you seem to me
to hold like cords, forcing me, when you draw them, to descend
to the power of your will." — " In views, at distances, although
the somnambulists are in other places, their body is not deprived
of movement." " The comparison holds not good. They are
on earth at slight distances comparatively with those of heaven;
they are not in the ecstatic condition necessary to communicate
with heaven, and hence the separation of the soul and body is
not the same." — I perceive that Adele purposes entering into
the ecstatic state j I make up my mind to try a decisive exper-
iment, and leave her to her will ; I forthwith send Bruno to
sleep, put him en rapport with her, and beg him to follow her
as far as possible, recommending him not to be alarmed, and to
warn me only if he should see danger. I wished to be assured
by myself of the pretended dangers of ecstasy. Frequently
had Adele told me that she had been on the point of not coming
back to re-enter her body, and as I thought that she only wanted
to alarm me, I wished to know what opinion to come to. At
the lapse of a quarter of an hour, Bruno exclaims in great alarm,
** I have lost sighfof her!" I had relied upon him, and paid
little attention to Adele, whose body in the meanwhile had
grown icy cold ; there was no longer any pulse or respiration ;
her face was of a sallow green, her lips blue, her heart gave no
sign of life. I placed before her lips a mirror, but it was by no
means tarnished by them. I magnetized her powerfully, in
order to bring back her soul into her body, but for five minutes
my labor was vain. Bruno, alai'med at my want of success, as
well as the persons present at this sitting, tended greatly to dis-
turb me. I thought for a moment that the work was consum-
mated, and that I had an indubitable proof that the soul had
departed from her body. I was obliged to request the persons
present to pass into another room, in order that I might recover
by myself a little energy. At the lapse of a few moments, I
entertained the hope that I should not have such a misfortune
to deplore ; but, physically speaking, I was utterly powerless.
Falling on my knees, I asked back of God, in my prayer, the
soul that I had in my doubts suffered to depart. I seemed, by
an effect of intuition to know that my prayer was heard : after
a minute's further anguish, I obtained these words : *' Why
have you called me back % it was all over with me ! but God
moved at your prayer, sent me back to you. No more shall I
be permitted to return to heaven; I am punished." — "Of what
punishment do you speak?" "Raphael has forbidden my
mother and all my relations, except Alphonse, to come and see
me again, until further orders, and it is to you that I am indebted
for this privation. I shall no longer be able to ascend to heaven,
but had it not been for you I should have been there now and
for ever." It may be naturally supposed that I paid bat little
attention to her complaints and reproaches.

I was only too happy to hear her speak to me, and promised
myself, as my readers may imagine, never to recommence such
experiments. I advise those who should be disposed to imitate
me, never to make such a trial, for no spectacle can be more
alarming, and the issue of such experiment might terminate
fatally.

It was all over with her ecstasies, just as she had predicted;
no one came any more to see her. Her brother often in-
structed her in what was agreeable to her ; buHWhe self-will of
Adele, and her little regard for his complaisance, drove him
away. It was more than six months before she recovered this
kind of clairvoyance ; I was not sorry for it, as I was deter-
mined not to magnetize her again. There was a continual
combat of subtlety between us two ; if I lost sight of her for
an instant, she had ever the same intention, suicide in ecstasy !
Several times since she sought to re-enter this state, but she inva-
riably felt a hand which pushed her head forward, sometimes
she heard boisterous music, which diverted her from her pur-
pose, and once a voice exclaimed in her ear, *' That is for-
bidden you." It was her brother Alphonse who worked all
these miracles: he never came to see her without divertino- her
by an air on a flute, although before his death he knew not
how to play that instrument ; he often rendered perceptible to
her a divine music, which she could hear, though wide awake,
by a secret she had taught me to employ to this effect. She
equally saw all her relations after she awoke, a circumstance
that excited her astonishment, and made her believe in macric :
she could not comprehend, be it understood, these kinds of
visions, which made me pass in her eyes for a sorcerer. We
are bound to conclude from all these experiments, which last-
ed whole months, and which I compress into one sitting, that
it would be more than ridiculous that a woman so firm should not
perceive at will the freaks of her imagination, if such they were ;
but, on the contrary, that all these facts presented such a variety
only the better to dispose me to believe in their merit.

We will pass on to more decisive experiments, in the same
kind of clairvoyance, in order that it may not be said, it is her
relations whose image is imprinted in her imagination, whom
she continually sees ; that is not astonishing, and proves
naught.

54. New Spiritual Clairvoyance. — Adele was consulted
by an abbe on a speculation. When he learned that she had
the facility of conversing with spirits, he expressed a wish for
her to see his father, who had been dead some months. " Here
he is," said she. *' Describe to me his appearance and dress,
if you please. 'i Adele did so, to the great satisfaction of this
gentleman, and related to him a few particulars of the life of
his father, such as he alone could be acquainted with. Naught
more was required to convince the abbe of the excellent
clairvoyance of Adele ; consequently he returned a few days
after to beg me to put some questions to her on alchemy ; T
promised him that I would do so with pleasure. Adele was
not at my house that day.

55. " Will you request your brother to come ; I have a few
questions to put to him ]" She requests his attendance, and
all at once seems overcome as if with surprise. " What is the
matter with you ?" asked I. *' It is a capuchin friar who is
come to me ; he is on his knees, and praying to God." — " Who
is this friar?" "I don't know whether he is a capuchin,
but he has a cowl on his head ; I can't see his face." — "Ask
him what he wants with you ?" " I dare not speak to him." —
** In that case I'll send him away." I give the usual command,
but the man does not budge. Adele and I both laugh ; she ex-
periences no alarm, still she persists in not speaking to him.
At last he disappears, and she again asks for her brother, who
forthwith comes. " I beg- her to ask him who this man is."
" It is," repHed he, laughing, "Father Lauriot; I sent him to
you that you might question him for the abbe." Adele laughs
at this name, and thinks that her brother is making sport of
her. (Lauriot signifies a baker's tub.) *' Request your brother
to tell you positively the name of this man." " His name was
Achilles ; he was a priest, and one of the abbe's friends. I
know not whether this gentleman is aware that he devoted him-
self, when on earth, to hermetic researches ; but in heaven he
is in societies that follow such pursuits, and for that reason I
address him to you." — " You were aware, then, that I was to
question you on this subject?" "Yes, I perceived it in your
thoughts," replies her brother ; <' and as 1 do not trouble my-
self with such matters, I thought I could not do better than
j)lace you in communication with one who could instruct
you." — " That being the case, you ought to have warned me,
and I should not have given this man so cool a reception."
" He will return." — " They make, then, the philosopher's
stone in heaven 1" " No ; but every one occupies him-
self there according to his taste. He whose whole affec-
tion it was on earth takes no delight in making it after his
death, but in associating with societies that protect and instruct
those on earth v/ho work at it, and have recourse to them." —
" The stone, then, exists ?" " Yes." — I put several questions
to him on this subject, which he answered according to their
value.

56. I had acquainted the abbe with this apparition, which
he took for an hallucination, never having known a priest by
that name. I informed him of the answers I had obtained
from Adele's brother, and these were satisfactory to him.
After his departure I determined on sending the young girl to
sleep again, that I might obtain from her fuller information.
Scarcely asleep, Adele requested his presence. He came, and
I put the following questions : " Is Lauriot your real name ]"
"I was nicknamed thus." — "What is your family name?"
No answer.—" When did you die V •' In 1831."—" Where ?"
" At the hospital Sainte-Therese." — " How old were you ?"
"Fifty-six." — "In what name is your death registered?"
" Achilles." " Do you know the abbe V " Yes ; when he
was lying ill at the hospital Sainte-Therese, I was one of
those with whom he most frequently conversed." — " But he
says he does not know you." " He will recollect me." — " You
employed your time, then, on earth, in search of the stone ?"
" I do n't come here to answer all the questions you think
fit to put to me ; I come out of pure complaisance, and shall
answer only what I think fit." — " Then what can you say to
the abbe respecting his operations V " They go on very
well. He is in the right road, only let him throw a little
more heat into his furnace." — " Do you know how long the
abbe has been engaged in his operations ?" " Four years." —
This man again falls on his knees, recommending an aug-
mentation of heat. " Give me a description of hira." '* He
appeared to me standing. Tie had on his head a cowl, v/hich
he took off to speak to me. He is a dark man ; his face is
pale and long, and his eyes black. He does not appear to be
so old as fifty-six. He is taller than the abbe, and has a some-
what taciturn and very meditative air. He had a small
leather cap on his head. I scarcely dare speak to him, though
he is far from uncivil in his answers; but his tone is severe,
especially when he told me that he should answer at the orders
of no one, but at his own pleasure." — " Are you really assured
of the truth of this apparition V " I maintain that this man is
still there on his knees before me. Be he a good or an evil spirit,
I see him full well, and have really spoken to him. He is
calm at this moment. He has a chaplet at his side, to which
is attached a medal about the size of a five-franc piece, on
which are characters of fantastical forms. They are some-
what like Vs and Ys ; I can't very well see." — '* Can you
see your brother to-day ?" " This gentleman tells me that he
will not come."

57. I forwarded to the abbe an account in writing of all
that I had obtained at this sitting ; then, this gentleman, unable
to call to mind any such name, proceeded forthwith to the
library of the archbishopric, where a register was kept of the
priests who died in the diocese of Paris. Next day he came
to my house with a copy of the registers for the last three
years, but we could neither find such a name nor any one of
that age. We were convinced that Adele had been under the
influence of hallucination, a circumstance which had never oc-
curred since she had been a clairvoyante. I was all the more
vexed at this as her brother, who had never before deceived
her in any of his revelations and predictions, was the author of
this trick, which came somewhat late, but in time to tell me
not to cease entertaining distrust of spirits.

58. Two days after this presumed mystification, and still
without the knowledge of the abbe, I once more sent Adele
to sleep, requesting her to ask for Father Lauriot. — " Here he
is." — " You gave me false information. What was your object
in doing so "?" "To conceal ray name; but I came with a
good intention — to oblige by my counsels, and I did so sin-
cerely." — " Why do you conceal your name ?" " I have no
answer to make to your question. Men forgive not, but God
does." — " In short, whoever you be, have you a borrowed
name, or any other ?" " I was called Lauriot, which was not
my name ; but I bore that of Achilles, which was my Christian
name." — " In what name is your death registered ?" *' I have
no wish to say." — " Why did you not tell me your name at
once, without deceiving me as you have done ?" " I had not
the least intention to deceive you, as I told you that my name
was Achilles Lauriot. I was obliged to resort to this subter-
fuge in order to conceal my real name, which would make you
curse me, and take in bad part the good I am willing to do."
— " In short, did you really die at Sainte-Therese ?" "Yes."
— "In what year?" "In 1S31." — "Was it there that you
became acquainted with the abbe "?" " It was there that I had
much conversation with him respecting the stone. I knew and
still know the abbe, who, you may rely upon it, will recollect
me." — "In what church were you employed?" "I don't
mean to furnish such information." — Adele again addresses to
him a few questions, to which he answers : " Your head is
poorly," and then recommences praying. It was true that
Adele had a violent headache brought on by this discussion,
which advanced us not a jot. I asked for Adele's brother, who
came immediately. — " Tell us candidly who this man is V
" He is a man who wishes to do good, and is incapable of
evil." — " But can't you give us fuller information than he did ?
Who is he ? What was he ?" " I can not answer what he is
unwilling to answer himself He is a man who is continually
walking, as on earth ; he had no fixed locality there ; it is the
same with him now in heaven." — " Can you not, as a spirit,
read his thoughts V " When a spirit is unwilling that we
should do so, we can not." — " He can, then, conceal them from
your researches V " Yes ; but he could not, were he a wicked
man; it is because I know his goodness that I addressed him
to you." Adele, provoked at not having a more satisfactory
answer, begs her brother never to send this man to her again.

59. As before, I forwarded the particulars of this sitting to
the abbe, who came to me two days after, more enlightened
on the point. " I now know this man," said he, " he really died
at Sainte-Therese, not, however, in 1S31, but only two years
ago, and not at the age of fifty-six, but fifty-four. When I was
lying ill at Sainte-Therese, I knew this man, who was pos-
sessed of great information, was an amateur of magnetism,
medicine, and alchemy. He sacrificed his time and fortune in
the research of the secrets of nature, invariably maintaining
that magnetism conceals mysteries worthy of being fathomed,
and that plants concerning the juices of which he had made
valuable* discoveries, possess virtues which men do not suffi-
ciently study. Ever running from one part of the country to
the other, gathering herbs, in the research of the occult sciences ;
delighting to conceal his name in the blessings he spread around
liim with profusion, as in the relations he established with the
world; he was Peter for one, Philippe for another; it was a
sort of mania with him. He usually wore under his bourgeois
dress a crape cassock ; in short, the multiplicity of his studies
deranged his intellects, and he fell into a most painful state of
imbecility, was obliged to be nursed at the hospital Sainte-
Therese, where, in his childish condition, he constantly muffled
himself up in a capuchin, and never left off" wearing his little
leather cap. He had at his side a large chaplet with which he
continually prayed ; he conversed wilh spirits and fancied
himself God; he was the sport of all, one calling him the
" capuchin father," another *' Father eternal," and so on. This
unfortunate man died in the most frightful misery ; he who had
been surrounded by a numerous and wealthy family, and a
considerable circle of friends, had not two living beings to
follow him to the grave ! I was ihe only one to say a prayer
over him ! This man, the laughing-stock of his fellow-beings,
has, perhaps, preserved an aversion for men ; this accounts fur
his saying that his name would create in them horror ! This
mania of not disclosing his name, has, perhaps, accompanied
him to heaven; the dress is precisely the same as that he wore
on earth before his death, and the medal fastened to the chap-
let alone confirms me in my recognition of his person, as he
bought it on one of the quays, and it was covered with cabal-
istical characters. The mania he has of never resting in one
place, as the brother of your clairvoyante says, is just as it was
on earth ; in short, he says truly enough that when I was at
Sainte-Thei'ese, we used to talk of the stone ; he was the only
one who showed me any friendship at that time. So, after all,
it is easy to account for the slight mistake into which he led.
us. The description given him, joined to what passed at
Sainte-Therese, would alone be sufficient for me to recognise
him, and the particulars he gives as to the time when I com-
menced my operations, are exact. At first 1 could not trace
the date further back than two years and a quarter, but
now I recollect having commenced, my experiments on the
same work by another system twenty-one months before, and.
this makes up the four years. I have full confidence in this
apparition, and will prepare a few questions which you will
have the kindness to put to him by-and-by."

60. The abbe expresses a wish to put the following question
to him himself: "Can you give me any proofs that I am not
deceived respecting you, and that you are really present at
this moment V " I will tell you that I am right glad at your
recollection of me ; I was, as I announced, quite sure that you
would call me to mind again ; you are not mistaken as to my
name, which I wish to conceal from every one but you, since
you are well acquainted with it ; but, as a convincing proof,
be pleased to recollect that I was the only person at Sainte-
Therese to whom you spoke of the work ; hereby you will
plainly perceive that you are not in error.'' — " Can you tell
me whether my works are going on right ?" *' Yes, quite so ;
but increase the heat five degrees more." — " My fire is not to
be measured as ordinary fire." *' To you, no ; but for me I
perceive that what you did this morning ought to be continued,
and thus you will obtain the additional heat I recommend."
This communication excites the abbe's astonishment ; he said
to me : "In fact, this morning^ I did somethinsf which must
accelerate the heat." Then he continued thus : " I have two
operations in hand, one of much later date than the other,
w^hich is the best one ?" " The last, that on the right." — The
abbe had already received the same answer from several
clairvoy antes. He goes on putting further questions, needless
to mention, at which he appears quite satisfied.

61. A few days after this sitting the abbe submits to me a
few doubts he has conceived as to the moral condition of
Father Lauriot. To clear up his doubts in this respect he pro-
poses putting a few questions to him in Latin, thus enabling
them both to converse in secret on hermetic operations, as
neither I nor my clairvoyante was acquainted with Latin. He
put his question, which Adele did her best to rej^roduce to M,
Lauriot ; she rendered his answers in French, saying : " Just
so, just so." The abbe observed to me that these answers
were quite irrelevant to his questions, the purport of which,
he tells me (and I believe without disguise), was : *' Do you
know the lady now present V* The question, under such cir-
cumstances, was as absurd as the answer, since he w^as aware
that a spirit can not perceive matter. Adele observes to M.
Lauriot that he answers at random the questions she puts to him
in Latin. Then he begins talking Latin to her with a volubility
precluding the possibility of her transmitting his long discourse
to the abbe. Fatigued with this sort of experiment, she finally
refuses to continue, and I take it upon myself to question her in
order to re-establish the conversation on a surer footing. " In
the state you now are, do you still recollect the Latin tongue V
*' Yes, as you may know from my having just answered in that
tongue." — " The answers are not such as we desired," " The
abbe knows that we took a three days' trip together to Ver-
sallleis, and that it was tlicn I made lilm acquainted witli the
matter." — " Monsieur says that he certainly did take a trip
with you, not to Versailles, however, but to Saint Cloud — not
of three days, but one only ; that you spoke to him on the
matter, but did not make him acquainted with it. You, per-
ceive, therefore, that you commit errors which ought not to be.
We always see you on your knees ; you do nothing but pray,
then ?" " I pray to God for men in general, and for my rela-
tions." — '* You have, then, relations on earth V *' Yes." —
"Have you any brothers 1" *' No."— " Sisters ?" "Yes." —
" Is your mother dead ?" " No." — ** The abbe says the con-
trary ; your mother died before you. It is quite true that your
father is dead, that you have no brother, and only one sister;
but, as to your mother, you are mistaken." After this fresh
mistake we conclude that the man is not altogether in his right
senses ; the abbe observing to me that his mother died while
he was in a state of insanity, and this accounts for his having
no knowledge of her death. We request the presence of
Adele's brother to whom we put the following question :
" This man, no doubt, is deranged ?" " He is a very honest
man, thoroughly good, and remarkably well-informed, but has
at times rambling ideas ; he is constantly running about, rest-
ing nowhere long at a time ; he is seen by us everywhere.'*
— " This man had on earth hallucinations, which he has, doubt-
less preserved V " He has preserved, as I have told you, his
strongest predilections, and his mind seems in consequence
disordered." — " Those who die deranged are not, then, restored
to a sane condition ?" "No, their infirmity constitutes their
chief happiness; they meet together, think alike, and are
happy." — " But comes there a time when these men recover
their reason V " Yes, God purifies them gradually, and
they enter a more enlifj-htened circle." — " We can not trust
to this man, who would make us participate in his errors
in operations where none should exist." *' I will send you
another, who has had some experience in the same kind
of operations ; after putting his clairvoyance to the test,
you will attend to his counsels, if you think fit ; as for me,
I have already told you, I do not devote myself to such
pursuits."

62. Curious to know wliat sort of personage Alphonse was
to send iis, I demanded his presence ; but to my surprise,
Father Lauriot again made his appearance. The obliging air
he assumes delights Aclele, and, at my request, she consents
not to beof of him to withdraw. I held with him the followinof
discourse : " The information you give us is fraught with
errors, and this makes us presume that your clairvoyance is
not sufficiently powerful to be of use to us." " The abbe is
not reasonable. I came to oblige him ; he desired to know a
heap of things which had nothing to do with the mission I
purposed fulfilling ; I have been overwhelmed with questions,
with a singular suspicion, as if my passage on earth had
been agreeable enough to me to preserve an exact recol-
lection of it ; what more could I do than appear in the same
garb that I wore on earth in my folly, and say that I had known
the abbe at the hospital, and furnish him with the particulars.
He has the certainty of my having spoken the truth, tliat I died
there : what more did he want ? He ouGj-ht not to overwhelm
me with questions that demand, on my part, researches which
would snatch a few instants from the happiness which I enjoy,
and which I cannot sacrifice to such trifles. You believe that,
because I died insane, I am so now ? undeceive yourself; I
may seem absent in mind, but I could wish that the men of the
earth vt^ere not more insane than I am, and knew what is known
in the state I am." — " The abbe would have wished you to
inspect his works." " I can not inspect them, excepting in his
thoughts, because it is not in the power of a spirit to perceive
matter." — " I thought the contrary, as, in order to predict
material events, a spirit must see them." " It is an error ; he
perceives the causes of them, sums them up, and comments
upon them according to his judgment." — " Is insanity an in-
fluence of matter or spirit ?" " Of both, though matter plays
the principal part in it, that only being diseased from the imped-
iments it opposes to the spirit in the ascension of ideas. The
latter being obstructed in their course, convey the greatest
trouble to the harmony of the system. Frequently, a single
idea, on which the mind is fatigued, suffices to convey all this
disorder into the intelligence." — "Are you happy in heaven ?-"
*' Yes ; this happiness can not be desci-ibed." — "What are
your occupations V " Reading, prayer, study, promenading
— in short, w^liatever I desire to do or obtain, I both do and
obtain."

Wee have just made acquaintance, I believe, with one of the
most curious apparitions in this book. Should any doubts re-
main as to M. Lauriot's sanity of mind, it is easy to destroy them
in part ; but there can be none as to his identity. AVe have had
then the apparition of one, a perfect stranger to us, a man
whom we did not ask for. Ten days were passed in trouble-
some researches before his friend could fully recognise him.
It remains to be settled how Ad^le's brother could have sent to
us a man known to the abbe. The latter and Alphonse had never
seen or been acquainted with each other on earth ; neither had.
Adele even seen the abbe or any of his friends. Explain this
who can. Let us pass on to a second question. Why was this
man so obscure in certain communications, and so true in others ?
Either he really preserved his earthly mania of concealing his
name, or fancied this name incurred public reproach. The first
supposition is the most feasible one, since the abbe makes hon-
orable mention of him in the coiiversation held in Latin.
Wherefore do we perceive in it so many errors ? Either
Adele was a bad interpreter, or M. Lauriot did not think fit
to answer these questions, or possibly the abbe hid from me the
truth, struck as he must have been with the idea, that he placed
me in communication, without having foreseen it, with a man
whose indiscretion might one day make me acquainted with
things which he had no wish that I should know. I believe the
abbe honest and true, from the eagerness he displayed in this
circumstance, to throw the best light he could on this appari-
tion ; and therefore conclude that M. Lauriot, not thoroughly
comprehending the questions, having, like all spirits, but a very
imperfect recollection of their earthly actions, must be likely
enough to make mistakes on this subject; his justification even
stands in no need of commentaries. Remains his mother, who
died before him, a circumstance which could not be forgotten
by a man of sound mind ; but being at that period under the
influence of hallucination, he had no knowledge of her death.
He is now in a somewhat similar frame of niind, and has not
troubled himself about it. He has been dead two years, which
are for him but a second. Under the influence of the moral suf-
ferings which have just quitted him, and under those of the hap-
piness in which he lives, he may well be ignorant of a particu-
lar of which he had been unable to think. After what we be-
gin to know respecting the properties of the spiritual life, we
ought to be less exigent ; it remains indubitably proved to us,
by the singular description, the chaplet, the medal, the small
leather cap, the appearance, the stature, &c., that he is the man
whom the abbe knew. Should not this be sufficient, there re-
main for us the conversation, the particularities at the hospital
Sainte-Therese. The jaunt to Saint Cloud is not the less true,
though badly described ; the precise date of the works, the
recommendation to continue what he had done that very morn-
ing of which he alone was aware, the exact description of the
work which other clairvoyantes supposed to be the best, the ex-
planations not less exact as to the members of his family, alive
and dead, with the exception of his mother. I do not think it
necessary to insist on these particulars to admit this apparition
into the rank of the most conclusive ones. The abbe accepted
it frankly as such, as well as myself; but we are about to see
that it did not answer his expectations.

63. Before introducing other personages, I ought to give an
account of another apparition of M, Lauriot, the results of
which are as follows : " I told you at the last sitting that we
could not accept your advice. You have not been asked for,
why did you come ?" Adele says that she takes a delight in see-
ing this man, whose goodness she can appreciate to its full ex-
tent, and that he may come to her at all times without the risk
of her driving him away, — " Then ask him why he told you
that his mother was not dead, since she died before him V*
*' He answers that he did not say so ; that I wrongly interpreted
his words, as he knew very well that she was dead, and could
not have said the contrary." — " And the Latin which he an-
swered you at random V '* I can not understand material words,
and yoa did not transmit to me those that were addressed to
me ; yoa said to me, ' They speak Latin to you.' I thought it
was on the subject of the works; hence it was that I replied to
you affirmatively." — " Why did you not reproduce the abbe's
words to M. Lauriot?" "Because it was a wearisome task;
as I was conscious that I had to do with a man who believes in
nothing, I preferred committing an error to continuing this kind
of communication." — I observed to Adele that she did wrong ;
that she ought rather to have said, that such a mode of speak-
ing was not agreeable to her, and that I perceived that M. Lau-
riot could easily have answered the observations of the abbe
(who, after hearing him, thought like me, that M. Lauriot was
still insane). Thus terminated the apparitions of this personage.
64. " Here is the gentleman that my brother said he would
send to me." — " What is his name 1" "He answers, that we
do not and should not know him."—" Has he lived on earth V*
*' Yes : but he is a foreig:ner." — " Where was he born ?" " In
Spain." — " Where did he die V " In Spain." — " In what city ?"
"He has no information to give on this point; we should not
know him." — "Give me a description of him." " He is tall,
stout, and maybe about seventy-five ; his hair is still very black,
although there are a few white hairs in his beard; he is very
fresh, and has the appearance of having been a rich and very
respectable man." — I put several questions to this gentleman,
all which he answered very correctly ; but it would be super-
fluous to mention them here. Having no wish to make this
work a treatise on alchemy, I reserve the information given me
for a separate work. I made the abbe acquainted with this new
apparition in all its details, and he appeared satisfied. We de-
voted a few sittings to conversation with this man, whom we
found obliging and sensible ; but the abbe, who was very change-
able, incredulous, and inconstant, proposed to me a decisive ex-
periment, which I accepted as much for my own instruction as
to afford him pleasure ; for man can not too highly cherish within
him a belief in the spiritual world, by making experiments
called for by the least of his doubts. We were agreed on this
point, both the abbe and myself. I had doubted, and at times
still doubted, for a pure spiritualist is not to be instantaneously
made out of an extra-materialist, and the abbe had one doubt
more than I ; as he feared on my part charlatanism. He had
a right to do so, as he knew me not, and I, for my part, was
glad to meet with such a man whose doubts were to turn to my
advantage.

65. The abbe said to me, " You will have the goodness to
ask, at the next sitting, for M, De Mallet (Christophe Edouard),
and send me word whether he appeared, and in what con-
dition." I much doubted this experiment, for which we had.
so little information to work upon. I asked for him, however,
and, to my great satisfaction he appeared. I ask ihis gentleman
if he will be good enough to answer a few questions which the
abbe desires to put to him V " Yes," replied he ; I told him
that at the first sitting they would discourse together ; mean-
while I beg Adele to give me a description of this gentleman.
*' He is a priest, or, at least, he wears the costume of one ; a
black robe, without surplice : he is a litrle taller than the abbe,
stout in proportion ; he has a noble countenance, a prominent
nose, the nostrils somewhat pinched up ; he has a mark on his
cheek, under the left eye ; his hair is gray, and he may be
sixty." — " Are you quite sure that he has a mark on his left
cheek, under the eye ?" — '* Yes, it is evident enough." " What
kind of mark, a pockmark ?" — " I can not see because he is a
pretty good distance off; but I am certain that he has a mark
of some kind." This gentleman retires. Adele is afraid that
the abbe should raise any difficulties as to this apparition, and
says that she won't ask for any more if she has been deceived.

66. I had sent an account of this sitting to the abbe, but I
neither saw him nor heard from him. I thought that Adele
had made some mistake. Three days after he arrived with his
servant-girl, who brought me a portrait of M. Mallet, which he
had been to borrow of one of his friends. Only judge of my
surprise, equal to his, when I beheld feature for feature the
man so well depicted by Adele, and especially the mark,
which was no less ihan the scar of a sabre wound, which this
gentleman had received in the army. The abbe said to me :
'* I may now acquaint you with the history of the count de
Mallet. He was one of the grand dignitaries of the empire,
having held a very high rank in the army. At the death of his
wife he embraced the church party with not less zeal than he
had served the empire. He was superior of the nuns of Sainte
Marie de Lorette, and died in the parish of Saint Sulpice, the
28th August, at the age of sixty, regretted by the upright and
good ; he devoted much time to metaphysics, and wrote a work
on this science, which I will lend you ; it is the fruit of elevated
and not superstitious reasonings."

The abbe is quite delighted at this experiment ; he can no
longer doubt the truth of these apparitions, convinced as he is,
that I did not know this gentleman, seeing that I had no par-
ticulars furnished me respecting him, that he had expressly
avoided being present at this sitting, in order not to establish
any communication of thoughts. What astonished him most
was this mark — this gash — and he himself did not know
whether it was under the right eye or the left ; to make sure
of it he had been to borrow the portrait which he showed me,
in order that I might judge of the correct likeness of the appa-
rition; he looked upon this fact as conclusive, and declared,
himself convinced. He wished me to send Adele to sleep, in
order to put a few questions to her. I forthwith complied
with his request. Adele was struck at the likeness of the por-
trait which she had seen before going to sleep, to that of M.
Mallet. The latter answered the questions of the abbe with an
exactitude that enraptured the piiest, who also put to him the
following one : *' M , the person who lent me your portrait,
and was one of your friends on earth, has begged of me to ask
you whether you had anything to say to him]" — "Yes; let
him take good care of his health, he is poorly." <' The abbe
thought that this answer accorded but little with what he had
just seen of this person, who was not in the least indisposed ;
then he left me. The abbe returned the next day to tell me
that be had imparted to his friend the advice of M. Mallet, and,
to his great astonishment, found that he had really been unwell
for a fortnifbt, that he had been obliged to neglect his business,
and that his maid-servant was saying to him only three days
jjo-o — If M. Mallet were still alive, assuredly he would recom-
mend you to take better care of yourself This particularity
conferred more value on the revelation than we had at first
thought.

67. After having asked of M. Mallet what the abbe desired
to know, I put to him in my turn the following questions :
" The D'Orval predictions, as they are termed, in which you
had so great faith when on earth, that you even had them
reprinted in 1840, what do you think of them now? Do you
still believe in them?" "Yes." — "Can you foresee whether
the events, of which they make mention, will come to pass?"
*' Yes ; but those predictions are exaggerated." — " Those con-
cerning the destruction of Paris, will they take place ?" " Yes;
but not to so great an extent as is predicted." — '* When will
that happen?" "I can not answer your question." — "By
what scourge will it happen ? Fire or war ?" " By a revo-
lution."

""What government will reign then?" "It is then that it will
be said: ' Come, young prince,^ as the prediction says." — "Do
you know whether the son of Louis XVI. is dead ?" " No,
he is not dead." — " Do you know him ? Is the Baron of
Richemont this son!" " I don't know." — " Do you think that
it is the people alone that will cause all the disorders predicted ?
The people and the foreigner?" — "Of how many is a number
composed?" " Of 20." * * * " For my personal safety,
I should like to know when this will happen." " The events
preceding such catastrophe wull be a sufficient warning." —
" Will the banishment of the priests take place ?" " The
priests will escape from France." — " The end of the world,
announced in eighty years, will it take place '^" " You will
not then be on earth, wherefore trouble yourself about it ?" —
" So you look upon these prophecies as true ?" " Yes, in the
main, but not in the exaggerations. There will be mischief
enough without making more of it." Adele says that this
gentleman has no wish to alarm any one.

68. M. Mallet is preceded, according to Adele, by a light
which she has hitherto perceived only before her mother. I
ask this gentleman if lie is disposed to answer a few psycholo-
gical questions 1 " That depends on the nature of them." —
"Have we a soul "?" "You perceive it, since I am one." —
"What is the form of itl" " That of the body — that which I
at this moment bear." — " Whither does it go after its separation
fi-om the body V " Into celestial places." — " What does it do
in those places'? — does it eat and drink 1" "It satisfies its
principal affections." — "Are there good and bad places'?"
" Yes." — " Are the bad ones v/hat Christians denominate hell ]'
"Yes." — "Are we burned there, as they say 1" "They say
what they do not believe." — " But you were a priest, you
youi-self taught this doctrine ■?" "I never believed in it." —
" Then what do we do in these bad places, do we suffer there ?"
" We satisfy there our affections ; are happy there, although
they are places of purification, in which God places us to call
us in due time to him, when he forgives us." — " Are they
places or sta.tes in which the soul is '?" " Places." — " Do we
remain in them for ever V " In the good places, yes ; and, as
I have just told you, not in the bad ones." — " In what does the
knowledge of the soul consist in those places V " In what it
desires to possess, and what it acquires at will." Adele is un-
willing to be importunate. I receive these revelations with
confidence, because they appear independent of all sectarian
calculation, and are of much greater value in the mouth of
a priest who has enjoyed an honorable reputation on earth than
in that of any other person.

69. " Has the soul any recollection of the earth and of what it
was there V " Yes." — " Can it perceive matter ?" " No." —
" Does it regret the material life ?" " No." — " Can it at will
visit its relations, its friends V " Yes ; when it is requested
in the state necessary to be seen as your clairvovante is." —
" Can it in aught influence their existence]" "Yes; in the
good which it invariahly counsels tliem to do.'" " Can it in-
form them of any particularity in their destiny V " Yes ; bat
it does so with much prudence, especially when it foresees the
effect that the revelation will create in the moral being ; for
this reason it is compelled not to tell all." — " Does it suffer
much in quitting its body ?" " More or less." — " Is it long be-
fore it becomes acquainted with the state into which it enters V
" It becomes acquainted with it immediately." — " You have
just told me that a spirit can not perceive matter ; how can
you come into this house, close to us, without seeing us V " I
am conscious of this young lady's spirit which attracts me, and
I find myself with her, agreeably to her desire and mine." —
" Still, proofs exist that some spirits see m^atter, since they upset
articles of furniture, vases, &c., convey messages and objects."
"Those are evil spirits that are in the circle surrounding the
earth, that sli]l hover over it, and do these things." — " It is not
only evil spirits, however, that possess this property. I have
read several works of saints who have performed or seen some
of those phenomena. M. Billot, a very pious man, has received
messages of the kind from the hands even of angels]" " It is very
seldom that the Deity permits these kind of conveyances ; they can
not take place unknown to heaven." — " M. Possin not long ago
said that he received a crown through the medium of his clair-
voyante ?" " There has been nothing similar to this in heaven
of late." — " In short, we have also a cu?-e who, in a small pro-
vincial parish where there was a scarcity of corn, had his
granary filled agreeably to his wishes ; he disti'ibuted this god-
send among his parishioners, and yet, it is said, the granary was
not exhausted. There are multitudes of similar facts in the
holy books V " There are many things written which have
never existed ; many others which are, as I have told you, the
province of spirits occupied in things of this kind ; but in order
for a man to obtain such favors from heaven, his soul must be
very pure, have in view but the happiness of his fellow-beings,
and an ardent desire to render himself acceptable to God.
Such men and such facts are rare ; but they do exist and have
existed. "We should ever suspect conveyances and messages of
this kind, as they are frequently but a stratagem of evil spirits
that wish to flatter our pride and incredulity the better to ob-
tain dominion over us." — " In short, since you say that such
things may exist through the intercession of angels, as through
tliat of evil spirits, it must needs be that they see ihe object
which they convey V " Certainly they see it ; but ihey take it
from the earth, for in heaven there is nothing material ; when
such a thing happens, it is, as I have told you, as great a mira-
cle for heaven as for the earth." — " You conclude that the spirits
of heaven do not perceive matter V ** I have told you so, sav-
ing under the conditions which I have just made known to
you." — " You told me that you felt yourself attracted by the
will of my clairvoyante ; could you not correspond in thouo-ht
with me, by answering through her the questions I should
mentally transmit to you ?" " I could do so; but that presents
difficulties which would bring in their train errors, and require
much more time, inasmuch as you are not in the spiritual state,
and such communication is too difficult," I deem it fit to ad-
dress these questions to M. Mallet, although we have ali-eady
seen them addressed to other spirits; we can not receive too
many confirmations in this respect ; we should question all per-
suasions, in order to come to a correct understanding.

70. M. Mallet is more or less time before appearing. He
invariably gives Adele his blessing at his coming: and o-oino-:
it seems, from what the abbe tells us, that such was a practice
with him on earth. I shall pass over the abbe's questions,
which have no reference whatever to what I desire to know
about the spiritual world. — " What do you think of posses-
sions, particularly the Loudun ones?" "They are merely
the malicious tricks of evil spirits, because the good spirits do
naught but good." — "What do you think of the convulsion-
naires of Saint-Medard, &c. V " Among them are found both
good and very wicked actions; things incredible appertaining
to good and to evil spirits, deeds ordained by God, others which
are condemned by him. We even appreciate all those things
only by a judgment enlightened by the Divine light, and disen-
gaged from all haughty and egotistical calculation. I can an-
swer all you ask me only by counselling you to be circumspect,
and to pray to God to enlighten your intelligence." — " Do
you think that we can render ourselves invi.sible to several
persons at once 1" " Yes, by drugs and pacts with evil spirits;
but there is naught so displeasing to God as those things by
which we may do all possible harm." — " Could you tell me this
secret, I believe myself incapable of abusing it ?" " You are in-
capable of it, at this moment, because you do not possess it ;
but no sooner should you know it than the pride of having such
power at your command would take possession of you and
lead you to do evil, as the rest. God suffers not the good spirits
to divulge those things." — ** Fascination plays the principal
part in it, does it not ?" " Did you send for me merely to read
you a course of magic 1" — " No ; but in order to know what to
think of those mysteries ; so many things have been written on
this subject that T should wish to be enabled to form an opin-
ion respecting them." *' Do not trouble yourself about them.
There are many good things written ; but there are also many
falsehoods, and wicked doctrines. Say no more about them."

71. A friend of mine, M. Renard de Rambouillet, to whom
I regularly communicate the contents of my journal, requested
me to put the following questions to M. Mallet. Desiring to
know what a catholic priest could reveal of heaven, I comply
with his wishes at this sitting : ''I desire the truth with all my
heart. Would M. Mallet be so kind as to instruct me in it
through you, by answering a few questions which are put to
me by a friend 1" " M. Mallet answers that he will do so, ac-
cording to the will of God." — " How do you find yourself in
the world you live in ?" " Quite comfortable and happy." —
" Are you really what we term, and what you termed, a soul,
when you were on earth V " Yes." — " The form of your soul,
is it still precisely the same as that of the body it dwelt in f
"Yes." — "Do you sleep] do you eat]" (This question is
often repeated, because it is a very natural one, and the first to
present itself as the most necessary one, in any style of existence.)
" Sleep and eat who please ; it is not a necessity as on earth,
but a real pleasure to those who do so ]" — " Do you live in a
house, as on earth V ?" I am in a house ; there are houses in
this work], as on earth." — " Are there also towns and villages'?'*
*' I <know not what towns are termed in heaven ; suffice it to say-
that there are houses. I do not busy myself with the rest." —
** What are your ordinary occupations ?" " I read, write, and
pass a part of my time in giving good advice to the wicked V* —
" You can then communicate with themi" "Yes, with their
spirit." — " Who supplies you with those books and houses ?
Do you build them, as on earth ?" " Those houses, and all
that exists in heaven, are unalterable, indestructible, imperish-
able, have been created by God from all time, and can undergo
no alteration." — " Are unions or marriages formed in the
place where you are 1" " We marry, as on earth, with this
difference, that it is for eternity. We can never more separate,
inasmuch as we can not be united, unless an exact resemblance
exists in the affections, the mode of thinking, and all that con-
stitutes perfect happiness." — *' Is the woman we have married
on earth the one who becomes our wife in heaven 1" " Not
always. We are much better acquainted with the affections
and defects of each other, and God would not suffer an unequal
match, as on earth '?" — " When you desire it, are you in the
company of friends, relations, dead like yourself?" " Yes ;
but if our ideas do not accord, v/e can not remain together — we
separate." — " Are many languages spoken in the other world 1"
" I have never SDoken any other lansfuao^e but the one I now
^peak to you; but, between ourselves, we mutually com-
prehend without speaking ; it is seldom that we make use
of speech." — " Do you remain a long time in the state you
are in ?" " Our happiness is so great that none desire to
change it ; when we have all we desire, there is nothing more
to wish for." — " Can spirits visit the globes, as the moon, the
stars 1" " By the permission of the Deity, they go wherever
they desire." — Adele tells me that I abuse the complaisance of
M. Mallet, whose venerable looks, fraught with goodness, in-
spire her with respect. I put this last question : " Has God
appeared to you 1 In what form ?" " I have never abso-
lutely seen God." — Adele is unwilling to continue, and this
gives rise to a dispute between us two ; I making the observa-
tion that if I put questions to a spirit it is in order to gain in-
formation with respect to the future Kfe through his light ;
that being aware of my ignorance and the purity of my inten-
tions, he can not take offence. " What he sees, before all, is
your incredulity. V/hen one knows what I know there is but
little inclination to abuse the complaisance of a venerable man,
who, in a few hours, will pass in your eyes for an hallucina-
tion, and his answers for errors of ray imagination. Spirits no
longer cling to the things of the earth ; they trouble themselves
no more about them than we should of a street we had passed
through twenty years ago. Can we think with pleasure, of
the scenes of life which have caused us troubles ? No ; what
exists within us is indifference for the past, and this indiffer-
ence is still greater in spirits that are never to revisit the
earth ; you, not long ago, sufficiently tormented my brother by
your questions, fraught with doubt. Spirits may be deceived,
though such would not be the case did they set more value on
the things of the earth ; they are not criminals put to the ques-
tion ; and bear this ever in mind, if you don't wish to drive
away all the spirits who may come to see you, but to obtain
from them right resolutions, lay aside in their presence doubt
and objection." This long moral lesson of Adele naturally
surprised me ; it is true that I had just started several objec-
tions, and intended asking for fresh proofs. So difficult is it, I
repeat, to convince an unbeliever and draw a parallel between
the future life and the present one ; our carping reasoning is,
above all things, least suited to a good clairvoyante ; we can
not, in the presence of such traits, for ever say that the clair-
voyante is the mirror of the magnetizer's thoughts ; in such a
case, Adele would invariably agree with me. True, there are
somnambulists of this kind, but she is not one of them. I have
put her in communication with other magnetizers, who, no
more than I, have been able to influence in aught her will.
She is isolated on this head, and wholly independent of all in-
fluence ; her system is not always mine ; she has no knowledge
of psychology ; and the answers just given by Me Mallet suffi-
ciently prove that she interlards them with naught of her own ;
she has too much respect for churchmen to misconstrue their
words to the profit of my persuasions, which she oppugns, in
order to •establish in their stead those we have just heard, and
which, as we perceive, are by no means in conformily with
those of the church, as I have nowhere seen that the church
adm"ts houses, occupations, affections, and marriages in heaven.
I have seen these things only in Swedenborg, and these reve-
lations seemed to me so foreign to what I then believed (in an-
nihilation, like the materialists), that I can admit them only
from the multiplicity of those made to me by persons of all
creeds, whom I can not, wish not to, influence ; and from
the comparisons which reasoning should make between the
materird magnetic effects which we see every day, and those
spiritual ones which seem to be the source of the causes,
while ours are but the effects. As there can be no effects
without causes, and the latter must be the type of the effects,
the spirit, being itself a cause, must return into the sphere
where all is, and whence all is manifested. We shall natu-
rally find there houses, gardens, men, and usages.

72, The 8th of July, 1846, I magnetize Adele in order to
put her in com.munication with the soul of a youncr woman
who died on the 2d of the same montb at the age of twenty-
four. Her presence was scarcely requested when she appeared
with an infant in her arms, which she had lost almost at its
birlh ; the apparition of this child astonished us, inasmuch as
we little expected it. Adele is not much disposed to ask her any
questions, saying to me : " Leave me an instant with her, and give
her time at least to recollect herself in her new state." Adele
experiences a painful emotion at the apparition of this woman,
whose name was Eliza, and weeps bitterly. These tears were
sufficient evidence of her good faith ; Eliza appears to her clad
in white, with a crown on her head ; she says that she is very
happy, and can not understand why she was afraid to die. She
wished she had quitted the earth sooner. iShe says to Adele :
** When you followed me to the grave, you entertained the
thought of placing a souvenir on my tomb : it would afford me
much pleasure if you would do so." I ask Adele whether she
had had a like thought? " Yes, I bargained for a small medal-
lion but did not purchase it." I beg Adele to swear to me by
the ashes of her mother, that what she just told me is exact,
and that it was really Eliza who divined her thought. Adele
fervently protests to me that she has told the truth, and that in
such a circumstance it would be a sacrilegious falsehood to
deceive me. " I do not think you have deceived me ; but,
possibly, you asked her if she would wish for this medallion
which you had a mind to buy for her V " No, it was she who
told me of it, I no lonq-er thoug^ht of it." — " Does Eliza attach
any value to her body, that she desires to see it adorned with
a medallion 1" "No; but the dead always like to 2^crceive
kind tokens of remembrance in the hearts of those they have
left behind." Eliza's husband was present at this sitting, and
could not believe in such apparitions ; he said to me : " Adele
watched over the last moments of Eliza ; she was struck at
such a death ; the attachment she bore my wife may possibly
react on her imagination ; could you furnish me with another
proof of the truth of those apparitions?" "Yes, on one con-
dition, which is, that you consider well of the person whose
apparition you request ; you will so manage that we shall have
never seen nor heard of this person ; take all your precautions ;
I will only ask you for the name. After this proof, ask no
more, endeavor to make it conformable to your wishes. Ah ! I
will prepare this for you, and to-morrow we'll see." — "Very
well."

73. M. Demarest, Eliza's husband, came the next day, ac-
cording to appointment. I magnetized Adele. He then said
to me, " I lost a sister, whose name I hand you ; be so kind as
to request her attendance." " Here she is." — " Give me a
description of her ]" said he. (He was not en rapport with
Adele.) The latter replied, " She is rather taller than this
gentleman, her brother ; her hair is of a dark flaxen color,
her face is long, and she has large blue eyes of a very sweet
expression." On the observation of M. Demarest, as to whether
Adele has a good view of her eyes, the latter draws nearer to
her the gentleman's sister, and says that " the right eye seems
to her as if somewhat dimmed." " It is a web," said this gen-
tleman, " that grew in her eye, in consequence of an accident."
— " Her mouth is small," resumes Adele, " skin very white,
complexion pale, but the cheeks are somewhat flushed like
those of consumptive persons, and her deportment is melan-
choly." Adele feels conscious that she must have been dearly
loved on earth, and she reckons her about eighteen years of
age. There is in her voice something sweet, but drawling.
She tells her brother that their father, supposed by those
around him to be on his death-bed, sixty leagues from Paris,
was out of danger ; that he should be consoled for tlie loss of
Eliza ; that she herself appeared to him expressly to convince
him of the reality of another existence after death. She was
accompanied by a young girl whom her brother could not
recognise from the description given of her by Adele, and
whom his sister said was one of her old school friends. M.
Demarest acknowledged all the details of the description as
exact apart the age, which Adele gave her as an approximation
to the real one, his sister being twenty-one when she died ;
apart, the color of the hair, which, said he, was of a chestnut
color; Adele saw it of a dark flaxen; then again the eye,
which she had not discovered at once, inasmuch as this person
was on one side and at a distance from Adele ; the rest was
very exact, even to the revelation of the recovery of their
father, which they did not hear of till some days afterward.
Would it be believed, these three facts sufficed M. Demarest to
doubt the reality of the apparition. A somnambulist who
makes a mistake of three years in the appreciation of age, and
this gentleman declares that his sister was not that age ; then
again, as to a shade more or less dark of the hair, and a slight
delay in the discovery of a web in the eye ! this is sufficient
for this man to doubt so detailed an apparition ; all the other
particularities, even to the tone of her voice, are strictly exact;
her father, whom he thought dead, and whose recovery was
announced to him, sufficed not this uneasy and suspicious man ;
as much less was required to make me believe, and I had been
as far off as he from siicb persuasions. I will observe that at the
sitting he believed, and was greatly astonished; it was only at
a later period that these facts disappeared from his memory to
inake way for these three trifling objections * We can not
say, after such a sitting, that Adele saw or read his thoughts,
had it been so they would have agreed as to the age, the color
of the hair ; and, above all, the eye, which was the most dis-
tinctive sign of the apparition, v/ould have been cited first.
Men of right understanding, who consider well of this appari-
tion, will, I think, come to a different conclusion, particularly
if I inform them that I had a little somnambulist, ten years of
age (he will be seen hereafter), possessing the speciality of
views at distances, who one day, placed en rajjport with this
M. Demarest, and visiting his abode, made the remark that he
saw on a small table a blue surtout. M. Demarest would not
accept this view, because, instead of a surtout it was a paletot.
A small sou of ten centimes, no longer circulated but for a
Hard, being put in a box, the child says, *' I see a Hard,"
whereupon this gentleman exclaimed, '* This child is not
asleep ; he knows not what he says."

74. M. Renard, of whom I have already spoken, a man to
whom I am indebted for the little knowledge I possess in mag-
netism, being called to Paris on business, begged me to send
Adele to sleep and give him a sitting similar to what he had
read of in my journal. -I was most happy to comply with the
wishes of so sincere a friend, and so judicious and well-in-
formed a man. Scarcely was Adele asleep than he asked for a
person named Desforges, an old friend of his, who had been
dead fifteen years. Desforges appeared. M. Renard had so
minute a description given him of his friend, that left no doubt
as to the reality of this apparition. A dispute took place be-
tween him and Adele (though he was not en rapport with her)
as to the dress of this person : Adele maintaining that he ap-
peared to her in a blouse slit in front, while M. Renard declared
that he had never seen him in such an article of dress ; and that
he usually wore a jacket or round vest. After puzzling his
brains for some time, M. Renard recollected in fact that
some time before he left his friend, people began to wear
in his part of the country blouses of this kind, and that he
wore such a one as Adele described. It would be useless
to mention the minute details, attitudes, language, &c., with
which Adele persuades persons consulting her on such a point.
There remained nau2:ht for M. Renard to desire. He was sen-
sibly moved at this apparition ; M. Desforges was, on earth, a
very studious man, well informed in physics and the occult
sciences. M. Renard feels disposed to avail himself of his
presence in order to ask him for some information respecting
the fabrication of magic glasses. M. Desforges answers :
'' Why do you trouble yourself about such trifles, that would
only tend to injure you in the minds of the fools around you;
do you not appear to them superior and incomprehensible
enough already 1 what would you be then ? you would pass for a
sorcerer, thus incurring their hatred and bringing on yourself
disputes that would trouble the short time remaining you to
pass among them ; believe me, as a true friend, do not trouble
yourself about such matters, it will not be long before you
rejoin me, and then you will know whatever you desire.'*
Upon a fresh observation of M. Renard, his friend replies to
him : '^ Such kinds of experiments ever bring in their train
vexations which, when too late, we would have wished to avoid.
For these mirrors to have an absolute and a general property, it is
necessary to be in correspondence with spirits that make you pay
dear in the end for the slight complaisance they have shown you."
M. Renard expresses a wish to have M. Emmanuel Sweden-
borg summoned. Adele sees him, gives a description of him,
which M. Renard acknowledges to be conformable to his ideas;
it ran thus : " I see a fine portly man ; he has brown hair, an
austere countenance ; though by no means intimidating, and
thick eyebrows. What a droll dress ! he wears a coat such as
no one sees now-a-days, has trimmings to bis sleeves which are
very large and tucked up, and lined with a different colored
stuff to that of his coat. Ha ! What large buttons ! He has
buckles on his shoes too." — " How old does he look ?" asks M.
Renard. "About sixty -six." M. Renard says that he was
more than eighty when he died ; but that in his part of the
country (the North) men do not show their age. Adele adds
that his hair is curled, and that he appears of a green old age.

M, Renard receives a little advice from Adele as to the state
of his health, proving to him that, independently of her spir-
itual clairvoyance, she possesses in an equal degree the same
faculty in respect to the ailments of the body.

75. Adele again requested the presence of Eliza, who came
immediately with her infant, which she gave to Adele to kiss;
then she sat down in the lap of our clairvoyante (apparently
not much to the satisfaction of the latter). She put to her the
following questions : " You told me, last time, that you saw
in my thought that I had the intention to place a medallion on
your tomb ; your soul, then, followed your body to the grave ?"
*' Yes, I knew also that my aunt, who was with you, desired to
place on it a bouquet of flowers." This second communication
is quite true. " How do you find yourself now V " Very
happy." — " What are your occupations V *' I promenade ; all
that I behold appears to me so pretty that I am never tired of
admiring what is around me." Adele suddenly exclaims : ** Ah,
the glutton ! she is eating a beautiful peach ; I will recognise
her in that, promenading and gluttonizing ; such are her pleas-
ures, she'll never forsake them." — " Would Eliza be so kind
as to tell me what sort of feeling she experienced at the
moment of her death, and how her resurrection was effected ?"
" I found myself in heaven, as if waking out of sleep ; I still
thought all of you at my bedside ; I called to you, when other
persons who were around me told me that I was no longer on
earth, that I had just died ; I could not believe what was told
me ; but at length I perceived that I was no longer among you,
on beholding my father and my child, who have not quitted me
since that day. I saw, also, the little companion beside me,
who has been dead these five years. I knew her in the house
where I was brought up, and where she died; her name was
Heloise." — " Adele tells me that she perceives beside Eliza this
young girl, who is very pretty, and looks very amiable ; she is
fair. Were it necessary for me to add a proof to those I pos-
sess in abundance, I should make inquiries respecting this
young person. I ask Eliza if her husband will not fall ill from
the grief caused by her death ?" — " 'Twill be nothing," said
she ; " when he returns from the country he'll think no more
of it." — Eliza knew of this journey, as she had known of
Adele 's and her aunt's thoughts. I wish to put more questions
to her; but Adele says to me: *' Let her promenade a little;
she has but just entered heaven ; she can not answer all." I
ask her whether, on her entering heaven, she saw Grod ]
" No," said she, " I have not seen him yet." — " Have you seen
any angels V " No ; but persons who speak to you in the
name of God, as coming from him ; and I do not think those
persons are angels."

76. I ask again for M. Swedenborg. He appears. — -" You
will have the goodness to answer a few questions as to the spirit-
ual world, now that you inhabit it; your answers would carry
greater weight with them in your present state." — M. Renard
attended at this sittina:. We ask M. Swedenborg- if he has
nothing to rectify in the writings he left on earth, treating of
the spiritual world 1 He answers, that they contain a few
errors of little importance. He says that he is not satisfied
■ with some of his disciples, who do not conduct themselves as
they ought. M. Swedenborg promises to return to us when we
stand in need of him. Adele says : " He lays his hands on us
as if to give us his blessing, and goes away." — We consulted
together, M. Renard and I, as to what we ought to think of the
apparition of this great ecstatico-prophet. Was it really he ?
We had not the least doubt of it ; but we might be imposed
upon by an evil spirit ; in that case, said we, God, whom we
will call to our aid, and M. Swedenborg, will not suffer us to be
deceived thus. Moreover, we shall discover him sooner or
later, and know what value to set on his revelations ; but I
ought to observe, that if an evil spirit has the powder of pre-
senting himself in the place of a good one, he may be driven
av^ay by a command, in the name of God. Such a course has
invariably succeeded with me and it is w^hat I do at each ap-
parition. Once the person summoned is seen, we should de-
mand of him a token of recognition, which he displays to you,
whether by a particular sign, a jevv^el, or aught else, God never
suffering evil spirits to counterfeit in this respect. Neither
should we suppose, because an evil spirit may happen to
commit a few mistakes in his revelations, especially in his
earthly reminiscences, mistakes to which they are very liable,
that it is an evil spirit that deceives us. No : we must expect
miscalculations. Spirits can not answer all that is asked tJiem,
because their knowledge is confined to their peculiar affection.
Thus, we should seek spirits that participate in ours, if we de-
sire to obtain correct solutions ; but it seldom happens, how-
ever, that relations or friends are replaced by malicious spirits.
77. I summon M. Swedenborg, who forthwith presents him-
self. I order him, in the name of God, to withdraw if he is a
false spirit ; on the contrary, he advances, takes Adele by the
hand, and says to her: "Fear naught, I am indeed Sweden-
borg." — " Could you be replaced by an evil spirit "?" " No ; so
long as you desire my presence, with the pure intention of in-
structing yourself, I will come ; but if on the contrary, you act
with contempt and authority, I should not present myself, and
another would come, in order to deceive you." — " Can you com-
municate with me by thought, through the medium of my clair-
voyante ?" " No ; your thought is too deeply buried in matter.
I could do so ; but it is best to avail ourselves of this young
lady in order to avoid mistakes." — " Could you inform me of a
means whereby I could enter into the state necessary to commu-
nicate directly with you, by the aid of certain narcotic combina-
tions ?" " The only practicable means is magnetism; any other
state, provoked by narcotics, irritates the nerves, influences the
ideas by disorganizing them, and can not, consequently, be so
good as the magnetic state." — " I ask you this, because I should
wish to be enabled to express to you questions myself to pre-
vent the possibility of their being altered 1" " In that case, I
advise you to get powerfully magnetized behind your ears; it
is your sensitive part, and probably you will succeed." — " Can
you answer this question. Did God create man male and fe-
male, as the Bible says ?" *' The Bible is an excellent book,
containing very good things for study. God did create a man
and a woman." — " Do you mean thereby that every man whom
God has created, has a woman equally created for him ]"
"Yes, every being has his complement; woman and man are
created in pairs." — " These two beings, are they born and do
they die at the same time ]" " Time stands for naught in the
matter ; they meet again in heaven when God wills it.'*' —
" These two beings, are they in every respect similar in thought
and form?" "Yes." — "In theii^ intimate union are they ac-
quainted with love in its carnal acts as on earth ?" " Heavenly
love can not be described by material language, it is an inexpli-
cable sensation." — "Are single persons seen in heaven?"
" Yes, but no being can be perfectly happy without being re-
united to its half, which is its complement of life." — " Can they
be separated by a caprice depending, or not depending, on
them ?" " No, we can not be separated from what constitutes
our happiness." — " Can the happiness of souls at rest be influ-
enced in heaven by evil spirits?" "No; they are separate,
and an inferior spirit can in nowise trouble the superior spirit."
— " Have you the conviction that we return not to a second
material existence 1" " We are in heaven for eternity." — " Can
we count the time we pass in this state of happiness and the
spaces we travel over V " Time is not reckoned there ; a thou-
sand years are as one day in eternity ; space presenting no dif-
ficulty to its being cleared is not measured there. The body is
so light that it finds itself conveyed wherever it desires without
perceiving the distance over which it has travelled." — " Inde-
pendent of the affections, are there any states through which
we must pass to arrive at this superior degree of felicity ?"
" The affection constitutes the states. The latter succeed each
other according to the strength of the affection which engenders
them, and leads them to the height of happiness."

78. " Does a lunatic forth wiili recover ihe use of Lis reason V
" He recovers his reason, but he requires more or less time to
arrange his ideas vv^hich continue yet awhile more or less disor-
ganized." — "Does insanity proceed from matter or spirit?"
" It proceeds from the spirit." — " I was told that it proceeded
from both." " Certainly, matter clogs the spirit ; but we have
sufficient proof that the spirit only remains affected, from the
fact of its being still affected after its separation from matter."
— " How do you think this is brought about ?" " A man ardeutly
devoted to study fatigues his ideas, and the too great contention
of spirit on a single one disorganizes the rest." — "We have,
also, other cases of insanity in being not devoted to study, which
are ofien produced by very material accidents, falls, fears, af-
flicting news, &c." " Such accidents are only secondary
causes, which would have produced no effect on well-organized
brains ; there are many men whose external appearance con-
ceal from our judgment very vigorous thoughts, no matter their
tendency ; they are pent-up thoughts, which, on a sudden com-
motion, overflow the other ideas and disorganize the whole in-
dividual." — " Can evil spirits derange our intellects on earth V
" No." — " Can they hallucinate us by apparitions, removal of
furniture, noises, and a thousand other things of this kind ?"
" They can do so only in the conditions wherein you find your-
self impressionable, but most frequently these hallucinations are
to be attributed to material persons of a very evil influence,
who, by their property, or those which they obtain through pacts
formed with spirits that possess this affection, take delight in
deranging our ideas and tormenting us ; the influence of poi-
sons has much to do with it." — " I did not believe in such pacts."
" They exist, but naught is more displeasing to God." — " What
is the means of ridding one's self of such a possession ?" " Do-
ing as you do when an evil spirit appears before your clair-
voyante, command it, in the name of G-od, to withdraw." — " In
the possession of Loudun and others, such means did not always
suffice." — " In many possessions there have often been too many
interests at stake ; the prayers were not always as pure as they
seemed to be, for the power of God inundates all the powers
of the universe, and no possession could resist were he invoked
from the bo'. torn of the heart. It is the sole and noblest
power given to man to make use of." — " What do you think of
talismans ?" " There are very good ones, but we must deserve
Jhem : it is a gift of God." — " Could you give me the design
of a good one V " I can not ; but there is one worth them all,
placing ourselves under the Divine protection, with purity of
.heart; no other is ecjual to this." — " What do you think of per-
ception obtained by the means of what are called magic glasses,
which are made use of to discover thieves or hidden things, and
useful to our safety ?" " They exist." — " What spirits can fa-
cilitate operations of this sort 1" " The good and the bad." —
''Could you tell me this secret 1" "Yes; but I must first
Btudy you, then we will see." — " What do you think of astrol-
ogy ]" Adele says that M. Swedenborg answers only by a ges-
ture, apparently signifying his doubt in respect to this, and that
be does not occupy himself with it. Adele finds me also weari-
some ; I put, however, this question : " W^hat do you think of
alchemy V^ " The stone exists; thisalso is a gift of God. We
must be very pure to possess it." We have a long discourse
on this subject, which I can not report.

79. " You told me, at the last sitting, that you would consider
whether I was worthy of possessing the secret of the magic
mirror, may I hope to receive from your generosity this reve-
lation 1" "Yes. 'Tis veiy difficult of execution; you will
go to work in this way : —

I had a very good one." — " Since your death, have you in-
creased your stock of knowledge, which, on earth, was already
very considerable 1" " No, on the contrary, I have lost more
than I have gained of that description which is no longer my
affection ; when on earth, I wished to instruct men in what it
was useful for them to know ; but now this desire no longer
pursues me, and all the knowledge necessary to material life
ceased being explained to me when I went to heaven." —
*' What is your predominant affection now]" "lam in the
society of a few friends ; we occupy ourselves with celestial
philosophy ; in the state I am, we know whatever we desire
to know, and this is a continual souice of felicity." — " Have
you any knowledge of the primitive creation of man ?" " Yes;
but I do not think fit to explain it to you." — " Could you ex-
plain to me his properties and relations with the universe ;
men believe now in a system, and you seem to approve of
such a one in your works, which demonstrates man as repre-
senting in miniature the entire universe ?" " Man is really a
representative of v/hat may be confined to his globe, seeing
that he possesses within him all the essences composing it ; but
there ends his resemblance with the universe." — " Some have
gone so far to say that he had in him, independently of all that
exists materially, places, actions, universal thoughts, inasmuch
as he finds himself in the places he desires to see ; knows the
actions and thous^hts which exist and no lono;-er exist. How
explain such a power V " The material man is a compound
of all that exists materially ; that is to say, he has in him the
essences of each of the kingdoms, but not places and distances.
The spiritual man has alone the faculty of knowing places,
actions, and thoughts, which are rightly without the material
body and not in it ; as the terrestrial essences, he may clear
these distances, which for him exist not ; he may know past
actions, since for him there is nothing annihilated, but the pres-
ent, the past, and the future are only a condition of being
presented to him by matter. He may communicate with all
these things, which are so many unities without, and form but
one with him, according to the power of his desire." — " Were
you acquainted with magnetism before your death ; you seem
to indicate as much in your works ]" " I was not acquainted
with its properties in all their development, I had but a con-
fused knowledge of them." — " You equally appear to indicate
in them phrenology, by saying that thoughts are agglomerated
in the head in kinds of societies, separately incased 1" " Our
head is but a compound of confused thoughts, which, when not
directed and incased by the spiritual man with discernment,
lead to the love of evil." — "Could you give me a clear de-
scription as to the nature of thoughts ?" " God, in creating
man, 'provided us all with an equal number of thoughts ; there
exists not a single being who possesses one more than another.
It is for man to separate the good from the bad, if he wishes
to be honest and eschew evil." — " How should he manage,
since he appears not free to act according to his wishes ?"
•* He could do so by dismissing the first thought that leads him
toward evil. If, on the contrary, he does not repel it, by
asking of God the strength necessary to do so, this thought
engenders others, which, in a short time, form a mass of
thoughts leading man toward evil or good." — " The thoughts,
then, according to you, engender like living beings 1" " They
assemble and encrender of each other. I will endeavor to give
you a material example : G-et a couple of ants (seeing that
everything is by pairs in the creation), separate them, instead
of bringing them together, by putting them each in a small
hole ; they will be quite at their ease, and will not propagate ;
if, on the contrary, you bring them together both in the same
hole, in a short time the society they have engendered, unable
any longer to contain itself in this hole, will burst forth, seek-
ing elsewhere a more suitable space. In like manner with the
thoughts ; master the first one by preventing it from uniting
with another, and you will have no trouble to fear." — " I ap-
prove of your comparison ; but since God is the author, the
creator of all things, he has deemed fit, then, to create good
and evil thoughts % Were it not for this assemblage of good
and evil, half the human species distributed as kings, judges,
priests, soldiers, intrusted w^th the keeping of the other half,
would be useless]" "I have told you that every man pos-
sessed the same quantity of thoughts, which he was at liberty
to class and govern according to his idea. If the Deity has
deemed fit to create such or such thoughts, he owes us no account
of it, since he does not render us responsible for the direction we
have given them by not punishing us for them." — " These
thoughts, which, from your comparisons are naught less than liv-
ing beings, coupling and engendering, under what form are they
seen in heaven and on earth ?" " On earth they represent, en tab-
leau, the action they concur in causing to be executed, and in
heaven they are represented as characters written in gold." —
Adele is surprised at not having seen, when she went to heaven to
see her relations, such a representation of thoughts. M. S weden-
borg tells her that she was unable to see them, inasmuch as she
was still in a state wherein a diaphanous body is imperceptible.
*' I saw," replies she, " in the body of my relations as in crys-
tal !" He answers: "You saw what might be compared to
crystal ; but, were you to see a diaphanous body in all its
brightness, you would find it infinitely superior." — "Yvhere
does that writing in gold appear to be placed 1" " In the heart
and the head." — " Are the bad thoughts also represented in the
same way ?" " Yes, but the bad ones can not enter heaven."
80. " Do you still think, as you seem to affirm in your books,
that heaven has the form of a man ?" *' Heaven has not the
form of a man. I made use of this figurative comparison only
the better to make ray readers comprehend the affinities of the
affections of the soul with the organs of the body of which I
represented heaven as a type." — " You told me at the last
sitting that it was seen en tableaux how earthly thoughts are ac-
complished ; but our clairvoyantes go so far as to tell us or pre-
dict to us words which will not be pronounced till a period
very remote. How can speech be represented ?" " Clairvoy-
antes have two ways of becoming acquainted with thoughts :
1st, by sensation; 2d, by view in pictures. Future speech as
present is not more difficult to be represented in pictures than
actions ; speech is the picture or description of an action and
every action may be represented in a picture. I will take for
example, slander: you say of a person that he is a thief, an
idle fellow, or so forth ; the person who shall pronounce these
words is seen pointing out him whom he slanders, and the latter
doing the action of which the former speaks ; and the clairvoy-
ante, judging from the apparent degree of candor the person
slandered may tell whether it is a truth or a falsehood. Sensa-
tion is more difficult to be defined ; there must be an intimate
relation with the person and the events." — " Are the thoughts
liable to external influences V " Yes, by the good and the
evil spirits." — " We see every day actions committed which
appear to be the result of an Instantaneous thought: are they
to b.e attributed to the influence of spirits ?" " No, not always ;
the influence of spirits consists in the eniiancing or abasing f>f
a thought, or they contrive to prevent the efl'ect of it, for some
purpose or other; but there is limited their power. The spiiit-
ual man is ever free to appreciate it at its exact value, there is
naught instantaneous in his actions ; all that appears externally
is the fruit of interior combinations, sometimes unknown to the
material body, hence they are fancied to be instantaneous."
— " What makes me disbelieve in free-will are the predictions
of clairvoyantes who, very often announce to us things that we
have no reason to suppose will happen. How can that be?
Make me understand it." " As I have already told you, the
thoughts agglomerate around a mother-thought, a type which it
is easy to recognise. The clairvoyante sees this progression of
ideas and can judge with assurance in what time they will over-
flow, in order then to hurry on, by the trouble they convey into
the harmony of ihe material body, the latter to execute the
action they are preparing. The prettiest equally as the strong-
est thoughts have all one and the same source and object."
— " Your solution is a very good one for animated matter ; but
we have also predictions as to whole nations and individual
beings still unborn, how can that which does not yet exist be
seen ]" " There exists not an action but what has ever existed,
either in germ or vibration ; for the clairvoyante time exists not.
I repeat to you, if his attention is directed to dates, epochs, he
sees in the world of causes that v^hich will happen at such a
period ; he is also and most frequently apprized of these pre-
dictions by the divine power which desires that they should be
known beforehand, that men may prepare themselves to re-
ceive or execute them."—" I am too much obliged to you for
your revelations to have the least wish to raise objections to
what you say to me ; but if God permits these things to be
known of men, it is in some sort saying to them, you can not
hinder them, and all this proves not free-will. I will make but
one objection more : if w^e have not the intelligence of direct-
ing aright our thoughts, and have beside us a guide who can
influence us to this effect, why does be not employ his power at
this moment in order to be of service to us ?" " He ever em-
ploys it ; but his power is submitted to yours, which repels it,
because it sympathizes not with it, with that affection especially
which predominates in you for the execution of your project."
— "You conclude that man is free]" "All men, on cording
into the world, having respectively the same number of thoughts,
may dispose of them at will ; far from free would he indeed be
who had not all that is necessary for liberty; but if you are in
a library containing all sorts of works, you consult the one
which is to your taste ; you can not in anght reproach the
library which contains all that it is possible for you to desire.
What makes you believe that man is not free is, that the exte-
rior has no knowledge of the affections of the soul, which pre-
pares the execution of them."

81. "Does matter really exist, in the full acceptation of the
word, for the spirit, which is no longer subjected to its laws, as
it exists, for the spirit which groans in its bosom ]" " Matter
is quite as existent for us as for you." — " Do you behold, in
your state, this firmament studded with stars that you admired
so much on earth." " I behold it better than when I was
on earth." — "Since that you have a constant daylight, how
do you distinguish these stars ?" "A spirit perceives whatever
it desires, without the least fatigue." — " Are these stars in-
habited ?" "Yes."— "By whom?" "By spirits."— "What !
spirits ; not men, then, like us ?" " No, spirits, like me." —
" These stars, then, are not material, as it is said V " They
are adapted to our substance." — " I thought that the spirit,
after its separation from the body, hovered in the atmo-
sphere surrounding the globe it inhabited, itself being a com-
pound of air floating in its substance, and that it was as well
there as on a more solid globe V " You are wrong ; the spirit;
for you is a substance comparable to air ; but for us, it is a
substance demanding space, in spite of the belief of men who
think that a spirit, because it penetrates matter without the
least difficulty, takes up no space ; our bodies take up as much
room as on earth, and as such countless myriads of human
beings have died, If there were not other worlds created by the
goodness of God, the space of your atmospliere, or earth,
would, no longer suffice, as well for the spirits as the places
surrounding them." — " I thought the stars material globes, as
you yourself advanced ?" " I committed many errors. — I was
a man — that accounts for it."—" You have also said that the
sun was pure fire, what do you think of it now ?" " The sun
that you behold is the God of heaven and earth." — " What do
you mean by that?" "Spirits know no other, and God has
never been seen in any other form."

82. On reflecting upon what had been told me in the preceding
sitting, I needed more ample explanations, as I could not but
suspect that we had made some mistake as to the stars, which,
according to revelation, are not, as astronomy supposes, mate-
rial globes. I longed to obtain more precise information. —
*' You told me, the other day, that the stars were inhabited by
spirits ; is there no other material globe in the universe but
our own 1" " There are many others besides yours." — " What
are those stars of which you spoke to me 1" *' What we name
stars are spiritual globes." — *' Has each material globe a spirit-
ual one V " Yes." — " Does this spiritual globe form a continua-
tion of the material one ?" " No, it is very remote from it ; the
distance would appear immense to you, material men, but it is
nothing for us." — '' Do we go, out of preference, into one globe
more than another ?" " We go to the one we desire to go to ; God
has set no bounds to our desires ?" — " Where are these globes
situated?" " In heaven." — " Those,' then, are the globes which
we see over our heads, and name stars'?" "You can not see
these globes, inasmuch as they are spiritual ; those are material
globes which you see and name stars; but in reality there are
no stars except in the world of spirits." — " In that case I per-
ceive that I explained myself badly, or was mistaken. Accord-
ing to what you tell me, the material world has its firmament
filled with material globes named stars, and the spiritual one
has also its firmament and stars ?" "Yes ; but know that we
name not firmament that material immensity which is over our
heads ; ours is an infinite space, strewed with worlds, like
yours ; we know but one firmament, which is tlie spiritual fir-
mament." — " Where, then, is this firmament?" " Far beyond
the immense space which your eyes can perceive." — " Are
there many material luminous globes, similar to that we name
the sun 1" " No, there is but one sun, which is spiritual;
which is the God of heaven and earth, which enlightens all
that exists." — " You were acquainted on earth with astronomy,
and you know that it admits many luminous globes, as the
centre of worlds grouped around them, and to which they give
light ?" " Astronomy is mistaken ; there is but one orb which
lights up the universe!" — " How is it that being lighted up
only by one sun, the spiritual worid can enjoy continual light?"
" We are much nearer to this sun than you are ; our globe
turns not like yours — it is not opaque like yours — hence it
is that it presents no obstacle to the light which traverses it in
every direction as through a glass. Its essence is in affinity
with this light and can not alter its rays." — " The spiritual
earths, are they in every respect comparable to ours ?" " The
globes which we inhabit can not be compared with yours,
which is not worthy of the comparison."

83. "I was once told by the ecstatico Bruno, that spirits
possessed forthwith whatever they desired ; for instance, two
spirits assembled in one place, desiring to be, one on a plain,
the other at sea, could, without quitting each other, find them-
selves in the places, though so incompatible, which they de-
sired. Would not such places be mere imaginary creation of
the spirit, and having no real existence in heaven?" " Your
question embraces one of the greatest mysteries of heaven.
All is not quite exact in what was told you; it is true, how-
ever, that four persons around a tree, from which each shall
desire to gather different fruit, one will be able to gather from
it a peach ; the second, cherries ; the third plums, and the
fourth apples, which all shall eat with equal pleasure ; but
what you say, that two spirits can perceive at the same point
two different places, is not correct, as this would annihilate
places and the spaces separating them. It is otherwise, for
places really exist ; but by a mystery not less great, these two
friends shall transport themselves into the places they desire,
without, however, quitting each other, inasmuch as they have
not the desire to do so. This it is that v\^ould make those
unacquainted with the mystery beheve that places exist not,
as you say. They have the faculty, which you possess on
earth, of being in different places, answering a person, and
putting questions to another who is really very far from
you." — " I was also told that if a spirit, in heaven, desires
a library in his apartment, and that, this desire gratified, he
wishes to replace this library by something else, that he had
no need of disturbing the former, which would disappear as
if it had not existed ?" *' It disappears as it came, certainly ;
they are of a nature so light, so incomprehensible, that they
exist, or can exist, only for us, only by our desire ; hence
springs celestial felicity, that is, possessing whatever we desire.
Being deprived of nothing, we can experience no pain; beino-
embarrassed with nothing, we experience no inconvenience.
Places really exist, but objects -exist only according to the
desires, or at least, we obtain possession of them only accord-
ing to the desires, by the infinite goodness of God." — " Since
your death, have you experienced any inconvenience, fatigue,
or contrarieties V " I have been so happy since then that I
should not be able to tell you whether it was only the other
day that I quitted the earth ; time is no longer aught for us :
the spirit suffers oiily when imprisoned in matter ; but in
heaven, there is no longer a thought that can. grieve you." —
' *' You are convinced that we never more appear on earth,
to be again materialized V " We are born, and die but once ;
when we are in heaven, it is for eternity." — " Do we well
recollect our earthly existence V " Yes, and our anterior one
also." — " What anterior existence ? Have we then already
existed on any globe before appearing on earth?" "Before
appearing on earth man lived in a spiritual world similar to the
one in which he lives on quitting the earth. Each awaits his
turn in this world to appear on earth, an appearance necessary ;
a life of trials, none can escape it."

Adele observes to me that her brother had already told her
as much ; that she gave no credit to it, but was glad to hear M.
Swedenborg say the same thing. " I was shown," said she, " a
little girl who was one day to be born, and who is still in this
spiritual world : this is extraordinary. As it seemed to me a
very fine child, I would have taken it in niy arms and kissed it ;
I was unable to do so, however, and asking my brother the cause,
he told me that, not having yet appeared on earth, no earthly
spirit could feel or touch her. I have taken down a description
of this child, and should be much pleased to see it when born."

84. Adelc expresses a wish to see Eliza, whom we have al-
ready seen. She appears, and I say to her : " It is now about
six months since you left us ; tell us all about what you have
been doing since then, and what your present occupations are."
*' I should be very much puzzled to tell you; I am so happy,
that it seems to me that it was only the other day I left you."
Adele says that, as before, she perceives she is eating a peach.
T make the observation to Adele that it seemed to me that, in
heaven, theie must surely bT3 some change in pleasui-c. She
replies :" On earth, where we vegetate a few seconds, we
hasten to enjoy pleasures ; but they, know you not, that they
have before them eternity !"

I asked Adele what impression she experienced at the ajD-
proach of a spirit. She replied : *' T am fearful, timid, and bash-
ful, while it is speaking to me ; I find myself but little worthy
of approaching so near to beings so pure, so beautiful, so sylph-
like, and with such benignant looks; T compare myself, in their
presence, to a lifeless block, and am at times glad when they
depart, that I may no longer behold so coarse a contrast; their
visit leaves the mind in a sweet calm, the air seems more pure;
in short, one is quite happy !"

85. ** M. Swedenborg, you told me that we had already lived
on another globe before appearing on earth : could you furnish
me with any information respecting this existence V " What
kind of information do you desire?" — ;*' Could you tell me the
names of these globes?" "They are names unknown upon
earth." — " Did we exist there in the human form ?" ** Yes."
— " What did we do on these globes 1 did we marry there ?
had we a family'? a form of worship? usages ?" *- The life
anterior, which we have all pnssed through, was, so to speak, a
life of nolhingncss, of child-birth, of hyppincss, like that which
we enjoy on our exit from the earth ; but this happiness can
not be comprehended, because it is not accompanied with ac-
tions and sensations to prove its sweet and tiue reality, where-
fore God has deemed fit that we should pass through thiee
successive lives : the first life on the globes of which I speak to
yon, not unlike the one depicted to you through Adam — a life
unknown, a life; of beatitude, devoid of sensation ; the second is
the one you enjoy, a life of action, sensation, afiection — a pain-
ful life placed between the two, to demonstrate, through its con-
trast, the sweetness of the third, and to delineate the wants,
joys, and troubles, which establish, as you perceive, this neces-
sary contrast, in oi'der that we may become acquainted with
good and evil, for without evil in this troublesome life we should
not be able to appreciate the happy state reserved for us." —
'* You have just told me that the future life is similar to the an-
terior one." ** Yes, by the spiritual state in which we find our-
selves, for it is only on earth t:hat we are material. The first
life offers the same joys as the future one; but I observed to
you that we could appreciate them only through the comparison
of the material life, which it was necessary to have lived in or-
der to be conscious of this happy state, and to delineate its
actions and affections." — " On these globes are we in families ]"
" No, we are pell-mell, all friends : it is only on earth where
families, societies, pleasures, and pains, are delineated." — ** This
first world, may it be in the material sun which we behold ?"
" No, there is no material sun ; I reiterate to you that there is
but one sun, which is the spiritual sun." — " Be so indulgent as
to listen to me, that I may make you understand me : this lu-
minous globe, which you perceived when on earth, and named,
like us, the sun, is it an earth like ours?" "No; this orb,
which you term the sun, is not an earth — not a globe; it is but
a very feeble ray of the spiritual sun, which penetrates on earth
through space, as a candle behind a door in which is a small
crevice ; this crevice would appear to you as fire, letting pass
this luminous ray, which would give light to the jjlaces on which
it fell. This fiction should represent to you what you believe
a sun, an earth, or a globe, to be," — " So I am to understand
that this luminous orb, which we term the sun, is but a ray of
the grand spiritual sun?" "Exactly so; but a ray so faint,
that it is scarcely comparable to a small live coal in a large
fire." — " And those other globes, all which appear to us more
or less luminous, whence do they borrow their light V ** From
the same ray ; there are not two of them for your terrestrial
system ; this one suffices, and, according to their position, they
reflect to you, more or less, the spiritual light which lightens
them as well as you." — " Are these globes inhabited ?" " Yes."
— " Could you give me any notion of them ?" " No, because I
do not occupy myself with them ; 1 have enough to do to occupy
myself with the spiritual worlds, without thinking of those I
shall never see again." — " Are the worlds that you inhabit very
far from the spiritual sun ?" " They are as far from it as they
are from terrestrial bodies, and were they to approach nearer
to it they would be consumed."

86. " All the beings that inhabit the universe, were they cre-
ated by God at a single throw ?" *' Yes, they were created at
his word." — " All the beings that people the different material
worlds, do they bear the human form ?" " Yes, as to those
that are of the same species ; apart the types." — " Are they all
subject to the same laws of creation and death as we 1" " Yes."
— " Have ihey, like us, places whither they go after their death ]"
" Yes, and they are quite as happy ; for God has in view only
the happiness of us all." To be still further assured that I have
made no mistake in the details given me by M. Swedenborg on
the sun, I ask him for fresh ones, which have the same result.
He says to me : " Why, you understand nothing, then ; you ask
the same question twice over ! No, your sun is not an earth,
is not a globe, but simply a ray of the spiritual sun. No, there
is no globe of fire among your stars ; they borrow all their light
from these same rays." Not being so well prepared as to be
enabled to judge of the value of this revelation, I leave it to
those who have the capacity of so doing.

87. " You have told me that our earthly existence was neces-
sary to deliueate our actions and enaLle us to comprehend the
auteiior and future liappiness of spiritual exisleuces ; but chil-
dren that die before they are able to appreciate the material
existence, how can they judge. of it]" "All children that die
bef jre the age of three years are protected by God, who dearly
loves them; they are little angels that remain in this state of
innocence, and stand in no need, in order to be happy, of hav-
ing lived longer a material life." — " What is their knowledge ?"
*' They are not so elevated as the angels, nor as those who die
at a more advanced age, because the latter acquire knowledge
according to that they had acquired on earth ; this, however, is
no bar to their being very happy. In their angelic infantile
state, they are aware that they have lived on earth and in the
life anterior; to this are confined all their desires of knowledge.
They prefer the innocence surrounding them to any other state."
— " And still-born children, what becomes of them 1" " It is
with them as with the foregoing ones." — " Wherefore this differ-
ence of existence between the old man and the child V "■ It
is by a protection of God that the child lived not a longer time
upon earth, whereon it desired not to appear ; but as it is a law
generally applicable to all spirits that they should come upon
earth, God condemns men to pass thereon a time proportionate
to the desire they had to quit their first existence, in which
they found themselves unhappy, and. the more they were so,
the more fit God deems it to let them sojourn in this material
life, in order that they may drink plentifully of all its sorrows,
and find the future life sweet and agreeable." — " In that case
it is a kind of punishment?" " It is an imposition, and not a
punishment ; it is a necessity." — " Then, according to what you
say, the more we have desired to come upon earth, the longer
we remain upon it]" " Yes, but we are no more acquainted
with its painful existence than are you in your material state
with the joys of the future life." — " AVhat say those whom we
thus quit to appear on earth? Do we seem to them dead, as
we are thought when we quit the earth?" "No; everyone
knows that he must come upon earth, and awaits his turn." —
" Yon liavc said in your Col(3Stial Arcana tliat man had two
memories, which lio took with liim into the future life, one cor-
poreal and the other spiritual, do you still think the same V
*' Yea ; hut these two memories form but one." — " I can
understand what the material memory may include ; but I do
not perceive what peculiarity the spiiitual memory can con-
tain ; can you explain it to me ?" " Yes ; the spiritual memory,
or that of the soul, is the recollection of its life anterior to the
matei'ial life ; the soul, though in the material body, is well
aware that it has lived in another world, and that it must quit
this woi Id to enter into a future one ; but it can no more com-
municate to its body its inmost thouf^hts than tlie tortoise can
inform its shell of what it thiidts. As the tortoise, it drags along,
with difliculty, this necessary and cramping prison, which pre-
vents It from rising to the object of its desires, as it was enabled
to do primitively, for, as to it, to desire and to possess was the
same thing. In its prison, it is very different; it is wholly
clogged, makes unheard-of efforts to procure for itself, through
the view of its material body, the faculty of seeing or posses-
sing imperfect objects, and, again, its desires are at each in-
stant but ill understood by the body, whose tortuous ligaments
sullbr only perverted thoughts to reach exteriorly. It is so
contraried at such restraint that this reacts on the harmony of
its desires, which are ever troubled and deceived, thus render-
ing it as it were insane. Could it quit this body it would so(m
do so ; but the Divine power keeps it imprisoned the time ne-
cessary for its purification ; it can but form wishes and undergo
its sad position." — " Are spirits in your state permitted to make
use of these two memories ?" " Yes, since they exist eternally;
but that of the material life is so opposed to being exercised
that we never force it ; all the oddities we have been guilty of
in this existence are so repugnant to behold that the spirit is
ashamed of them, and unwilling to call them again to mind." —
"I have been already told that a sjnrit could appear in several
places, and answer several persons at once ; could you explain
to mo how tills can be ?" " A spirit can be but in one place
and answer but one person at the same time ; its material
body can, it is true, be in another place, but the spirit sees, and is
only ill one place at a time. What would incHne to a conlrary
belief is the facility with which it finds itself there. This swiftness
is inestimable by the laws of time ; hence we fancy, because in
less than a second it can be swifter than our thought, in several
cities successively, that it really is in several at once : but it is
otlierwise; only being as I am, disengaged from matter, T
have a faculty the more, that of responding, by thought, to
those who question me, much more quickly than you can by
speech, and this would give me the time to answer another per-
son, while you are reproducing my words ; thus this would be
taken for several answers at once, whereas it is otherwise." —
*' On the earth v/e have examples, however, of such undoub-
lings ]" " It is the spirit that makes you believe this, because
it can represent its body in a place where it really is not ; but
neither is in more than one place at a time." — " In magnetism,
we often perceive impressions of images or objects that have
stood in places where they no longer are, when the clairvoy-
ante perceives. them still there." ♦' The soul always leaves be-
hind, it something of itself, wherever it rests — a sort of image;
but the spirit of the person may still very well be present, when
its body is no longer there. The clairvoyante may also com-
municate, by the aid of this impression, with the spirit that has
left it, and fancy that it is really j)resent in this place, inasmuch
as there is no time nor space for it. It is impossible to explain
this to you otherwise, because a spirit can not positively be in
more than one place at a time." — " I have still a question to
put to you respecting the ray, of which we have before spoken,
and which hghtens us as a sun ; can you tell me why our astron-
omers perceive spots on its image, reflected by their instru-
ments V " There are and can be no spots in this ray ; no
doubt it is the interposition of certain material globes, which
check its passage, and appear to them like spots or dark
points." — " If, as you have told me, we are all created male
and female, or in pairs, and reunited in heaven to our half,
how is it with respect to children dead in embryo, or at an age
wherein this necessity of completing themselves is not yet
formed?" "It is with cliildren as with grown up persons,
those dead, after the age of three years, grow up and complete
themselves, and those under that age are coupled in like man-
ner to beings of their own age ; their felicity is not less great
than ours. The Deity, in his works, has displayed the great-
est impartiality; we are all equal, in happiness, children and
men, rich and poor; in heaven is perfect equality !"

REFLECTIONS ON WHAT HAS BEEN COMMUNICATED TO ME BY
M. SWEDENBORG AT THE FOREGOING SITTINGS.

I HAD never read any of the productions of this celebrated
ecstatico-prophet, excepting his " Treatise on Heaven and
Hell," a work which assuredly, for a materialist, offers not
very mathematical solutions. It has been seen that I made a
few observations to Bruno on this subject, when his guide told
him something relative to what 1 had superficially read in this
work ; accordingly, when my friend, M. Renard, who had come
from Rambouillet expressly to see my ecstatic Adele, solicited
the apparition of M. Swedenborg, I purposed, if I had the
honor to converse with him, submitting to him whatever I
could not admit in the little I knew of his writings ; reflection
proved to me, however, from all I had seen and heard for ten
years, that it would not be right to reject with silly pride facts
which, quite inexplicable as they are to matter, are not the less
true ; I was hunted, harassed, by my clairvoyantes to surrender
to these truths, the genuineness of which I had combated from
the very first ; consequently, I lent an ear. My hand on my
heart, either I was a madman or what I heard was possible ;
the unity that reigned in all that my somnambulists told me
made me no longer hesitate a moment, this kind of madness
appearing to me as rational as our reason ; I perceived that it
was far best that the latter should be subdued by such truths
than by aught that could impose on the senses. For had I seen
with my own eyes, and touched with my own hands, an appa-
rition, or a thousand other similar facts, I should have thought
it mere hallucination, and in a few days, have said : All mad-
men see like things, I have been mad for a moment ; but it is
otherwise with reason, when satisfied on all points ; when I
read over again every day these revelations, which, to me, are
much more palpable proofs than even apparitions, I remain
convinced that this kind of madness is very reasonable and con-
soling, and M. Swedenborg is for me the god of ecstatics ; I
now read his works with pleasure, because I have already ob-
tained similar secrets without being acquainted with his ; If I
am puzzled to comprehend others, I have the assistance of
magnetism, which I advise all to make use of, as now-a-days
we must have persuasions based on proofs : — let us not believe
all that is told us ; let us simply believe our own judgment !

Should any one succeed in explaining the spiritual phenom-
ena of somnambulism otherwise than by the existence of
spirits and their influence ; if it can be proved to me how
thousands of clairvoyantes, in every corner of the globe which
we inhabit, and in every religious condition of life, can so per-
fectly agree on the main point of the question, namely, that we
have a soul bearing the human form, for which is I'eserved a
happy and immortal life ! and the recollection of its self^ the
philosophical trinity of all clairvoyantes ! — if, I say, their error
is proved to me, I will forthwith burn this work, and put my-
self under medical treatment, as I must be disordered, and have
been, though involuntarily, under the influence of hallucina-
tion ; but, as I know that it is not given to man to annihilate
this truth, I have consequently a right to admit that this soul,
in the human form, living in a future life, having recollection
of its self, can not exist without usages — can not be unhappy
because it must have compensation for what it has suffered on
earth ; a just God can not act otherwise !

I have, therefore, collected with pleasure all we have just
read of the grand ecstatico-prophet. We can not doubt the
purity of his intentions ; nothing in his teachings can give rise
to the suspicion that he aims at deceiving us ; either he preaches
error in the interest of an infernal spirit, or he preaches the
truth for the love of God ! If he preaches for evil, he goes to
work in a very sorry way, by vaunting only the bounty of the
Creator and the respect due to his omnipotence. If he preaches
for the love of God, he owes it to truth to retract a few errors
he may have committed in his books ; as he says himself, I was
a man I We see what he says of the creation of man, male and
fenrjale; it can not be otherwise. If two sexes exist, it must be
with a view of union, and to unite there must be homogeneous-
ness J one must have been created for the other, as its comple-
ment, as the part most in harmony with its self and its affec-
tions. As there is diversity in the creation, by the types,
thoughts, affections, we can not suppose that an affection has
been created in order not to exist, it can exist only by what
constitutes its life, which is the possession of what it desires,
and it can not desire anything which wounds its harmony,
since on this harmony depends its happiness. It is necessary,
therefore, that the object of its affection be similar to itself, or
sincere, durable, eternal union is not possible ; 'twould be just
as on earth, trouble and disorganization ! We have already
seen that Bruno's guide perfectly agrees with M. Swedenborg,
and every one will perceive that it must be thus — -it is only
with our own image, male or female, that we can find concord
and happiness !

We will next pass on to the revelation on insanity ; he tells
us that it leaves a trouble in the spirit after its separation from
the body. We have had a proof of this in the apparition of M.
Lauriot, who came very apropos to remove all doubts in this
respect. We have others in the rambling of the thoughts and
judgment daily presented to us by clairvoyantes in their confi-
dences and their appreciations. Whoever should think of inva-
riably obtaining from spirits precise information would be great-
ly mistaken. Should we from this suppose that we have had to
do with evil spirits the mistake would be the same ; it must be
ever borne in mind that they can answer only according to their
affection — only on such matters as God permits them to speak
— only according to the justness of their judgment, which attains
not at once to the plenitude of universal knowledge — only ac-
cording to the goodness of their memory, their taste in cultiva-
ting it, and a thousand others fetters which we believe we should
refuse them as spirits. If these impediments did not exist, the
secrets of heaven would be those of the earth, and the roles of
the two existencess would be changed.

M. Swedenborg equally says that pacts and talismans exist;
in this he agrees with M. Mallet and Bruno's guide. I should
be tempted to leave this assertion to be judged to whom of
1 ight it belongs. It is the sanctuary of cabal : enters not he who
wishes ; but 1 can not let slip this opportunity of expressing my
thoughts in this respect. We can not admit that there are inter-
mediate beings between the Divinity and the human species,
who compound with God by pacts in some interested view ;
because the Deity, appreciated as he ought to be, can not figure
in any affair of this kind. The fatalists, by this judgment, would
not assimilate God to a being trafficking in or executing what
the foolish or enlightened judgment of a spirit would claim
from his goodness or justice, by striking or pardoning a being
who may have been more or less the friend or the protege of a
spirit, I do not believe in this falling off of the Divine good-
ness, and the fatalists who are convinced of the human destiny
by predictions, have a right to say that man came from the
hands of his Creator as a watch from those of the watchmaker,
all the works of which concur in attaining a pi'oposed end —
namely, to mark the quantities of time ; let but a wheel be put
out of order by an accident, similar to the pacts in the life of
man, the proposed end is annihilated : no more harmony, no
more ensemble, no more possible movement. Then he says :
Pacts and talismans would annihilate the order established by
the Creator ; they can not exist. Free will exists not, since the
most trifling actions of our existence are predicted to us long
before their execution ; spirits can not intervene in the order of
things established by God. They have a right to speak thus ;
but there exists another manner of viewing the question. God
is, indeed, the Creator who can create nothing imperfect ; con-
sequently, he has created man as perfect as possible. In this
state of perfection which represents the purest happiness, man,
from what we have seen, knew not how to taste this sweet
position. God beheld himself under the necessity, in order to
prove to him how harmonized was his work, and how free he
had created him, of creating for him a second state, a less per-
fect one — the material state, a state of restraint! of gnef !
pain and trial ! and condemning him to pass in this state a time
more or less long, in order that man might be confined and
dependent in this new state, from which, were it permitted
him, he would soon free himself God has confided this pain-
ful infancy to the care of spirits provided with the rights and
power necessary to make man sensible of the comparison of
this state with the preceding one, and that his only object was
thereby to raise him from this sort of fall and prove to him
what the liberty he possessed was, compared with the depend-
ence in which he finds himself under the government of spirits
whom he has appointed to this guardianship, to transform, re-
strain our desires and affections, knowing above all that they
can not annihilate the creature of his choice, and intrusting
them with it only for a limited time, which is but a few seconds
in eternity. God, by this proposition, would be by no means
accusable. Quite the contrary, he has created us all, without
the least distinction, with the same portion of happiness and in-
telligence, and does what he thinks necessary to penetrate us
with it. God, by this proposition, suggested to me by an an-
terior life, is not the author of our troubles, since he leaves the
government of him to man, even man become a spirit, who,
by the appreciation it has been in his power to form on eaith,
directs, unsuspectedly to us, all our actions and thoughts
toward one object — happiness. By this same proposition,
the cabal would be authorized in its persuasions, its mysteries,
pacts, and talismans, as it would ever be possible for the supe-
rior spirits that govern us to mitigate at their pleasure our
earthly position, elevate more or less our intelligence, accord-
ing to the dispositions they perceived in us, and the right and
good use we made of them.

In such a way do I find explicable the non-existence of free
will ; for the material man is not free, there can be no doubt
of it. And we should see likewise hereby that the Christians
who tell us that evil proceeds from, and is produced only by,
man, do not deceive us ; but it should be the spiritual man who
has the government of us, and not the material man. This evil
becomes a good, since it is necessary to replace man in the state
of happiness from which he has fallen. We ought to complain
only of ourselves, accuse only ourselves, and absolve ourselves,
if w^e can. Our material state, buried in the grossest ignorance,
permits us not to define evil : w^hat is evil for one is good for
another. Even the sun, which is the purest source of ter-
restrial life, bears the germ of what we call evil, since it burns
what it nourishes, destroys what it protects ! Evil is only the
false position in which we place good ; the want of knowino-
how to appropriate it to ourselves. It is the disorganization of
its harmony, the disaggregation of its parts.

We must, therefore, think thai cabal and sorcery are the
work of spirits, and that if there is nothing very precise and
general in their results, it is that the power of such society in-
voked finds itself dependent, inferior, or friendly, to the society
under whose care i* placed the individual against whom en-
chantments or spells remain without effect. Without this prop-
osition we should every day see disappearing, under the bane-
ful influence of a few individuals, thousands of victims ! But
we are not to deduce from this conclusion that the power of
doing evil, whether through magnetism or sorcery, exists not ;
that cabal has not its powers, its secrets, its laws, and its rites.
I repeat it, the essential condition, and one very frequently un-
known to the malicious individual, is in the power of the so-
ciety to which he belongs over that of his victim. We must
conclude from all this chaos of evil that God is not the author
of it; but that, on the contrary, he is ever our savior when we
invoke him with all our heart.

There is nothing incredible in what I have just said, since all
religions, in general — sects, societies, governments even —
place themselves under the aegis of those spiritual societies and
the chiefs who have founded their material societies; so strictly
true and rational is the view which appears irrational to man
— termed superstitious. In order to develop the proofs of
what I advance it would be necessary to write a treatise on
purpose; such is not the object of this work, which permits us
not to enlarge on every secret, as so doing would only disturb
the ensemhle, already too often interrupted, of our revelations.
We will pass on to sittings 79 and 80. The notions supplied
by our good Swedenborg on the assemblage of thoughts, their
aggregation, must agree with the phrenological system, with
the adepts of that of corpuscules, and confirm, above all, that
exclamation of the learned English chemist, Davis, after an
ecstasy occasioned by the laughing gas: "The whole human
organism is but an assemblage of thought !" We see by the
notions given us how they are perceived in heaven and on
earth; we remain convinced, no matter how they are so, that
they are indestructible and survive the actions they have brought
forth; we obtain this proof through the revelations made to us
by clairvoyantes on the past. This single fact alone suffices to
establish the existence of the soul after its separation from the
body, and, above all, the unity of its self ; for, to speak logi-
cally, of what use would be the survivorship of these thoughts,
these actions, after the annihilation of the being who had been
their author? Why should it be impossible for the soul to con-
tinue its existence, since all that concurs in surrounding it in its
material life exists for eternity? We see every day our clair-
voyantes depicting to us as present events, individual actions
that took place years ago, and the knowledge of which could
not have reached them in any other state. Were this still the
effect of the communication of thoug-hts, it would not the less
prove that the memory is perpetually enriched by whatever
man has seen, done, known, or thought, that nothing is lost or
effaced on these tablets of the book of life ! What I have just
said is the plainest side of the medal; but the other is much
more positive. For it is possible for a clairvoyante (since it is
seen every day) to enter into communication with beings that
have disappeared centuries ago from our globe, and find again
in their memory the most trivial of their earthly actions, which
are as unknown to the clairvoyante as to the magnetizer ; here,
there is no longer any communication of thoughts ! They can
equally foresee the action which will be executed in a century
or two, and the individual who will perform it, &c. In actions
which seem most deeply buried in oblivion, we perceive that to
the clairvoyante they are as full of life as if they had but just
been executed ; and we would have the soul alone not to profit by
this immortal life, its individuality, its self^ after its separation
from the body, though all that we have just cited is immortal,
individualized! For shame ! apparitions become useless before
such phenomena \ wishing to think otherwise is no longer to
think.

The 82s sitting offers us the solution of a question which all
men have put to themselves without being able to solve it ; it
is this : If we live after our departure from this globe, whither
do we go? We are aware of allthe systems to which this
question has given birth. India, the cradle of almost all our
European religions and beliefs, places our soul in that which
most flatters the sectarian spirit — from the sun whence all has
emanated and whither all returns, to the tender flower, the
caressing animal, these two grand systems of absorption and
metempsychosis ! China, not less enlightened than India, pre-
fers placing us under the care of its mountains and smiling
valleys. The Christians, true mosaic of all these beliefs, place
us in hell ! under the earth, or in heaven, that azure space over
our heads. No one better than the clairvoyante can serve us
as a guide in so dark a route ; so have we seen M. Sweden-
borg, ever in accord with the laws of the creation, give spirit-
ual globes to material globes, as a complement of that famous
binary, number two, which reigns in the simplest as in the most
complicated particle of creation. Every man of good faith
who shall recognise in us two distinct beings, one material and
the other of an indefinable substance, must admit, in order that
this second being exists independent of matter, globes in affin-
ity with its substance, and these globes, every one will per-
ceive, can not be compressed between the atmospheres of ours,
but float in atmospheres appropriated to their nature, and this
can exist, as he very justly observes, only far beyond the
material worlds.

Sitting 83 offers us a solution less comprehensible, as to the
manner in which objects are perceived in heaven ; how ex-
plain what surpasses our intuition ? Only, we see that his
description corresponds with what our clairvoyanles do daily,
when they find a very good piece of sugar in a bit of candle,
complete intoxication in a glass of water, an impassable barrier
in a train of fluid, &c. We can catch a glimpse of this in-
credible power or hallucination only in two ways. Man may,
after the image of the Eternal, create, by the sole act of his
will, by investing his desire with the form necessary to it; or
man, in the state wherein is his clairvoyante, may, without sus-
pecting himself, place it in the world of causes. It may be
objected, that a magnetizer like the Honorable M. Dupotet,
who lately traced a white line on the floor of his apartment,
desiring that it should be a road, more or less agreeable,
abutting on a precipice, &c., had no other intention than that
of delineating or creating this perilous route. I will answer
that it is sufficient that M. Dupotet desired to place his clair-
voyante in a road which, though existing not materially in our
eyes, existed with far superior details in his brain ! with an
ensemhle wherein nothing was wanting. Then, will it be
thought that M. Dupotet created this image 1 No, he could but
think a thing possible — a thing existing in one of the two
worlds ; he is too well-informed to think the contrary, for the
first act of the thought is of existing from all eternity : the
second, investing the form of which it is the soul, by presenting
itself thus to the eyes of our spirit ; and the third act awaits
being materialized by the action, in order to be perceived by the
eyes of the body, and what more has M. Dupotet done ? He has
presented to his clairvoyante a thought invested with his spirit-
ual form! What has the clairvoyante done? He has seen
perfectly a road, a precipice, which existed quite as well for
him as the Boulevards for us. The precipice would have
caused the death of the body, as if it had been material ; only,
it is necessary, in order to comprehend these truths, never to
separate ourselves from the idea that our material body lives
only for matter, and that our soul lives only for the spiritual.
They are two worlds quite distinct, in which, without in the
least suspecting it, we live daily ; for how think, without
thoughts ? and where do we get these thoughts ? In iheir
world. What is it? Of their nature. Where is it? Within
and without us. How does this world exist 1 By God, he is
the type-world. What is a type-world 1 A world of form.
Then, therefore, a thought, not materialized, nevertheless exists
for the clairvoyante, who is ever in this world of thoughts, the
causes of all that exists, sees in them their forms, and the sim-
ple word forest must represent, in the world of causes, a forest,
with all its accidents. Incomprehensible as this proposition
may be, we have the proof that it is true. The word forest
is the material envelope of the thought itself, which is a forest.
Let it not, therefore, be supposed that a clairvoyante who strug-
gles at your feet is hallucinated ; he is in the centre of reason,
while we stand around the circle. The mere desire of M. Du-
potet to fictitiously create a road was sufficient for his thought
to place his clairvoyante in a state fit to explore the world of
causes where this road exists, since it is a thought, and a
thought is a form typical of the thing itself. The clairvoyante
finds himself on this road, which causes him, spiritually and
materially, the greatest fatigues, which might lead to the death
of the body ! As, without quitting your abode at Paris, fixing
his eyes on your knees, he sees Bordeaux, "vvhere you have the
assurance that he is, from all that he describes to you. These
two terrible problems, Vv'hich our reason can not admit, will ever
be detrimental to its comprehension of these things ; for, who-
ever says that neither time nor space exists for the spirit, says
that which is contrary to our reason, though, at the same time,
he gives utterance to the greatest spiritual truth.

This is the way in which I am able to explain these phenom-
ena ; for God alone creates, and man admires !

We will pass on to the revelation of a life anterior to the ma-
terial life. No one, I believe, now-a-days, admits that God is
continually creating the human species, although a poet has
said that the Deity could not think without creating his image.

We generally believe that all created things existed from all
eternity, and we ought not to confound, as I have said in the
foregoing article, the enjoyment of the sight of the world of
causes with the creation of the causes themselves. God can
indeed, in a far superior manner to man, enjoy the harmony of
his thoughts, which, with him, form but a perfect unity, and
which with man form two, because man proceeds from the Di-
vine thought, and is not God; he enjoys Hke God, when he is
spiritualized, the view of the thoughts under their typical forms,
but he does not create these thoughts; thus it remains proved
to us, that the thoughts of the Eternal Being from all eternity,
since they are of him, can not be annihilated without parcelling
out the Divine Person ; man, who is one of these innumerable
thoughts, exists like them from all eternity, he changes his con-
dition like them all when they become materialized, and this
gives rise to the belief in a spontaneous birth, because we take
the effect for the cause, come to a stop at appearances, and not
at the reality. Thus the soul having existed before dwelling in
our body, has existed somewhere, in some form or other, and
lived a life of activity, for there is no possible repose in nature ;
all conduces to movement, without the latter it is nothingness,
it is the parcelling out of the Great Being ; as I have said it is
impossible. It must, therefore, be admitted that if the soul has
existed from all time, it may have lived under the form of a
germ ; and again, this form of a germ might be man himself,
for every germ has its form within it and all its attributes, so
then a form and all its attributes, without movement, without
vibration, can not exist. Even though we should assimilate the
germ man to the germ flower, it would not the less be proved
that these two germs contain within them all that they must one
day develop without them, are not the less as complicated as
full of life, bound up in their envelope as in their bloom ; then
we are constrained to admit a prior existence to the material
one, and are equally constrained to place ourselves somewhere.
This somewhere for us should be a place ; this place should be
appropriated to our mode of being. Thus, we must have lived
in this place, and in order to live it is necessary to act, we have
acted ; in order to live it is necessary to feel, we have felt, but
imperfectly, as has been just proved to us. We stood in need
of a new position, in order to render an account to ourselves
of the first one ; all beings are conscious of this pre-existence,
and I can not do better than quote on this head what I am at
this very moment reading (six months after the revelation w^as
made to me), in a work of M. Loisson de Guinaumont, entitled
*' Somnologie Magnetique,''^ P^ge '''4. Never was description
more explicit and of better effect, especially from the affinity it
has with this article. It is M P , who speaks in his
magnetic sleep, the 21st of May : —

" When God, the essence of love, intelhgence, and goodness,
created our soul, he created it with a view to final happiness,
but he thought proper to leave to our soul the free-will of its
destiny ; beside the virtues he thought proper to place vices,
and leave it the liberty of choice. If we follow the first road we
return toward God ; but of what nature, then, are the rewards
that await us 1 Here it is that the feebleness of man's imagina-
tion and the poverty of his language find an unsurmountable
obstacle. How form to himself an idea of celestial joys ? of
what nature are they ? how are we afiJected by them "?
" No images, no words, can give the least idea of them.
** Let us suppose, however, that under the sunny sky of Italy,
amid the marble city of Venice, a child belonging to the highest
class of the patricians, is just born ; this child will grow up sur-
rounded with the love of his parents, in one word, experiencing
all the enjoyments that fortune can bestow ; arrived at the age
of adolescence, this child shall be suddenly, and without transi-
tion, snatched from the arms of his parents, and transported by
the power of a will, which nothing can oppose, to the depths
of Lapland. There, instead of his brilliant sky, instead of all
the enjoyments of luxury with v/hich he was before surrounded,
he will no longer have but a snowy sky, a hut and garments
made of skins ; at the same time that he has experienced a
change in his condition, he shall have lost even the very recol-
lection of what he previously v/as. Let us suppose, also, that
a confused tradition informs him that there exists a country
wherein, instead of this misty sky, a bright and vivifying sun is
constantly felt ; that instead of those miserable huts there exist
marble palaces, adorned with all the magnificence that imagina-
tion can conceive ; that instead of those miserable hides that
cover him, silk, velvet, gold, shine in all parts on the garments
of the inhabitants of this country, his confined imagination v^^ill
not be able to conceive it ; but if, by a nev\^ transition as rapid
as the first, he were restored to his first condition, whh the dif-
ference only that this time he should preserve the recollection
of the miserable life he had led during what he will term his
exile, his soul then would be inundated with delight; the joy
which he would experience on once more finding all that he
had lost, above all, on once more finding his parents full of af-
fection, would annihilate him, if I may so speak, in an ocean
of happiness. Well ! whatever be the happiness he would ex-
perience, it is no more to be compared with the joy we shall
one day feel on finding ourselves again in the presence of God,
than could the light shed by a candle be compared with that of
the sun. Our joy, our happiness, will be augmented by the
happiness that God experiences, if I may so speak, on behold-
ing return to him a soul which might have been lost ; for the
goodness of God, his love for us, is incommensurable."

I repeat it, what can we find more explicit 1 What a coin-
cidence between this revelation and those we have read, which
certainly were not the result of a combination between two
magnetizers, who never saw each other, between clairvoyantes
who never knew each other, and who accord so well, without
communication, since I did not read this work till more than
six months after what had been told me on this subject.

By the 85th sitting, we perceive that God, infinitely good,
wholly devoid of partiality, invites to the enjoyment of his
munificence every being of every globe without distinction of
sects ; all that tends to good ascends toward him to enjoy the
harmony after which it aspires ; all that tends to evil per-
forms the opposite evolution by removing farther from the
Divine Unity.

M. Swedenborg makes us an unexpected revelation on the
nature of the globe, which we take for such, and name the
sun ; it will be far from satisfying all exigencies and all beliefs,
still I know not whether it be possible for man and science to
pronounce on this matter which of the two, science or spirit
disengaged from material fetters, is most liable to err? I be-
lieve that it is science, because the things proved mathemati-
cally by it are annulled before the spiritual laws, and what
appears rational is not always true. There was a difficulty
which prevented me from admitting this revelation, viz., those
spots which the solar image leaves on reflectors ; we have seen
at the 86th sitting what answer he made to this objection, and
the fresh assurance he gave that he spoke the truth. Thus all
religions that worshipped and still worship the sun, of which
Christians are the most devoted disciples, had the intuition of a
rational and wise worship, and what appeared to us very ridic-
ulous yesterday may be very sensible to-day. In such way
marches human intelligence, which, if it were acquainted with
the pure truth as to the mysteries of creation, would flee from
it, shun it as a thing heterogeneous to its reason, such being its
thirst after ignorance and absurdity ! We are about to pass
on to a new ecstatic, who, I believe, will not be supposed to
have any system of his own on psychology, being but ten
years of age. In the little I am about to present, enough
will be found to satisfy the studious spiritualists who have read
me so far.



SEVENTH ECSTATIC.

88. Emile Rey, ten years of age, of a waggish and very
curious disposition, was a little neighbor of mine, and fre-
quently came to spend an evening at my house, when I used
to make him recite a few pieces in verse. When I had made
the magic glass I have already spoken of, the composition of
which was given me by M. Swedenborg, I had a mind to try
the first experiment on Emile, though I did not think his tur-
bulent nature well adapted to these kinds of visions, for which
a little submission is required. He perceived nothing in it,
but, as I have just said, he was very inattentive. One of his
little comrades of a more quiet disposition, perceived in it
different things which he desired to see, and this gave me the
assurance that my mirror was a good one. I had a mind to
try again on Emile, by the experiment of the water-bottle,
which Cagliostro often employed to convince his auditors of
his magic power : he beheld very distinctly divers remote
places ; perceiving, from this, that he had propensities for the
magnetic sleep, I magnetized him, and in a few minutes he
slept; his curious disposition led him to travelling ; he acquired,
in a very short time, this speciality, and left me no doubt as to
the worth of his clairvoyance. It was this child of whom I spoke
farther back, whose sleep was called in question by M. Dema-
rest, because, in a distant view at that gentleman's house, he
took a surtout for a paletot, and, in a closed box, a small two-
sous piece for a liard. I tried to put this child in communica-
tion with spirits disengaged from matter ; I told him to ask to
see his an^el. " Here he is." — " How is he dressed ?" " He
is quite naked." — I repeated a prayer for the dismissal of this
spirit if he were not sent by God ; Emile said, " I no longer see
anything, he is gone." I summon the good one. " Here he is ;
'tis no longer the same." — "Why so?" '* This one is dressed ;
he has a blue robe, a pink girdle, beautiful white wings, fine
flaxen hair ; he is much handsomer than the other!" I desire
the latter to be gone, as the former ; he remains, and tells Emile
that he is sent by God. " By what sign may you be recog-
nised, in case the evil one should think proper to take your
place V He points out to Emile a small white spot on his
forehead. "Have you lived on earth 1" "Yes." — "When
did you die?" "I don't knovi^." — "What do you do in
heaven V " I play there ; we have plenty of amusement." —
"With whom do you play f "With children of my own
age ; I ride on horseback." — I ask Emile how old this an-
gel appears to be. He replies : " About my age." — " Are
you fond, too, of riding V " Very ; my angel is on a fine
dapple-gray horse." — "What! at this moment?" "Yes." —
" What is there in heaven V* " A fine garden, fine fruits, fine
flowers." — " Can we eat these fruits and pluck these flowers?"
— " No, God forbiJs it." " Does your angel see the earth ?"
" No, he can see only heaven." — " Does he see the men of the
earth 1" " No, he can see but me." — " Can he see me also 1"
" He could do so, since you are en rapport with me." — "Would
your angel be so good as to show himself to you when
you have been waked up?" "Yes." — I terminate this sit-
ting. Emile, on awaking, perceives his angel when I lay
my hand on his heart, as he had recommended me to do ; he
gives me the same details as to his dress as when sleeping.

89. " Here is m,y angel." — " What is his name ?" " He
calls himself Angel." — " He has no name then 1" " He has
no need of one." — " T should wish him to take one when he
comes to see you." " He tells me to call him Ais." — " Do you
still see him on horseback 1" " Yes." — " On what does his
horse stand V " On nothing ; he has wings also, and he flies."
*' What do you perceive around him ?" " Nothing." — " Could
Ais conduct you to heaven to see that fine garden V " He
tells me that I shall go after my death." — "Why not imme-
diately ? — in the state you are, you might go." "He won't
let me ; he says that my body could not go, only my soul." —
" Well ! let him conduct it." " He can not, because he fears
the wicked angel." — " You have then a good and a bad angel ?"
" The latter is not an angel, for we have but one we call angel,
the other is a wicked spirit." — " Ais told you that he had dwelt
on earth ; where did he live V " In France." — " What city?"
" Paris." — " What street ?" " Rue Neuves des Petits Champs,
No. 9."—" The name of his father-?" " Gustave Jules." —
" What is he ?" " A tailor." — " At what age did he die ?"
" At the age of eleven years." — " How long ago V " He does
not know." — " When he died, what effect did that create in
him?" "None; he found himself forthwith high, very high,
then he entered paradise." — " What is paradise ?" " 'T is
the same thing as heaven." — " Is there a hell ?" " Yes,
but far, very far from heaven." — " What do we do in this hell ?"
" We burn there." — " Has Ais seen hell ?" " No ; never." — ■
" He told you that he played in heaven ; with whom ?" " With
playfellows and toys." — " Where does he get those toys V*
" He desires them, and G-od gives them to him ; but he has
not always what he desires." — " When he has no longer a
mind for those toys, what does he do with them 1" — "He
keeps them, because he can neither break them nor destroy
them in any way, as on earth." — " Do children grow in heaven 1"
*' Yes." — " Who instructs them V " Comrades more advanced
than they." — " How does Ais know that it is God who gives
him those toys ? does he see him give them to him V " No ;
he has never seen God, who can not be seen by any one : God
is a soul that fills the whole universe, who is everywhere, and
whom none can see ; but in heaven he i^ represented by a pic-
ture whereon is seen a man bound to a cross." — " Is there any
night in heaven ]" " Both night and day." — " I have heard say
the contrary." ** Those who wish to sleep see night, and
those who do not wish to sleep always behold' day." — "How
are we dressed in heaven ?" " Every one wears robes." —
" What are those robes 1" " They are of all colors, blue,
pink, red, green." — "How are the men recognised there?"
" They are easily recognised by their fringed girdles." " Do
we grow old in heaven ?" " We do ; but we never die again,
never, never." — " Are old men to be seen there as on earth ?"
"Yes." — " I have heard say the contrary." "Ais will tell us
that the next time ; he'll ask his companions, who know more
about it than he ; his father told him not to be long." — " His
father, then, is dead, tool" *' Yes." — I awake Emile, who, as
before, perceives his angel near him an instant.

90. "Did you not know your guide or angel on earth?"
"Yes; I went to school with him." — "Did you ask to see
him ?" " No ; I asked to see my angel, and he came." —
" You see him with wings ; have all the angels wings ?" " No ;
kind Providence gives them to those only who have been re-
ligious, and as Ais was particularly so on earth, he has
-^ngs." — "He told you, last time, that he would inquire
whether we gi'ow old in heaven, can he answer you to-day 1"
*' Yes ; he tells me that in heaven we preserve the countenance
we had on earth, and do not change." — " Let us rightly under-
stand each other; you know that on earth old men no lonrrer
have any teeth and their skin is wrinkled all over, are they the
same in heaven V " No ; every one there has teeth and no
wrinkles ; we are much handsomer there than on earth." —
** In that case we don't grow old V — " No ; but children alter
as they grow up ; they remain not as they were when they
died," — " Could your guide show you your little brothers who
are dead V "Yes." — " To assure myself of this I will sum-
mon a person of my acquaintance who is dead, and whose
name was Isidore Verdure." " Here he is." — " Already V
" Yes." — " What kind of a man is he ?" " He is taller than
you, has a black beard, and is dressed in a surtout and a
hat." — '' Ask him if he knows me ?" " He answers that he
is your cousin." I cause other questions to be put to him, to
which he makes no answer. He is, indeed, the person I asked
for, from the answer and details given ; for this child knows
not how to frame a description, scarcely can he appreciate
colors. According to him this man was about thirty-six years
of age, his real age was forty. I ask for my cousin's mother.
*' Here she is," said he. — " What kind of a woman is she V
" She is very small, has gray hair and black eyes." Such, in-
deed, she was. I can get no other answer from her but to
this question : " How many children had you on earth V
** Three," said she. I was aware that she had lost childi'en at
a very tender age, bat I did not know how many ; I inquired
of my father who is> her brother, he, like the child, told me she
had had three.

91. Emile's guide reproaches him for not having conducted
him to a remote place whither I had sent him, and of which
Emile gave him a fine description ; on my observation that he
could not have seen those places which are material, he replied
that he should have been delighted to accompany him. I compre-
hended that Emile's guide thought, because he saw Emile dis-
engaged from his body, he could see at will material places,
that he would have had the same power. This would tend
to prove that the progression of intelligence in heaven is
not so extended as one would imagine, and that this child, given
as guide to another child, was himself only a little superior to
him in point of wisdom.

Emile's mother having heard say that her son could com-
municate with spirits, expressed a wish that he should ask to
see one of his little brothers ; I summoned him without putting
Emile en rapport with his mother. " Here he is." — " De-
scribe him." " He is taller than I, fair, and blue-eyed ; he has
a rosy color ; he is much handsomer than I, and wears a blue
blouse and a sash round his body.' ' — " When did he die ]"
'' He does not know." — " "What did he die of?" " He does
not know." — "How old was he when he died ]" '* Nine years
old." Madame Rey says that this description is quite exact,
with the exception of the age ; she also says, and it is what
astonishes her very much, that Emile never knew this child ; to
be more assured of what she had just heard and what she ought
to think of it, she desires that her grandmother, who had been
dead upward of twenty years, should appear, if possible.
'• Here she is." — " Give us a description of her ?" " She is
very old; her hair is quite white, her eyes black, she has a
pimple on her cheek and a scar near her left eye, a cap that
ties under the chin, a handkerchief en jicliu round her neck,
and a black gown; she is not very good looking." All this is
very exact, even to the scar which was occasioned by a fall on
the chimney-corner ; as far as regards the left side, Madame
Rey is obliged to make inquiries of her mother, and finds it
perfectly correct; as to the pimple, they think they can recol-
lect it, but not precisely. She had a very sallow complexion,
and this accounts for E mile's description of her looks ; she
was in mourning for her husband when she died. In short,
Madame Rey is confounded with astonishment, she exclaims :
*' Emile never knew my grandmother, as she died ten years be-
fore he was born, he never heard me speak of her but in a
vague manner ; but how could he know what I did not know
myself, I who was obliged to make inquiries to be assured of
what he says? It is very astonishing. Ask her what she
does 1" "She is very happy." — "Where is she?" "In
heaven." — " With whom ?" " All her grandchildren." " How
many of them are there 1" *' She replies, seven. I say, mo-
ther, what, have I seen seven little brothers dead V '' Yes,
my child, reckoning with them your little sisters." Emile
had never been more explicit or more clairvoyante. Madame
Rey smiled with delight, at thinking of all she had just heard,
and the sweet hope of a life of felicity, where she might agaiu
press all her children to her bosom.

I removed from this house and had no further opportunity
of magnetizing Emile, who would, in the course of time, have
been an excellent clairvoyante ; I much regret him. These
slight tokens obtained from a child of ten years of age are by
no means out of place in this work ; I could leave them to be
commented on by the reader, w^ho, if he were initiated into the
laws of spiritualism, could do so quite as well as myself; but
how avoid adding reflections to reflections on subjects which
stand in so much need of them 1 I was surprised at the appa-
rition of the child that Emile had known on earth, and wdiom
God gave to the latter as a guide ; I could not comprehend
"how a child, who seemed not to know much more than the
other, could be his guide, when my worthy friend Renard sent
me the celestial secrets of the good Swedenborg, wherein I
read what follows as to the state of children in the other life ;
" When children ai"e not in this state, but in an interior
sphere; to wit, in the angelic sphere, they can in no wise be
infected by spirits, even though in the midst of them ; some-
times, also, the children that are in the other life are sent by
the Lord to the children of the earth, although the child on
earth is absolutely ignorant of it. The former experience the
greatest pleasure at this.

" 2296. It has been also shown to me how all is insinuated
into them by pleasures and charms suited to their inclinations;
in fact, it has been given me to see children clad with the
greatest elegance : they had around their breast garlands of
flowers that sparkled with ravishing and celestial colors, and,
moreover, they had them around their tender arms ; it has been
given me, also, once to see children, with virgins charged with
their education, in a paradisiacal garden, ornamented not with
trees bat bowers like laurels, forming porticoes, with alleys to
lead to the interior," &c., &c.

I solemnly protest that I had never read this work of the
great ecstatico-prophet, and I should think, indeed, that my
little clairvoyante had not read it at his tender age any more
than I. Let us compare what the venerable Swede said a cen-
tury ago with what we have just read of this child entering
into life. Had I not since had a knowledge of these celestial
secrets I am conscious that I should not know how to reconcile
to myself what was presented to me as strange by this young
guide of eleven years of age; I have, therefore, done right to
preserve this little journal, which, from what we have just
read, proves that Swedenborg saw right, and the latter proves
that my clairvoyante was in a good state. We shall no longer
be astonished at seeing this guide on a winged courser, espe-
cially if we continue the perusal of all that Swedenborg says on
the subject. Children, like grown-up persons, enjoy the pos-
session of the objects of their affection, and their spiritual
knowledge is very confined, as we have seen by the answers of
Emile's guide. How, in presence of such revelations, can we
remain shut up in an egotistical materialism ; especially when
we have it in our power to procure similar ones to those I ob-
tained, surrounded with so much prudence and mistrust 1
Every one can obtain them by his practice, which will leave
him nothing to wish for, and largely indemnify him for his pains.
Set to work, you that shall have read me ; say not that I was a
visionary ; neither say that I was a mirror in which my clair-
voyantes looked. You will perceive, by yourself, that such
logic is totally false, at least you can not accuse me of a want
of sincerity and impartiality : my questions are just as I put
them ; the answers such as were transmitted to me ; all that I
have been able to collect I give to the, reader, keeping nothing
back; I wish not to establish a system but a truth, which con-
sists in the existence of the soul and its identity after its
separation from the body. Emile's little guide recognises a
hell ; we can comprehend this belief; he has never seen it, and
I should have deemed myself false to truth had I passed over
in silence this revelation, which ought to take its place in this
work as contrary revelations have taken theirs. The same
guide also says that we can not see God, who is a soul, &:c., but
that he is represented in heaven by a picture whereon is seen a
man bound to a cross. Consult the secret 2299 of the afore-
said work of Swedenborg, as to children that have died in
Christianity, aiid the coincidence of these two revelations will
be clearly seen. I should never conclude did I wish to fix the
reflections of the reader on all that has been unveiled to me;
the right-minded will know full well how to draw from it con-
soling consequences.

Let us pass on to the relations of an eighth ecstatic, belong-
ing to Catholicism fiom conviction.



EIGHTH ECSTATIC.



Madame Gouget, forty-eight years of age, having heard
speak of magnetism, had herself magnetized by several persons,
the last of whom, according to what she told me in her sleep,
had completely upset her. I knew this woman to be a very
good kind of person, and was grieved one day, when she came
to pay me a visit, to hear her give utterance to a mass of inco-
herences, as proved to me that she was under a very baneful
influence, and that her mind, which already suffered from it,
would sooner or later sink under it. She had left off" beinsf
magnetized ; but she felt the want, in order to recover her
normal condition, of finding a magnetizer who could rid her of
the evil influence of the last one ; she begged me to render her
this service. Not feeling myself equal to such a task, I gave
her the address of the baron Dupotet, to whom she went. He
magnetized her, examined her by the power of his art inter-
nally, and perceived that she was deranged. He did not
refuse her his services (he is known to be too good for that),
but this poor woman durst not return to him. She was advised
to go to her first magnetizer, but this was needless, inasmuch
as the man was unacquainted with magnetism. Grieved at
seeing this woman combating the influence of her baneful mag-
netizer, who employed all the energy of his will to bring her
back to him, in order to profit by her at his pleasure, I under-
took to snatch her from this secret obsession. I succeeded in
doino- so at the close of five sittings, and restored the unfortu-
nate creature to a state of thinking and acting as before her
disorganization. I have just given a few details which are
necessary to persons engaged in magnetism, and which show
how scrupulous we ought to be in the choice of a good mag-
netizer.

The principal speciality of this woman was for views at
distance ; she beheld the exterior of bodies with remarkable
facility, and described maladies perfectly well. I could cite
many psychological facts which would not be out of place in
this work, but I will content myself with the following ones : —

92, Madame Gouget says that she receives salutary advice
from her angel. "Who is your angel?" "Saint Paul." —
*' There are two Saints Paul, is it the apostle or the hermit V
** The hermit." — " How does he appear to you ]" " He is a
venerable old man, with a gray beard and a majestic air." —
"Ask to see your real angell" "Here he is." — "Is it still
the samel" "Yes." — "Ask for another]" "I see a group
of them on my right," — " Beg one of them to approach and
tell you his name V " Here is one," — " Describe him to me."
" He is old, very old." — "What do you call old 1 is his face
wrinkled V " No, but he quitted the earth ages ago." —
"Angels have lived, then, on earth?" "Yes." — "Proceed
with your description of him," " His hair is red and he has a
very fine countenance." — " What is his dress V " He wears a
sort of dress like a priest's chasuble, but it is not one however.
I can not describe to you its form — it is not unlike a mantle.
He has on a colored gauze scaif which passes over one shoulder
and is tied on the opposite side under the arm; his legs are
bare and he has a kind of slippers fastened to colored buskins."
— " Desire him to go away if he is not an envoy of God."
"Oh! he stays; he is an angel of light, and no power can
drive him away from me." — " What is his name V " He has
no name." — *' Let him take one." " He tells me to call him
the anael of Paradise." — " Since he has been dead so lonor he
ouffht to be well acquainted with heaven; can he give you a
description of it '?" " Yes, he is gomg to show it me." — After
her ecstasy, I ask her : ** What does he do in heaven 1" " He
is happy." — " Are there gardens, houses, temples in heaven V
" There are no gardens or houses, but there is a temple where
all the angels are assembled." — " A temple is a house." " Yes;
there is also one higher, much, very much higher, but into
which all enter not that would." — " Where is this temple
placed V " In the third heaven." — " There are several heav-
ens, then V *' Yes ; there are three." — ** Where are these
heavens ?" " Very high, very high." — " Is there a hell wherein
we are burned ?" " No ; there is only a purgatory wherein
we suffer much at being deprived of the sight of God, momen-
tarily, and this is very painful." — " Are we burned there V
" No ; there is no other suffering but what I have just told
you." — "Do we remain there eternally T' "No; God is so
good that he withdraws us from it." — " In what form is God
seen in heaven?" "In the form of a brilliant sun, impossible
to describe ; its rays are like the purest gold, and so dazzling
that we can not look on ihem ; they give out such beautiful
colors as we have no conception of upon earth. God is a
spirit whom we can see only under this brilliant form." — " Are
these things told you or have you seen them V " My angel
tells me, and I have seen them in heaven whither he just now
led me. Good God, how beautiful it was! My angel says
that here is enough for lo-day."

Madame Gouget, once out of this ecstasy, experienced much
difficulty, for want of expressions, in telling me what she had
seen ; she is very religious, and believes in her watchful state
the dogmas of her religion, which are by no means in accord-
ance with what she has just said in respect to hell, purgatory,
the three heavens, &c. It suffices that this woman renders
homage to the Creator, by representing him not as a mischiev-
ous and vindictive being, for my receiving her testimony with
pleasure. Her angel says that there are no gardens, &c., in
heaven, because his principal affection being prayer, he beholds
but a temple, where he joins in chorus with the beings who,
like him, sing the praises of God. From all that we have read,
we perceive that our happiness exists in our principal affection.
He who loves solitude would not wish to be in a noisy city ;
he, on the contrary, who is fond of bustle, diversion, would de-
sire a city. Thus it is that each thing exists for the affection,
and what is contrary to it exists not for it; in this sense was it
that Madame Gouget answered me hereafter. I stuck to prov-
ing that in the three preliminary secrets of the spiritual world
she agreed with my other ecstatics, that the soul exists after the
death of its body in the form of the latter ; that it has a recol-
lection of its self.

93. Up to this day I had never desired that my clairvoyantes
should see any of the deceased members of my own family, for
a reason that vv^ill be appreciated, viz., that they might have de-
picted to me an image engraven in my memory; I had a mind
to try Madame Gouget. I asked for my mother by her Chris-
tian name and also by her maiden name, and was very much
surprised when Madame Gouget told me she saw a very old
woman. After a very minute description, and particularly as
to a mark that she told me she perceived on the left cheek of
this woman, I recognised in her my grandmother, who was pre-
cisely as Madame Gouget described her to me. This appari-
tion, uncalled for, and which I was far from expecting, was
owing to the resemblance of the names of my mother and
grandmother ; I ought not to have asked for my mother by her
maiden name. I had already fallen into a like error with
Adele, when several members of the same family presented
themselves on account of the resemblance in the names. To
make sure whether Madame Gouget really beheld my grand-
mother, I put to her questions the answers to which removed
all my doubts in this respect. My mother appeared at the same
time, and the portrait she painted of her was quite true.

Madame Gouget offered me also a speciality which all sora-
nambulists possess not to the same degree. I put her en rap-
yort with Adele, and desired she would see the latter at the
period she was suffering a cruel malady, twenty years ago ; she
entered into details on this subject that lasted half an hour,
minutely described the places, furniture, personages, words ut-
tered at the time, even to the flowers and. legumes in the gar-
den, which certainly no longer exist, as well as a multitude of
objects she saw. She even recounted to Adele particulars as
to the very habits of the young girl, trifling things, that no hu-
man beingr would grive himself the trouble to commit to writingf
for the purpose of recollecting them. We were utterly aston-
ished at the perspicuity of these details. " I see you," said she,
" in a bed with blue curtains, in a room having two doors. A
large clothespress is at the foot of your bed. There is a large
fireplace, in which are stout andirons. There is a kind of lit-
tle white pot before the fire, in which your ptisan is being
warmed ; it is your mother whom I see, and she has no wish
that any one but herself should attend upon you and nurse you.
I hear her giving you consolation ; she also forbids you to
scratch your face, which is the principal seat to which your mal-
ady has flown ; your eyes are covered with it, you are blind for
some time. What kind attentions your good mother pays you !
she passes whole nights with you, and will suffer no one to take
her place. I see under the bed a pair of light wooden shoes.
Over the mantelpiece is an old-fashioned glass, the gilding is all
off the frame. There is also a sort of little bureau near the
■ door ; we go out by this door to enter another room, and by
this we go down into a garden. Ah ! I see you there pluck-
ingr roses, and concealing^ them under vour dress: then ffather-
ing fruit, while you look behind you to see that no one is com-
ing. It is especially when you are going to gather some fine
chervil that I see you by the wall, under an apricot-tree. Ah !
there is a rabbit-hut at the end of the wall, pretty well stocked ;
there are both large and small rabbits ; it has an iron-grated
door, a large stone keeps it shut. I see your mother rooting
out some fine carrots with a wooden picket ; she seems pleased ;
she is very fond of fine carrots. There are flowers and salad
in this alley ; there are yellow flowers. Ah ! where does this
lead to ? It is a stable. There is a beautiful vine alongside
the wall," &c. Adele acknowledges the exactitude of all these
details. While Madame Gouget is in the garden, Adele fancies
every moment that she is about to tell her that there is a well
there; but though passing close by it, she does not perceive it,
and this gives rise to Adele's observation : ** If she sees all this
in my thought, since I think and wish to draw her attention to
this well, why does she not see it?"

This communication is no longer a vision of things and ob-
jects existing, since all this disappeared many years ago.
Madame Gouget hears the words, sees the gestures as if this
scene were full of life. Even though we admit that these
things were imprinted in the memory of Adele, which is true
enough, it nevertheless remains to be explained how such an
impression should be full of activity at all times. Who causes
her to act 1 and on what site does she stand ? We fancy we
have said all when we say, she sees in the thought ! I think,
on the contrary, that we increase the difficulty of answering.
If it be possible for the clairvoyante to perceive in the memory
facts such as I have just described, and the history of mag-
netism supplies us with not less incredible ones, it is, therefore,
possible for him to find again there all that man has been able
to see, hear, say, or do, during his whole life. Partial facts
may be imprinted on this memory not only once but thousands
of times ; and this impression of the shortest scene of our life
offers the clairvoyante space enough to discover in it a heaven,
an earth, places in which he promenades at his ease. What
then is the space that a soul can fill in comparison of that
which these images must hold in our memory ? Answer,
princes of science ! it is a spiritualist who asks you this ques-
tion, and condemns you to the ridicule with which you cover
him if you are unable to resolve it. I repeat to you, know
that the clairvoyante sees in your thought w/iai you no longer
think, hut what you have thought ; what you no longer see, hut
what you have seen ; what you no longer hear, hut what you
have heard. Thus the secret oaths that you have made to the
young girl whom you have deceived ! dishonored ! abandoned !
he sees them and will tell you of them ; he sees also the tears
that you have caused to be shed ; he hears you singing the
romance that captivated her heart and you forgot, together
with the victim whose image has not left you ; you will possess
her again in eternity ! She forms part of you, you can not
shake her off; all is present and full of life to the eyes of the
clairvoyante. When the bodies that have committed these ac-
tions are gnawed by the worms, he sees them acting, hears
them speaking, speaks with them, promenades in places that
are no more ; he finds of these pictures, of these scenes in the
domain of your memory, as many as can pass in the universe !
Hear you, the universe ! you are, then, a universe, answer ?
No ; since the universe is a compound of a multitude of uni-
ties, and that, on the contrary, these unities, these places, these
scenes, may exist in you thousands of times ! You are, then,
a thousand universes ! You are still more ! Well ! if you
can not answer this question, study this soul, the masterpiece
of creation ! you will surely accord it a little of immortality,
since the most infamous actions have as much ! Say that, in
default of better, you will study the revelations that M. Sweden-
borg has made to me on the subject of the nature of thoughts,
which are living beings, engendering, immortalizing them-
selves, like us. Systems of corpuscules, emanations, images
foreknown, demonstrated, under a multitude of phases, from
Pythagoras to Saint Martin, from M. Delachambre, in his trea-
tise on the System of the Soul, to the learned, propositions of
Dr. Gall, by his protuberances, progressing, overflowing, and
troubling the other localities. This assemblage of atoms can
not act without life ! The word atom bears with it some kind,
of form ; the word life bears also a self. Thus what forms
will you give to the thoughts of Dr. Gall ? What life will
you give to this atom, if not the form of the thing itself? If
not a self that unites with another sef^ This atom, small as
it is, moves toward a certain end, that issues from a will. See
at what we arrive, for there is nothing dead in nature ; all,
therefore, is alive, with a life divided ad infinitum. Proceed-
ing from forms to infinity, we perceive that human thoughts
and actions are not lost to the clairvoyante — that they are, in-
deed, acting : in one word, Hving images ; sounds, song, vibrate
in his ear ! Only think, a sound ! which appears to us to have
materially entered into vibration twenty years ago, and more,
falls with the same force and harmony on the ear of the clair-
voyante ; it will resound thus to all eternity, and this impression
of actions of images will never be effaced ! it will ever act ;
for there is not a particle of the material and spiritual creation at
rest ; we can not, therefore, deprive these actions, these sounds,
these thoughts, these images, in short, with a life not general-
ized, confounded in the torrent of universal existence, but
individualized, having a form proper to them, since the clair-
voyante finds them again at all times ; they are, therefore,
spiritually speaking, as we have been told by Binet's guide, by
Messrs. Mallet and Swedenborg, indestructible, unalterable,
eternal ! However strange this revelation may appear, we
have only to reflect in order to admit it ; it is not the same, if
we wish to explain it, I shall endeavor to do so in a work
forming a sequel to this.

To resume : Adele, who has this speciality only through
revelation, in a consultation asked for, in her turn, by Madame
Gouget, took her revenge, telling the latter many hidden par-
ticularities of her life, which the good woman had some diffi-
culty in calling to mind. Never had I obtained a more curious
sitting ; self-love was mixed up with it, without turning to
jealousy, and I acquired the certainty, and, as I have said, in-
tentionally, that if the last thoughts and actions are reserved
with such care in the domain of the memory, and survive the
annihilation of the body, wherefore should the soul which has
elaborated these thoughts be alone destroyed, or not have the
recollection of its self, its individuality, since all that constituted
this individuality is by no means dispersed in the domain of
the universe ! but, on the contrary, seems to form in it a bun-
dle more compact, and much better to be appreciated, than in
the material life.

I must make a last observation on the manner in which, as
we have seen at the commencernent of Madame Gouget's sit-
ting, I wished to dismiss the Saint Paul, in whom T had but
little conficlence. T desired to appreciate, for the last time, the
power of the will of the magnetizer over the magnetized, and
perceive how far the influence of the former extended. I ac-
quired the certitude, as every one might, in this kind of re-
searches, that this pretended power of the will lost all its
empire in spiritual experiments, for I have maintained many a
time, to my clairvoyante's persuasions, which they could not
annihilate in me ; T have horribly contraried, fatigued them by
captious reasonings, and never could obtain their assent to
ideas not their own. None would admit the non-existence of
free will ; not one has represented God otherwise than as a
brilliant sun ; not one would admit the hell of the catholics ;
not one would have it that Christ* was the only true God of
heaven — Christian spirits and others have all agreed on this
head; not one would have the heaven of Christians, or the
complete beatitude of a soul devoid of form, that breath, in-
comprehensible, without some form or other ; all, on the con-
trary, have recognised in the soul the human form ; and in
heaven, a place wherein there are usages, as on earth, whither
all men are called to enjoy a happiness that they deserve,
froin the evils they have suffered on this globe. They have all
been agreed to maintain their thesis of free will, by recognising
places of purification, wherein we suffer from privation of the
sight of God, for a period more or less long ; but none has
recognised an avenging God, wrathful and vindictive ; all have
made God worthy of being loved, adored, respected, admired.
And it is because I ought not, in order to cry up the goodness
of God, who can not be extolled by the mouth of a weak
mortal, and needs no other advocate but his beneficent acts,
it is, I say, in order to combat the errors that have been
propagated by all sects down to this very day, with a view to
the moralizing of men, and whose maxims are offensive to God,
that I have freely committed to writing all that has been told
me by my clairvoyantes ; and, in order, at the same time, to
render homage to the Divine justice, which we can no longer
doubt, now that we are acquainted with the object of our ma-
terial existence. By the revelations that have been made to
us on this head, God has no hand in our afflictions, but is all in
all in our happiness.

** It was said to me : " Confound not the Father with the Son, as Christians do ;
The sole Creator of the universe never came down on earth to be cracified by
men. Christ was the Son of God, as ■we all are. He accomplished a special
mission and returned to the bosom of the Eternal, as we all shall one day return
to it!'' When I have made the observation that Christians aflBrm that there is
no salvation saving in the divinity of Christ, I have been answered : " Heaven is
open, without distinction of sects, to all who believe in the existence of God, serve
him with love and respect ; heaven is but an assemblage of an infinity of societies,
each of -which represents creeds and usages peculiar to itself, each society being
able to admit into its bosom only beings of similar persuasions, and thus it is that
heaven, or the bosom of these societies, is shut against contrary creeds, and all
have a right to say, saving Moses, Christ, Mahomet, Luther, Calvin, &c., there is
no salvation; that is to say, you will not be admitted into our heaven, our
society, the society founded by such or such man, because your persuasions would
not accord with it : you would be miserable there yourself, and would trouble
others."



APPENDIX.



M. Renard, the gentleman already mentioned, being aware
that I intended publishing by subscription the present work,
desired, on a journey he took to Paris, to put further questions
to Adele, in order to judge once more of the value of her per-
ceptions, and at the same time thank this excellent clairvoyante
for a prevision she had had in his respect, a prevision which
had been realized, and the details of which are as follow : —

At one of the last sittings we had obtained from the venera-
ble Swedenborg, M. Renard had requested me to submit to
him a few questions, which were answered agreeably to his
wishes ; but to one that was addressed to him, as to whether
M. Swedenborg had a spouse in heaven, and could address her
to us, we were answered, " She is about to present herself
from me." What was my surprise when, on asking Adele to
give me some description of her, to hear her say, " Why it is
the future partner of M. Reiiard who is now speaking to me." —
*' How is that ?" resumed I ; "it was M. Swedenborg's partner
that was asked for." " In faith, I have made a mistake un-
wittingly," replied she. " I addressed to M. Swedenborg ques-
tions on the part of M. Renard ; I told him that he would be
glad to know his partner. M. Swedenborg, like me, under-
stood it to be M. Renard's spouse that was asked for, and hence
the mistake." — " In short," said I, " give me a description of
this person." " She is a pretty brunette, with a sweet air, fea-
tures perfectly regular, fine black eyes, fresh-colored cheeks,
a small mouth, rosy lips, and a round dimpled chin ; she is not
very tall, wears a white robe, and has a crown of white roses
on her head. Mind you, she appears to me not as she was on
earth, but as she is in the spiritual world." — "Ask her what
her name was ?" " Juliette Pichot." — " Where was she born V
"At Aurillac, in Auvergne." — ''Where did she die f "At
the abode of an old aunt she had at Frenay." — " How old was
she ?" " Forty-seven." — " How long has she been dead V
" She does not know." — " Did M. Renard know her on earth?"
" He knew her at an inn where he came sometimes to take his
meals, in a small town near Mans, and where she was a ser-
vant." — "What was the sign of the inn?" "The Golden
Sun." — " How old was she at that period V " About six-
teen." — " Did M. Renard pay his addresses to her ?" " No,
he never breathed a word of love to her." — " How will he be
able to remember her ; he left that part of the country a very
long time ago." " She will appear to him, and he will remem-
ber her." — " She is, then, the companion destined him by
God V " Yes, she tells me that he will soon* join her."—
"-Has she anything particular to make known to him ]" " No,
she will appear to him in a dream, and awaken hiin to a remem-
hrance of her.' ^

* Whenever a date is demanded of spirits, they all reply, " It will be soon." This
word admits not of the same acceptation spiritually as we give it materially.
There, where hours and lime are not reckoned, the moments appear short ; an
hour is an age for a happy expectation ; a second for a contraiy one.

I forwarded to my friend all these details, which, as may be
supposed, caused him much surprise ; he had not the least rec-
ollection of this young girl ; he had, indeed, lived at Mans,
and travelled in all the small towns dependent on it — had
necessarily taken his meals at several inns ; but time (a period
of thirty years) had effaced, in respect to this, all recollec-
tions from his memory. I endeavored, at several succeeding
sittings, to obtain more precise dates and places : it was ever
the same answer : " Why would you have me trouble myself
about this earth where I was so unhappy 1 — with this condi-
tion in which I suffered so much, and with the numerous places
at which I was in service ? It will not be long before we meet
again, and then we shall give up all thoughts of the earth !" I
abandoned all research in this respect, and thought no more of
the matter, when one day I received from my friend a letter
couched in these terms : " I can not, my friend, resist the de-
sire of giving you the analysis of an ecstatic dream, in which I
beheld Juliette : I found myself at a large inn, where I called
for some refreshment, and was served. Opposite to me, at the
same table, was a man with whom I made acquaintance.
When he was about to depart, I accompanied him to the street
door ; he was no sooner gone than a servant-girl whom I had
observed going to and fro came up to me, saying : * I, too,
am going away.' I spoke to this girl and advised her to stay ;
I took her civilly round the waist in order to detain her, and
she turned round and fixed her eyes on me. Her countenance
was that of a pale brunette, somewhat sickly and expressive of
suffering, but having a very tender look. I was greatly moved
and my heart bade me give her a parting kiss, but so many
persons were passing by that I durst not ; at the same time she
disengaged herself from my grasp, leaned toward me and said :
* M. Cahagnet, your friend, has told you that an angel aicaited
you in the spiritual world IF Then, taking wing, I lost sight
of her. These last words struck me, and I forthwith awoke.
Dreams are real excursions in the spiritual world ; thus, what
your clairvoyante predicted has come to pass. Do not for a
moment suppose that it was the thought of this revelation that
influenced me ; I bad long forgotten all about it, since this girl,
whom I take to be Juliette, was obliged to remind me, and
that in a very, laconic way, of what your clairvoyant had said.
The effect of the dream over, I immediately awoke. Modern
savans have never been able to explain the cause of dreams,"
&c., &c. Here we have some of those proofs that square not
with our material exigencies, but overshoot them. What was
Juliette's object in this circumstance ? No doubt to represent
to M. Renard the inn where she had known him. What did
M. Renard do ! He could not recognise a place, and a ser-
vant-girl who had served him occasionally with refreshments ;
the personal appearance of M. Renard might have made an
impression on her, when probably he had paid no attention to
her. Juliette, in this dream, replaces him in the same condi-
tions in which he was thirty years ago ; perceiving that he did
not seize upon these images, and that his reminiscences re-
mained dumb, she says to him : "iVJ. CaJiagnet, your friend, lias
told you tJiat an angel awaited you in the spiritual tcorld,^''
and she disappears after rousing him ! This apparition, which
had been predicted by Adele, but which might be resolved into
a simple vision and naught else, made such an impression on my
friend, that on his journey to Paris he testified to us all his joy,
and declared that he was more convinced by this dream than
by anything he could have seen in any other circumstance.

94. M. Renard asks for Juliette : she says that she suggested
to him this dream for the purpose of being recognised ; that
she is often near him, speaking to his spirit, but that he can not
materially perceive her presence ; she assures him that she
will do her best to let him see her again.

We ask for M. Swedenborg. " Here he is." — " M. Renard
desires to put a few questions to him." " Let him speak." —
"Are spirits sensible of sleep]" "Sleep who will ; sleep is
not a necessity for the spirit; if the spirit gives itself up to it,
it is merely for pleasure's sake. With the material body it is
quite the contrary : the latter stands in need of repose while
given up to it ; the soul, which never sleeps, takes advantage
of this repose to distribute and learn its actions, arranges them,
prepares them for the day following this rest ; the soul can
sleep, but it never Joes ; the vital spirits alone that surround it
give themselves up to repose."

" You told M. Cahagnet that the star vi^hich gave light to our
material globe lighted up the whole universe ; how can that
be ?" " I told you, on the contrary, that it was but a ray of the
Divine sun that lighted up your planetary system ; there are,
in like manner, thousands of other rays, departing from the
same Divine sun, that light up all the other systems." — " The
rays of this star that lights up our earth, are they, like all other
spiritual objects, invested with a material substance ?" " Yes,
the nearer they are to the centre whence they emanate, the
purer they are." — " The nations that adore this star ought, in
that case, to be nearer the truth V " All religions that adore
God, no matter under what form, are equally acceptable to
him." — " The objects found around, and for the use of spirits,
according to the thoughts of their affection, were they created
before the thoughts of this affection, or are they created only at
the very moment of the thought?" ''Whatsoever man sees
and possesses is within him and without him ; it is the fruit of
his thoughts which were created by God : man creates noth-
ing; he desires, sees, and possesses the object of his desire." —
"But can he perfect the object he perceives, as he does on
earth, by cutting stone, polishing wood and metals ?" " He
can do what he desires, since there are usages ; he lives in the
spiritual world as on earth; he constructs with materials, if
such be his pleasure : if, on the contrary, he desires objects
already constructed, he possesses them instantaneously."

95. M. Renard expresses a wish that Adele should ask for
his father. " Here he is." — " Give me a description of him, if
you please." (Mr. Renard was not en rapport with Adele.)
'* He appears to me taller than you," said she, " and stouter ;
he is dark, has small eyes, a large nose, and an agreeable look ;
he has a gray vest on him, with pockets behind, and one at the
side in which he puts waste paper ; he has a waistcoat that
comes down very low, and having two pockets; he has blue
gaiters on, and I perceive a stick in his hand." M. Renard
says that this description is exact, and begs Adele to put the
following questions to his father : " Are you reunited to my
mother, your first wife ?" " Yes, there she is," replied he,
pointing her out in the distance to Adele. *' Did you love her
more than your second wifel" "Yes, for my second did not
render me happy." — " Are you happy where you are V " Yes,
I have nothing to wish for." Adele says that this gentleman is
easy of speech, and has a cheerful look ; that is exact. What
we deem most remarkable in this apparition is the stick, which
had become quite a necessary for him in consequence of falls,
in which he had had both his legfs broken.

M. Renard had no need of this new apparition to believe in
the existence of his father ; he wished to judge by himself, a
second time, of Adele's excellent clairvoyance, which, far from
falling off, continued increasing.

We ask asrain for M. Swedenborgf, to whom we address the
following questions: " If we existed on another globe before
appearing on earth, we must all be of an equal age ?" " Cer-
tainly." — " If we are of the same age, one can not be the child
of the other 1" ** No, not spiritually ; it is only materially that
it is so from necessity." — " If we are equal in age, we should
be equal in corpulence ]" " Yes, in the spiritual world every
one there appears pretty nearly of the same corpulence and
age ; if there are differences, they exist only in human affec-
tions." — " If we are all equally old, and of the same size, there
can be no children 1" " There are children only for those who
desire to see them ; but children among;- each other see them-
selves as tall as men." — " If it be thus for the equality of ages
and forms, it should be the same in regard to intelligence 1
When a child dies as such on our globe, he ought to recover
forthwith all his knowledge, which should be equal to that of
the rest ]" " No ; were it so, it would no longer be a life of
progression. To learn constitutes the happiness of spirits ;
they appeared on earth to delineate there their affections, which
multiply to infinity. He who died when a child, knows not
what he knows who has seen much and desired much. What
all spirits equally know is, that they have all lived on earth and
on an anterior globe ; they are all acquainted with the language
of heaven ; but each helps the other to develop his intelligence,
which is much quicker than upon earth, but nevertheless leaves
a very great difterence between the knowledge of each ; it is
only children under three years of age that, by the effect of the
divine thoughts, remain, or appear to remain, in this state of
innocence, which they would be unwilling to change." — " I
don't understand how an embryo of fifteen days should be able
to become acquainted with the earthly sufferings for which it
was beneficial, you say, it should be born ]" " I have already
explained to you that men remained on earth a time propor-
tioned to the desire they had of changing their position ; that
children, dying as such, had less desire to appear on this earth
than others ; hence it is that God, who can commit no injustice,
leaves them there the time calculated by him as necessary to
instruct them in the false position felt there. Do not fancy that
the embryo that has not seen the hght of your earth has not
suffered a sufficient long time to prove to it that it was and is
about to be happy. Although in the bosom of its mother, it
suffers more than you imagine ; for it, it is a prison that may
be compared to your prisons on earth, in which, if you passed
fifteen days, you would suffer as much and more, perhaps, than
a man who thinks it mere sport to spend a few years in one :
the last pang is ever the one that makes the deepest impression
on us, and renders us forgetful of the rest. Thus the necessary
imprisonment of this child in the body of its mother for some
time, is as painful to it as long years of earthly existence to
others — believe it, all is for the best, and for the justest pur-
pose." — " Still, if this false terrestrial apparition suffices to
become acquainted with the painful sensations necessary to our
future existence, I don't see why I should vegetate so many
years on earth, when I might have undergone the same trans-
formation as this child." *' Were such the case, the earth
would not be inhabited : you can not comprehend the wise
laws of the Infinite, hence you talk in this way. A uniformity,
such as you understand it, would be absolute repose — 'twould
be nothingness ; and there is no repose, no nothingness ; the
variety of forms, of existences, assures you of an eternity of
happiness." Adele is fatigued and unwilling to proceed. I
put to her this last question, '* If all spirits are equal in age,
the name of brothers suits them better than those of fathers,
mothers, and children ?" " Yes ; but such names nevertheless
exist for those that take a delight in them."

96. " For some time past I have had a great w^ish to ask you
whether the language spoken among spirits has sounds similar
to our lans^uasres of the earth ]" *' On earth, I address to
spirits the questions you submit to them in French, and they
answer me in that language, but in heaven I do not speak that
language ; we know, we feel, this penetrates from one heart to
another without the assistance of speech." — " Suppose, for
instance, I put you in communication with a deceased foreigner,
v^hose language was unknown to you, and he in like manner
was ignorant of yours, how would you manage to transmit to
him my questions, and he to answer them V " If your ques-
tions were in French they would be understood by the foreign
spirit, for deceased spirits understand all languages ; but if, on
the contrary, the questions were addressed to me in a foreign
tongue, I should not rightly comprehend them, consequently I
should transmit them incorrectly, as I did to M. Lauriot; hence
mistakes would occur. I don't like communications of this
kind." — " It is said that tliere are clairvoyantes who speak
languages which they have never learned?" "We can not
speak a language which is unknown to us. Those clairvoy-
antes have a taste for experiments of this kind ; to succeed in
them, they dispose of the faculty they possess, as spirits disen-
gaged from matter, of comprehending the thoughts. I would
not take upon myself to speak any other language than my
own, because I am persuaded that if I rightly comprehend the
questions put to me, the spirit to whom I submit them will
have more facility also in comprehending and answering them."
— •' Then, to speak to a foreign spirit, you would wish the
questions to be put to you in French?" "Yes." — "But how
manage to transmit them to him] " "Since I have just told
you that spirits comprehend and speak all languages, they have
also the faculty of reading in ray thought, and auswering the
questions put, provided I comprehend it myself. Hence, as I
have already told you, the liability to mistakes to which I am
exposed like all clairvoyantes; a thought or question not rightly
understood, not rightly rendered on both sides, may spoil all."
— "Ask for M. SvvedeuborcT." "Here he is." — " All material
objects, you have told me, have a spiritual representation 1"
" Yes." — " So, if spirits desired it, they could see and be pres-
ent at all our actions V " Yes, they could, but such is not their
practice." " They could equally, if they have taken a fancy to
any part of the earth, this room for instance, occupy it, if such
was their desire, and be, consequently, with us without our
being aware of it V " They can do whatever they please." —
" I would thank M. Swedenborg to answer me a few questions
of another kind." "Speak." — "Can he explain to me how a
clairvoyante is able to see in his eye whether the latter is disor-
dered 1" " It is the spiritual eye that issues from the material
one and visits it." — " There are cataleptics who see through the
pit of the stomach, or any other part of the body, how is that ?"
" It happens in this way : the soul no longer being the slave
of the organs, as in the material body, it can convey its spirit-
ual view where it thinks fit, especially in the conditions you
have just set forth." — " In that case the soul would not, there-
fore, have a body, alike in all to the material body, for the
reproduction of all its organs, if it can transpose them from one
point to another, the eye under the foot, for instance ?" " The
soul does not transpose them for this ; it can see where it thinks
fit, since there is no obstacle for it ; if it can see to the depth
of a hundred feet under ground, a sheet of water, or a mine
which may happen to be there, it may surely see under its ma-
terial foot. The soul can see wherever it wishes, be where it
seems to it fit, be in all and everywhere, be all and nothing;
the soul takes up no material room, is liable to no deterioration,
is unalterable, and incomprehensible. If you wish to dwell
upon comparisons of volume, size, space, and time, you will
never comprehend the spiritual laws ; know that the soul can
be, without filling it, in the smallest point of the material cre-
ation, and can fill the universe by its relations with it."

M. Renard, of an integrity proof against anything, delighted
with the results I had obtained, desiring to proclaim them
whenever an opportunity occurred, and wishing to support
them with all the weisfht of truth of which he is one of the most
fervent disciples, had been long anxious to procure the portrait
of the venerable Swedenborg, in order to compare the descrip-
tion given of him by Adele with the likeness of this great man ;
for this purpose he applied to the society of the disciples of the
New Jerusalem, expressing a wish to purchase the engraving,
which, as it is said, so faithfully portrays him. Scarcely had
he it in his possession than he forwarded it to me ; I exhibited
it to Adele, in her watchful condition, in order that she might
compare it with the original in her somnambulic state. I put
to her the following questions : " "What do you think of the
engraving I showed you in your watchful state?" "It is the
very image of M. Swedenborg, but he seems to me a little
older, although, in the spiritual state in which he appears to
me, he is infinitely more handsome than in this engraving ;
accordins" to the lig^ht we are in, the countenance is more or
less youthful and fresh." — " You told me at the time that he
wore a coat, the facing's of which were of a different color ; it
is not possible to distinguish them in this engraving, would you
be so good as to describe to me the colors ?" " He appears to
me wearing a coat of the cut that I before described to you,
similar to that in the engraving, with large buttons ; it is of a
chestnut color, the facings are green, as well as the trimmings
of the sleeves ; he has coarse blue breeches on, with knee-
buckles, and also buckles to his shoes ; he is a strong man ; his
physiognomy is still imposing to me, although there is nothing
harsh or malicious in it, but grave and venerable." — " Do you
see him with his hair powdered ?" " No, it is curled, as I
before told you, and as the engraving represents it ; it is brown,
and very thick ; his eyebrows also are very thick ; in short, I
had told you all this." — " Do you think that this was the official
dress he wore at the Swedish academy V* " No ; I asked him
before, and he told me that I saw him in his usual dress, which
' he preferred to any mark of distinction."

These fresh particulars were in nowise necessary to me ; the
revelations he had made me through the medium of Adele, which
tally so well with his works, which I had not then read, as I
have before said, were sufficient to confirm me in the belief that
I was not in the presence of a deceiving spirit ; the religious
sentiments with which all his teachings are stamped are not of
a spirit of darkness, and such a spirit, could it have searched
into the memory of this great man so far as to reproduce to me
what we have read, with so much truth, it would have done the
same with respect to his dress, the one not being more impos-
sible than the other ; but this supposition would destroy the be-
lief we have in theology, that the inferior spirits can neither in-
fluence nor purloin the thoughts of a superior spirit. T merely
add this reflection for the sake of a few timorous consciences
that see the Evil One everywhere and in all ; I am far from ad-
dressing it to persons whose minds are free from such childish
fears. I have done my best to depict and recognise a man
whom I have never seen; assuredly, I can not do more; let
those who have it in their power to confront the color of the
hair and garments do so, inasmuch as this, I believe, will ever
be out of my power.

I advise no one to seek to obtain any other definition of the
soul than the one we have just read ; it would be fatiguing a
clairvoyante to no purpose. We shall never be able to explain
the primitive nature or properties of the soul and thoughts by
our material solutions ; it is the same with respect to the laws
that regulate the spiritual world; it is useless perplexing spirits
with our buts, our ifs, our whys ; let us listen to them, sum up
what we see and hear, let us compare, judge, and never finally
pronounce, as our judgment may ever be appealed against.

Above all, let us ever bear in mind that in questioning a spirit
we are not tlie master, but indeed the scholar ; should an infe-
rior spirit plunge you into too palpable errors, no longer ad-
dress hiim ; but do not contrary him, do not use him roughly !
You know not whom you have to do with ; you might be a vic-
tim to your silly pride, as well as your clairvoyante.

These precautions are needless in simple apparitions ; they
are useful only in the metapliysical diicussious you may have
with them.

In the captious question I addressed to Adele on the power
with which the spirit disposes to see where he thinks fit, I try
(from what she affirms that the soul bears the form of the body)
to make her understand that it can not have the visual organ
under its feet, but in its head, or in that case this organ would
be the soul itself transporting itself wherever it pleases. The
answer she gives me is the one she already gave me two years
ago, and which has been read in this work. The body of the
soul is of a substance similar to crystal, like all around it, and
every part of which it can perceive without the least difficulty;
this is admissible, since it has this power over matter itself, this
proves that there is but one single substance in the creation the
degrees of which are more or less luminous for our material
state, a substance that the soul can penetrate, whether by light-
ing them up with its own light, or seeing them by the mere as-
sistance of theirs.

She tells me in the preceding answer that the spiritual eye
quits the material one to visit the latter ; she means by this, that
a somnambulist, to this degree, is himself out of his material
body ; and hence it is, says she, they can perceive whether a
person is asleep or merely pretends to be so, by the mere in-
spection of the individual's head which appears to them empty
if he sleeps magnetically. In this way the body would no longer
be an obstacle to the vision. Many other clairvoyantes will,
perhaps, say the contrary; judging only from them, although
out of their body they perform their functions within ; they will
ever believe themselves in this body, although they are only in-
timately united to it, and being instantaneously where they wish
to be, they will never be able to explain how they should find
themselves entire, present in a remote space, material, infin-
itcly small, and find themselves at the same time filling all their
material body. Possibly Adele would have been unable to de-
fine this incredible proposition, had not the spirits defined it for
her themselves. Oh ! abyss of our reason !


CONCLUSION.

What conclude from such a collection of facts ? To pro-
nounce, must we possess a distinguished education 1 No. Is
it more necessary to have a subtle and superior mind ? No ; it
is necessary to stand aloof from all religious parties, implore
the divine light of our Divine Master, that he may enlighten
our intelligence, bestow on us a sound judgment, strip it of all
the passions left in it by false maxims ; annihilate ourselves, as
it were, before the infinite greatness of the Creator and his cre-
ation, instead of proclaiming ourselves, with silly pride, his
masterpiece. We must make every effort to shake off, what-
ever matter teaches and exacts from us by its laws, for the laws
of matter are not always in accord with the laws of the spirit-
ual world; they can not, as I have said, fraternize together,
though not being disunited, and forming but one inexplicable,
yet sensible whole. To form a conclusion on this collection of
revelations, we should be wise in the full acceptation of the
word, and the wise are rare in our times.

I will not permit myself to pretend to so great an honor, or
to add one revelation to another in order to establish a system
or beliefs which might possibly be revoked, as not being suffi-
ciently luminous. I leave to each the right of judging, of pro-
nouncing; 1 will merely beg permission to gather together the
principal questions I have put, the whole as laconically as pos-
sible, and set down their answers in due order; all this, in a
few pages which will close this book, and leave in the intelli-
gence of the reader, without perplexing his memory, a sum-
mary of what I have said and heard. Let him take these ques-
tions, disorderly as they are, as a model or starting-point for
those I advise him to address to cl air voy antes* himself, then he
will see whether I was wrong in submitting to him this sum-
mary of my experiments, or falsified the truth. May he gather
from it the sum of happiness which I possess ! It is the most
ardent wish of a he.art that would be glad to see all men a little
less wretched and a little more enlightened.


* After having driven avp^ay by prayer the spirit of darkness, invoked the assist-
ance of the divine hght, made the clairvoyante swear that he will not alter the truth
in the interest of any religion, to render him responsible for his conduct, and, as a
greater security, employ the organ of a child to put the questions to the said clair-
voyante, who by this means would be isolated from the person consulting him.



PSYCHOLOGICAL QUESTIONS.

I AM about to submit only questions relative to the existence
of the soul after its separation from matter.

1. " Whence comes magnetism?" " From God."

2. " May its action be both good and bad ?" "Yes."

3. " What are the conditions to be observed for the good ?" " The
desire to do good, which proceeds from God."

4. *' What are those to be observed for the bad ?" " The desire to
do evil, which proceeds from man."

5. "Does the body alone possess the power of magnetizing?"
" It is in this action but a machine."

6. " What moves this machine ?" " Our soul."

7. *' The soul, then, stands for something in the action of mag-
netism ?" " It is the principal agent in it."

8. " Is it aided in this operation ?" " Yes."

9. " By whom ?" " By beings disengaged from matter."

10. "What is its mode of magnetizing?" "Prayer to God, and
an ardent desire to relieve."

11. " Has the soul beside it a good and a bad spirit ?" " Yes."

12. "Can it avoid the influence of both?" " Yes, in certain
cases."

13. " Is it free to act according to its will ?" " Yes."

14. " But if it is influenced by spirits ?" " It is counselled, and
remains at liberty to act."

15. " Has the soul already lived on another globe ?" " Yes."

16. " Why did it quit it ?" " In consequence of a necessary law
imposed by God on all beings, without exception."

17. "What did it do in those places?" "It was very happy
there."

18. " In what form did it inhabit them ?" " The human form."

19. "Had it a family there as on earth?" "No; it had but
friends."

20. " Had it affections there as on earth ?" " No ; for it nothing
was designed but perfect happiness, which it could not appreciate, for
want of never having experienced the least obstacle to its desires."

21. " Does it live after the death of its material body ?" " Yes."

22. " Whither does it go ?" " To heaven."

23. " What sensation does it experience when it quits the earth ?"
" None, it ascends with all the affections necessary to its nev^ exist-
ence, and finds itself placed in heaven."

24. " Is it long before becoming acquainted with this new state ?"
" It becomes acquainted with it immediately."

25. " Of what form is this heaven? is it not rather a state of the
soul ?" " It is an immense boundless extent, representing accidents
of places as on earth. It is a place which can be appreciated only in
a desired state."

26. " Are there several of them ?" " There are three."

27. " Are there bad ones ?" " There are no bad heavens ; there
are only places of purification."

28. "For v/hom are these places of purification?" " For great
criminals."

29. " What do they do in these places ?" " They suffer at being
deprived of the sight of God."

30. " Is there a hell wherein we are burned ?" " No."

31. " On entering the heavens does the soul see God ?" " Yes."

32. " In what form ?" " That of a dazzling sun."

33. "What does he say to it?"* "He reproaches it for its bad
conduct on earth before all the assembled spirits, which is very pain-
ful to the self-love of the soul receiving these remonstrances ; but
God is so good, and so dearly loves man, that he pardons it, and con-
signs it to a place where it is purified and prepared for its admission
into heaven."

34. "In what form does the soul live in these places?" "The
human form."

35. " Are its organs, in every respect, similar to those of its mate-
rial body ?" " Yes."

* We should be astonished at hearing that a sun spoke, if we had not, to prove
it to us, even the declaration of Moses, and that of the prophets and ecstatico-
prophets, who all, vidlhout exception, hear words issuing from a brilliant light,
which they call the voice of Jehovah.

36. " Is it perfectly happy there ?" " Yes."

37. "Has it any recollection of having inhabited the earth?"
" Yes:'

38. " Does it recollect its relations ?" " Yes."

39. " Does it regret the earth ?" " No."

40. " Can it see the earth at will ?" *' No."

41. " Can it see its relations and friends there ?" " It can only see
their spirit."

42. " Can it be of any assistance to them ?" "Yes."

43. "In what way ?" " By wise counsellings."

44. "In the state of somnambulism, how do they appear to it?"
" A beautiful blue sky is seen, and in the distance a small luminous
point, which draws near, preceding the person, and admits of your
seeing this person before you, or at your side."

45. "In what form do they appear?" "In the corporeal form
they had before death."

46. " What is their dress ?" " Such as they wore on earth."

47. " Why rather this than any other ?" " Because in any other
they would be less easily known."

48. " In heaven, do they wear this dress ?" " No."

49. " How are they attired there ?" " Ordinarily, they have only
light gauze robes of different colors, according to the inclination they
have for them ; their dress is, as on earth, a matter of taste."

50. " What do they do in heaven ?" " Whatever is best suited to
them ; children play, grown-up persons study, play music, and prome-
nade ; they do there what they take most pleasure in."

51. " Are they reunited there to their family ?" " Yes, those who
desire it."

52. " Are they all married there ?" " Yes ; when God deems fit."

53. " How long a time do we remain in heaven ?" " An eternity."

54. "Is there day and night, heat and cold?" "In heaven there
is invariably a mild temperature, and a continual day."

55. " Is time reckoned there ?" " No."

56. "And space ?" " Space is not known, inasmuch as we are in-
stantaneously wherever we wish to be."

57. " Are there houses, cities, gardens, temples?" "There is all
that can be desired."

58. " What-language is spoken there ?" " That of the thought."

59. " Are angels seen there ?" " Yes."

60. "Angels or spirits, are they the same thing ?" " Angels are
more advanced in wisdom than spirits."

61. " Have both inhabited the earth ?" " Yes, all heaven contains
has lived upon earth."

62. " Do we, after a certain time, inhabit again the earth ?" " No."

63. " Are we all equal in heaven ?" " Yes, in regard to happiness,
and each possesses it in the same degree, but intelligence alone sepa-
rates us ; every one there has not the same amount of instruction."

64. " Are there any baneful spirits ?" " Yes."

65. " Do pacts and talismans exist ?" " Yes."

66. " Of what use are they?" " To protect you against such or
such a thing."

67. "What are their results?" "That you find yourself bound
with the spiritual societies that have protected you, and must undergo
the consequences of this dependence in which you have placed your-
self by doing for others, hereafter, what you were glad they should
do for you."

68. "What do you mean by that?" " That when you are in the
spiritual world, you must render to man the same service as spirits
have rendered you ; this makes you dependent."

69. " Is it true that there are obsessions ?" " Yes."

70. " By whom are they occasioned ?" " By evil spirits."

71. "Those evil spirits, have they a chief named Satan ?" " No ;
every one is at liberty to act as he pleases in the interest of his so-
ciety's affections."

72. " Can they perform all the incredible things related of them ?"
"Yes."

73. " What are the means of freeing one's self from them ?"
*' Sincere prayer to God."

74. " Are there any elementary spirits ?" " Yes."

75. " What is their form ?" " The human form,"

Every one may, according to the kind of information he de-
sires, put questions relative to it ; but, above all, let him learn
to consult the taste of his clairvoyante, and the present affec-
tion of the spirit invoked, for were we not to take these pre-
cautions we should be cast into a labyrinth of errors, whence
we could issue only less enlightened than before; a few truths
scattered among these errors would cause the latter to be ac-
cepted as true, and this would be a grand miscalculation for
the too credulous individuaL Spirits taking with them their
principal affections, are not totally divested of pride, the
greatest sore that gnaws the human species, and they often
wish to appear to know more than they really do. We should
be firm in our questions, ever mistrustful, yield only to what is
beyond our judgment, not carry this mistrust so far as to
be unwilling to admit anything, because we can not comprehend
what we hear; neither should we reject any revelation, but
keep a correct journal of it, change as often as possible our
clairvoyantes, question them all in like manner, and judge ac-
cording to the agreement in their answers. If we have any
belief in God, invariably to beseech him from the bottom of our
heart to keep away the spirit of darkness from the clairvoy-
antes ; to implore, on the contrary, the spirit of light, and not
accept the first spirit that presents himself, no matter his firm
and imposing demeanor ; you must beg of your clairvoyante to
join with you in driving him away with a firm will, if he is not
an envoy of God. These are the few words by which, under
such circumstances, I operate : —

" In the name of God, thy Creator and mine, I command
thee to withdraw, if thou art not sent to us from him !" He
who resists this command, if you have ^ pure clairvoyante, is
a beneficent spirit ; question him. If he commits a few errors
do not accuse him of them, he has no intention to deceive you,
but he has little relish for such questions, especially if they
I elate to the earth. Their memory is rich in all that they have
seen there, but they like not to search into, or speak of it. His
likeness, his dress, the few revelations he may make to you
will give you the assurance that he exists. Be not too exigent
in his respect, put to him no mistrustful questions, such as,
*' What is your name 1" since he came to his name. " What
is your family ?" since you know it as well as he ; or, should
the contrary be the case, you may question him. Ask him not
how long he has been dead, he knows nothing about it ; leave
him at liberty to answer you without interruption, for he reads
in your thought : he is of good faith ; he thinks that his pres-
ence ought to suffice you in all the details that surround him
to make you believe in his existence. Have the same good
faith, and you will learn more than you could have possibly
desired.

To initiate your clairvoyante in this kind of apparition, first
look out for a subject as independent as possible of your will ;
make no physical experiment wherein the communication of
thoughts is often necessary. Seek for a natural, voluntary
clairvoyante, and not a sickly one, if possible. Conduct his
speciality toward these communications, without ever demand-
ing of him any but those appertaining to maladies. Begin by
interesting him in an apparition, asking him if he would not be
glad to see some departed friend who had been dear to him ;
he will be curious, his desire will be strong, and the person
mentally demanded by you and by him will shortly present
himself. Continue this kind of experiment, changing the per-
sonage as often as you can. As soon as you perceive that the
view of a deceased being greatly affects your clairvoyante, that
he appears delighted at seeing him again, tell him to ask this
spirit to have the goodness to conduct him into the places he
inhabits ; he will readily do so, on one condition, which is that
the clairvoyante shall descend again to earth, after a short in-
terval of time, not exceeding ten minutes, according to the
susceptible nature of the subject. To aid him in his departure,
place him under the care of God and his guide ; place your
hand at some distance from the crown of his head, your fingers
downward and brought together to a point, desire them to
attract and open the fictitious space necessary to the passage
of the soul. When you see him leaning back, his arms lan-
guidly dropping down, his face flushed and assuming an ex-
pression of beatitude, leave him for the time agreed upon in
this ecstatic contemplation. For prudence sake, ever keep
your eyes fixed on the plexus, principally the solar or pit of
the stomach, retaining by your will sufficient life in the body
to prevent all risk. If your clairvoyant should not return at
the appointed time, and you perceive that his countenance is
getting discolored, assuming a dark sallow hue, proceed no
further, death is at hand. Close the door upon him, making
with a determined force of will, a few transversal passes over
his head and before his face ; if it be long before he answers
you, do n't be disturbed, do as if you were pulling him from
on high with a cord, blow warmly on his heart, and you will
see him pass again into the ordinary state of magnetic sleep.
Ask him what he has seen, do not laugh, or you will learn
nothinor. Be of sfood faith, see in his revelations an act of
madness or truth without telling him of it, and think what you
please. All the counsels I have just given are dictated only
by a wise prudence ; there are many ecstatics of different
shades, with whom we have no need of this prudence ; but
there are some with whom we can not be too circumspect, as I
well know by experience. We ought to consider ourselves as
warned on this head ; death or insanity might be the conse-
quence of such attempts. The ecstasy by which we commu-
nicate with spirits on earth presents no danger ; it is one of
the tasks which somnambulists perform with the greatest
facility. I also recommend that if the clairvoyante, in speak-
ing with spirits, should solicit from you certain marks of re-
spect or assent to certain gestures, still preserving your dignity
as a man, who ought to bend the knee to his Creator only,
refuse not doing what could not in the least affect you. Be
covfiding, reserved, voluntary , reasonable, devoid of passion,
and you will be indemnified for your pains, rendering yourself
more happy than you ever were before ; you will be less in-
clined to curse the earth and its sorrows, inasmuch as you will
perceive that those sorrows are beneficial ; you will no longer,
in your sufferings, accuse God, because you will know that he
is infinitely good ; you w^ill no longer be puffed up with your
knowledge, because the further you go, the more you will per-
ceive that you know nothing ; you will patient admire this
terrestrial mechanism, so beautiful, so grand, in one point of
view, so insignificant in another ; you will be in haste to again
inhabit your former dwelling and be less attached to your ma-
terial baubles. You will no longer tremble before your coffin,
which is the gate to the temple of happiness wherein you are
to live for ever ! !

Recognised as superior by our savans to this good and honest
soldier whose narrative we have just perused — a narrative as
simple as it is full of truthfulness. After reading this one, they
will be tempted to cry out, *' Hallucination !" But there is no
lack of hallucinated individuals of this kind : the satirical Bal-
zac, the astounding Alexandre Dumas, the austere patriot Al-
phonse Esquiros, the piquant Alphonse Karr, the philanthropic
Eugene Sue, &c., &c., all believe in magnetism and its marvels.
It was to those well-taught men that it appertained to handle the
subject which I have ventured to treat upon very superficially.
What success would it not have obtained, set forth by those
pens, as elegant as they are witty ! In short, since I have
opened the march, let us proceed ; and you, readers, be indul-
gent : —

" Monsieur : Having perused your * Secrets,' I am induced
to relate to you a few facts from which you may possibly derive
some information. As it seems necessary to me to make a few
prefatory remarks in order to fix the amount of confidence that
may be accorded me, I will do so, but in a few words.

" My natural tendencies are spiritualist ones ; my aspirations
are directed toward the world of causes ; but three motives
paralyzed my tendencies and my aspirations : the philosophy
of our days, with which I was classically impregnated ; my
pride, which made me consider as weakness of mind the least
faith in whatsoever departs from physical and chemical possi-
bilities ; in short, the fear of being a dupe, even to my own
illusions — therefore laughed I disdainfully at the recitals of
supernatural things. 'Your father,' once said my mother to
me, * was not a weak-minded man, and yet he aflfirmed having
seen on two occasions, in the course of his life, two human
forms clad in white : in one he perfectly well recognised his
betrothed, in the other his aunt. In fact, these two persons
were dying, far away from him, when he saw them.' At this
affirmation I gave an incredulous shake of the head. * Your
grandmother, at the moment her father took to his death-bed,
beheld him distinctly, wrapped up in a sheet, and seated on
their garden-wall.' ' A mere illusion,' replied I ; ' childish
fright.' — ' For several years we had not seen my father's broth-
er • one night we were all aroused by his voice, which, from the
yard, was calling my father. We ran out to welcome our
uncle ; no one was there, and we were all thoroughly convinced
of the fact, since your grandfather' had been thrice named.'
'Hallucination of the hearing,' repUed I; 'a spirit can not
speak.' — 'When he whom I loved died,' added my mother,
' several blows were struck on a small spinning-wheel hanging
from the wall, and it commenced rapidly turning round. Weep-
ing, I conveyed the spinning-wheel to the bedside of my father,
who laughed at me ; and the fact was renewed in the presence
of a score of persons, who felt the agitation of the air under
the invisible wand, and beheld, not only the wheel turn, but a
cloud of dust gather around it.' — ' It was probably some sorry
trick of legerdemain that was played you,' replied I. ' When
my sister died,' resumed my godmother, * I did not even know
that she had been ill. I woke up during the night; the moon
threw its light into my room, and I disti»ctly beheld my sister
walking. When my husband died, far away from me, I felt
myself raised thrice in my bed.' — ' These are illusions, my dear
godmother,' replied I, 'for such things can't be; the spirit has
no form ; the spirit has no action over the matter it animates,
and acts physically only through the medium of organs.' My
incredulity on such matters was so great, that I would not be-
lieve that three violent rings given at our door, while we were
on the landing-place, were a sign of farewell sent by a female
friend of my mother, although the hour of her death coincided
with that of the three pulls at the bell. I preferred believing
that a mouse had run along the bell-wire ; and when my sister,
at that time in Scotland, inquired of us by letter whether Mad-
ame O , of whose ihness we had not sent her word, had not

died on such a day, at such an hour, because she had heard her-
self thrice called by the voice of that lady, although the coinci-
dence was exact, my incredulity remained unshaken. * Some
such thing will happen to yourself,' said my mother, ' and then
you will believe.' — ' I will search into it,' said I, * and find out,
be you assured, some physical cause for it.'
imploring the assistance of the spirits that facilitate such experi-
ments. M. de Laborde makes use of a brilliant ink which he
puts in the hollow of the looker's hand, and stimulates his ner-
vous system by perfumes. M. Dupotet makes use of a piece of
coal with which he describes a circle on the floor, with the in-
tention of making perceptible to the person operated upon such
picture as the latter desires; he keeps the subject inclined for
this experiment by thought. Sorcerers have their reputation
which is of great assistance to them. Certain prepossessions
against such or such a person suspected of theft or aught else,
their imposing air, their supplication to such spirit familiar to
them, without knowing positively the meaning of what they
say — this suffices, and they operate ! Leon, of whom I have
spoken, followed in their steps ; prayer, failh, and a disposition
of the visual organ, facilitated his experiments. Cagliostro,
preceded by his reputation as an incomprehensible man, was
often successful in consequence of the tact he displayed in se-
lecting his pupils, the occult magnetism he employed, &c. ; but
if 1 ask Messrs. de Laborde, Dupotet, Cagliostro, the sorcerers,
Leon and others, whether they saw themselves in their mirrors
or reflecting body, they v/ill reply no ; therefore, there must be
a disposition for this kind of exjteriment, we must be influ-
enced by an imposing display, an occult magnetism, or the aid
of invocations and perfumes. Wherefoie, in order to profit by
my mirror, I would advise the ceremony to be performed with
a certain dignity, and to have recourse only to what may act on
the imagination or nerves ; as much by a moral or spiritual
magnetism as by the assistance of perfumes. All those that
bear or shed a sweet, pleasant smell, are suitable for the good
spirits, such as incense, musk, gum-lac, &c. ; and for evil
spirits, the seeds of henbane, hemp, belladonna, anise, or cori-
ander, &c. Each seeks his own atmosphere, or one akin to it ;
but, above all, shun the assistance of evil spirits. Let the spirit
of justice, discretion, humanity, predominate in you : or, other-
wise, wo betide you !

It will not, perhaps, be comprehended why I should recom-
mend shunning the invocation of evil spirits, and yet make
known the perfumes they deliglit in. I presume that I shall be
thought sufficiently consistent with myself to speak here only
of the apparitions we desiied to obtain, on the score of thefts,
or other crimes, committed to your prejudice. It is the spii'its
of those culprits who will obey your command to present them-
selves, and seek the nauseous smell of these perfumes. You
have nothing to fear from them, since, on the contrary, they
have everything to fear from you. What I recommend you to
avoid, w^ien demanding apparitions of those you desire to see,
is pronouncing words, the meaning of which is unknown to you,
that invite baneful spirits to your assistance. This is true
magic* For the sake of a little earthly glory, lose not celes-
tial happiness. In all our experiments of views at distance on
earth, we can dispense with their assistance ; we have the
power of doing it by ourselves, aided, as I have said, by aux-
iliaries placing us in the conditions necessary to obtain these
results. If I seemed to fear the assistance of strange spirits, it
was because the simplest judgment we can pass on the spirit-
ual phenomena of magnetism will prove that spirits exist after
being freed from their material envelope ; but they can not be
immediately delivered from their affection for evil. We should
have the conviction that they can not gratify it on the spirits
that surround them, and have the same inclinations as they
have ; we are, therefore, the only beings placed at their dis-
posal, and, under a show of eagerness to be of service, they
do not act for the sake of obliging us, inasmuch as their sole
happiness consists in doing evil. It is needless entering into
further explanation of all that might result from allying our-
selves to them.

Magnetism, and all its properties, sufficiently prove the de-
pendence of certain intelligences under the power of the mag-
netizer, to render us as cautious as possible. The philosophy
of this science has so upset every idea hitherto received that we
no longer know what to think, what believe, and what do. If
we dread the services of a friend whom we believe we well
know, still more must we dread those of beings unknown !
Consult on this head the Journal of Magnetism, by M. Dupo-
tet, wherein I read at this very moment : " The souls of the
cursed are the first to answer, as they are still disposed to
serve sinister projects. Expect from them nothing more; they
have only this power." What an authority forthwith comes in
support of the counsels I give ! Gro on, estimable and sincere
man, you also have great things to reveal to us ! Speak; fear
not the name of visionary ; it is never too soon to enlighten our
brethren ; but ever too late when we know them to be in error.



CAN CURES BE PERFORMED THROUGH

PRAYER?

Happening to go to work one day at the abode of Madame
Ferriere Penona, a lady to whom I am indebted for many
marks of kindness, I found her bathed in tears and absorbed in
the most profound grief. Venturing to ask her the cause of
her sorrow, and whether any misfortune threatened her, she
replied : " I have a little niece whom I dearly love, who is,
perhaps, at this very moment breathing her last." *' How old
is the child ?" " Fourteen."—" It is hard at such an age to
leave the world, and kind parents, whose sole happiness we
are! Wliat is her complaint ?" "The doctors don't know.
My poor brother has just arrived to receive her last embrace ;
he will assuredly die of grief, as he has but this child, and is
dotingly fond of her." — " Do you think there is no remedy ?"
" The doctors say no, and look upon her as doomed !" — "Has
magnetism been tried on her V " Oh ! my brother has no
faith in it ; he is an old officer, who would think he had run
mad were he to take up with such an idea; and then, again,
we know no one to whom to apply !" — '• I devote much time to
this science, and am pretty fortunate ; I know not what I feel,
but it seems to me that all hope is not lost." '* If I could but
think so, and you were so good !" — " I should be the happiest
of men, madame, could I but dry up your tears!" "What
can I do V " Mention it to your brother." Two mortal hours
passed away before coming to an arrangement ; the suscepti-
bility of the doctor, the painful position of the relatives were
extreme ; disorder was in all hearts : at length the doctor said
he saw no objection. This news was announced to me by a
servant ; I hastened off to the hotel, and was ushered to the
bedside of the dying child; not a word was uttered by those
present; I inspired but little confidence — I wore the livery of
a proletarian !

Never did I see a countenance more ano;-elic or interesting- —
a languishing look which seemed to shun the sight of death to
fix itself on a few toys, a few flowers which, like it, were lan-
guishingly drooping on the edge of a vase where they were no
longer nurtured by the water of heaven. At fourteen, life is
so rich in hope and full of emotions ! I drew near, asked her
how she was, and if she v/ould permit me to take her hand.
To what, good heavens ! did I speak 1 Speech was no longer
at her service. She let me perceive, by putting out her hand,
that I had been understood. The father and the nurse of this
interesting;' child stood bv the window, shedding^ tears. I con-
veyed my looks on the beautiful eyes of this frail creature. I
no longer know^ what passed within me. I recollect that I
spoke to her mentally for some time, lavished on her the most
tender consolations, the firmest hope. I implored the mercy
of the Lord, and the beneficent influx of the sacred legions
of the angels. 1 attracted her soul to my soul, opened to her
my heart to revivify her by the sweet emotions that agitated it ;
the eyes of her body were closed ; mine shed a phosphorescent
light wherever they were conveyed ; I breatlied a sweet odor ;
a mild atmosphere surrounded me ; I was no longer on earth,
we were in heaven. Ah ! you who laugh at all, respect this
recital : it is that of a frank and loving heart, which, for the
first time, played the sweet part of a father, and was happy that
day, that hour only. It no longer thought of its own painful
existence ; it was all in that child, and that child was all in it.
I will not tell you how long this scene lasted, what thought the
persons present, and what I think of it now. She tvas saved ;
in the evening she took her first meal since a fortnight, slept all
nio^ht for the first time since a week : and three days after trod
with a firm step on the dead leaves in the garden of the Tuil-
eries. I met her but this once : we shall meet again in heaven.
Pray ! Essay !

*******

I ought to return thanks to the sole and only Creator of the
universe for the divine inspiration of this work, as well for
myself as for men in general, to whom it will convey the great-
est calm by regenerating from the experiments it proposes —
faith in the next world, so wavering here below — by imparting
to the tender mother, the faithful spouse, the inconsolable lover,
the means of beholding in their magnetic sleep the objects of
their affection ; speaking with them, receiving and giving each
other proofs of their mutual attachment and their grateful
recollection.

Oh, you cataleptizers of limbs ! who would believe you com-
promised the little you pretend to know, if you bestowed a few
minutes on your subjects to pour their hearts into the bosom
of those immortal spirits who laugh at your ignorance and fool-
ish pride ; you who fling back the cloak of ridicule, which
should cover you, on spiritual magnetizers ! If thei-e remains
but a spark of good faith in you, say with me that you know
nothing, can do nothing, will never know anything ; if you
consult not your clairvoyantes on what you are ignorant of, and
if you acquire not the proof that you are not empty pitchers,
but, on the contrary, that there is in them a being far superior
to them ; that this being is not a molecule of ambient air which
returns into space, after quitting the body it animated, as a
drop of water returns to the sea; but is really a being individ-
ualized for eternity, having a recollection of its material exist-
ence and acquainted with your foolish reasoni7igs ; that this
being is beside you, according to your desires, and asks but
to answer your questions — if you can not see it or touch it, it
is "because your prison is too material, your eyes too veiled, and
your judgment too vain. I counsel you, therefore, to look well
to your decisions, to avoid the two extremes — denyino- all, as
you did, or believing all, as some magnetizers have done. I
have said enough in this work not to lead you toward Brahma
or Mahomet. Be men ! children of God, prostrated at his feet,
but not at the feet of your fellow-beings.

I ought also to return thanks to my subscribers, whose intui-
tive confidence will not, I trust, be abused. Not yet living in
a cloudless atmosphere of liberty of conscience, I must be silent
as to the names of a few benevolent men who have, more or
less, contributed to the publication of this work, by facilitating
my acquisition of the number of subscribers I desired, unwil-
ling as I am to render any one responsible for a work which
was, possibly, accepted too favorably before being known.
Would that I could cite the name of a confiding disciple of
Swedenborg, who advanced me the funds necessary for the
printing, and that of a generous friend to enlightenment who
subscribed a hundred francs !

But shame to the savans to whom I addressed myself, and
who did not even do me the honor of answering my applica-
tion ! What can be the reason ? I wished to prove to them,
mathematically, the existence of a soul, of which they speak,
but in which they do not believe ! I wished to point out to
them a school to which mew in general should be compelled to
resort for new studies. I came humbly to solicit a trifle from
philanthropy to aid me in this publication. To whom, alas,
did I address myself? I wanted to enlighten those who teach !
I asked of those who beg ! I offered to bargain with the
princes of trade ! I ought to exclaim with Saint Martin :
" Nothing is easier than to arrive at the door of truths ; nothing
more rare and difficult than entering it:" and such, indeed, is
tlic case with most of the philosophers of this world !


END OF VOLUME I.



THE SECRETS OF THE FUTURE



REVEALED THROUGH



MAGNETISM.



VOLUME IT.

CONTAINING PERCEPTIONS OF FIFTY MORE PERSONS "WHO DIED AT DIFFERENT PERI-
ODS — A PERSONAL DESCRIPTION OF THEM, CONVERSATIONS HELD WITH THE3I, AND
CERTIFICATES AS TO THEIR IDENTITY. — ALSO, A NUMEROUS COLLECTION OF SUPER-
NATURAL FACTS COMMUNICATED BY MAGNETIZERS, AND QUOTATIONS FROM SPIRIT.
UALIST PHILOSOPHERS ON THE I3IM0RTALITY OF THE SOUL, ETC., ETC.



" What magnetism rigorously demonstrates is the spirituality of the soul and its
immortality ; also, that souls separated from the body can in certain cases put
themselves in commanication with living beings, and convey to them their senti-
ments. The study of the phenomena of somnambulism is, in this respect, more
important than in that of curing diseases." — Deleuze.



When, in January, 1848, I presented the public with the
first volume of the " Secrets," I was unable to support the
facts therein contained by any testimony but my own. My
position as a simple workman — my very confined social rela-
tions, absolutely null in the scientific world — could give no
weight to the persuasions I had just propounded : I felt that,
despite their truth, and the facility of being assured of it, I
should, perhaps, throw out only a few doubts, which would
pass to the state of definitive beliefs, if! supported these reve-
lations by honorable testimonials ; consequently, to attain this
end, I hastened to give apparition-sittings to persons who
solicited them, and now I can surround my own name with
names that the public venerate as auUiorities. In this second
volume I present to the world a sufficient number of testimo-
nials to apparitions obtained, recognised, and signed as true,
by princes, counts, viscounts, generals, colonels, pastors of dif-
ferent creeds, landholders, merchants, men of letters, magnet-
izers, and artisans, personages of different nations, &c., &c., all
ready to confirm by their verbal testimony what they signed at
my abode.

I do not think that with such supporters, and such frankness
on my part, any charlatanism, bad faith, and, above all, hallu-
cination, can be suspected; my judgment m,ay be confined to
the little instruction I have received, and to a few persuasions
more or less true and admissible ; but the persons whose testi-
monials will be read are competent witnesses — savans inter-
ested in this question ; magnetizers, who had not, till then,
pushed their experiments in this direction, and who much
doubted the possibility of causing to appear thus deceased per-
sons, in conditions necessary to admit of their being recognised
and holding converse with them : a great question assuredly
was that, which I sought to resolve with all the force of my
intelligence, and which I have succeeded in causing to be
resolved by others with more facility than one could have ven-
tured to hope.

I come, therefore, to present to the public this second vol-
ume, in which I have thought proper to answer, by way of
refutation, certain objections made to different propositions set
forth in the first volume.

I have thought fit to reconcile this faculty of clairvoyantes
with that which our fathers must have possessed, as well in
ancient times as in the middle ages, thus permitting them to
open different schools, where similar beliefs were taught, which
demonstrated, a j^'i^ioi-i, the existence of the soul after its sep-
aration from matter, living individualized in a better world un-
der the human form, having recollection of its selj' and its ter-
restrial existence, reuniting: itself accordinor to its affections to
its relatives or friends, dead like itself, and having sensations,
usages, affections, as here below : this is what, in a few words,
I have desired to demonstrate as mathematically as possible bv
the aid of somnambulism and apparitions. I may applaud
myself for this undertaking, because, up to the present moment,
it has completelv succeeded with all those who have ensraored
in it. Some mas^nelizers have been so obliging as to respond
to the general appeal 1 made, and have furnished me with sev-
eral experiments, which will be read after mine and with no
less interest.

May I not encounter on my road those bourns, obstacles
past, present, and future, placed on all roads, to operate as a
bar to the truths that enlis^hten the human species. I eno-gore
those who accompany me in these experiments not to halt from
the desire of throwing light on any obscurity. It would be
pure loss of time, and injurious to the proposed end.

REPLY TO THE MAGNETIZERS WHO BELIEVE THAT THE APPARI-
TION'S MENTIONED IN THE FIRST VOLUME OF THE " SECRETS"
ARE BUT AN EFFECT OF TRANSMISSION OF THOUGHTS.

On the first appearance of the " Secrets of the Future Life
Revealed," the spiritualist magnetizers, who had made similar
experiments, gave a kind, I may say a grateful, reception
to this work, because it strengthened in them beliefs which
were yet in a mere nascent state. This work had necessarily
to encounter adversaries in shallow magnetizers, who refer all
the phenomena of magnetism and somnambulism to matter. I
know not whether such kind of men believe in the existence
of God and the soul. Tliey say yes, for decency's sake, and
deny through passion.

In*such frame of mind, contrary to the spirit of this work,
they exclaimed, with a certain assurance, " These pretended
revelations are but a transmission of thoughts." I then wrote
to ]M. Hebert de Garnay, editor of the "Journal du Magnet-
isme," to have the kindness to address to me one of those for-
midable savans who alone produce, see, and judge, in oider to
put to him questions worthy of his lofty intelligence ; silence
was the only adversary I found on the place of combat. As
bourns are ever accidents, hidden and acting in the dark, I
looked upon myself as warned.

I had dedicated the first volume of the " Secrets" to M.
Dupotet, as being the most distinguished character in magnetic
science, and consequently the fittest person to appreciate its
vahie; he would naturally give an analysis of it in his estima-
ble journal, in which he was so obliging as to announce the sub-
scription. Several months elapsed before the subscribers to
this journal knew what they were to think of this work. One
evening, M. Dupotet came, in company with several persons,
to ask me for an apparition-sitting : he was satisfied, as we
shall see further on. But still this analysis did not appear. At
length, on the 12th December, in the seventy-fifth number of
the " Journal du Magnetisme," we read a critique, from which
we extract the following passages : —

" 1. M. Cahagnet dedicating to us his book, we are in a
measure bound to say v/hat we think of it.

" Wishing to assure myself of this incredible fact, I asked
for a deceased friend of mine, wholly unknown to the clairvoy-
ante and her raagnetizer: this ecstatic described to me my
friend, and enumerated all the singularities characteristic of
him ; nothing was forgotten, insomuch that I verily thought
that I beheld him myself. This spectre disappeared abruptly,
frightening the somnambulist ; a single word had caused its
sudden disappearance, and my astonishment was at its height,
for this very word invariably tended to infuriate it.* This fact,
which I guaranty, gives a sort of semblance of truth to M.
Cahagnet' s doctrine concerning the apparition of the dead.
His book is full of similar phenomena ; still, I am not fully con-
vinced. In the first place, it is an intermediate who se^, and
to any one familiarized with somnambulism it might be attrib-
uted to communication of thoughts."

2. Then comes a somewhat illiberal critique on the work as
a whole, its poverty in poetical images, in scientific and logical
solutions, accompanied with these words : " I renounce making
quotations from the ' Secrets,' as some would prove too much
for many persons, and others not enough.'*

3. Farther on we find the following : " Be that as it may, the
* Secrets' have created some sensation in the magnetic world.
The book is a step farther toward the unknown."

4. And this observation, " How is it that in all the answers
of the spirits, M. Cahagnet has not yet met with aught that dis-
tinguishes genii from simple mortals, nor collected any of those
important truths with which heaven is full ]"

I will answer, in a few words, these four principal observa-
tions of the Honorable M. Dupotet. With respect to the first,
if you believed in the communication of thoughts, you should
not have asked for a person of your acquaintance. If you are
not fully convinced of the truth of these apparitions, how would
you have the persons whom you invite to verify those that you
publicly provoke every Sunday in your saloons, in a circle traced
with charcoal, be convinced any more than you. i\s to the
second, that the work is devoid of poetical images, scientific
and logical solutions, ending with these words, " The ' Secrets'
would prove far too much for certain folks, and not enough for
others;" first, I am, as I have already said, the man of nature with-
out any instruction, consequently as devoid of the genius of Vir-
gil as of the captious definitions of Kant. The " Secrets," hov/-
ever, contain more than twelve hundred solutions, as w^ell met-
aphysical as psychological, the analysis of which you neglect.
If they are not scientific or logical, it was intended, at any rate,
that they should be so; again, if they prove too much for cer-
tain folks, and not enough for others, there must be something
in them useful or ridiculous. This seems to me logical. As
to the third observation, you say that " the ' Secrets' have cre-
ated some sensation in the magnetic world, that this book is a
step taken toward the unknown." If they have created a sen-
sation it is from pleasure or pity ; let those who have read them
judge. If it is a step taken toward the unknown, it proves,
then, something more logical than you say. At the fourth ob-
servation M. Dupotet is astonished that certain genii did not
come to reveal to me certain truths of which heaven is full. I
will answer, that it is for the reason that like seek like ; as I
am not, and never shall be, a genius, I sought beings of my
own nature. Sdl], the *' Secrets" have created a. sensation, have
proved, have caused a step to he taken toward the unknown !
The fact is, that those who came to inspire me knew more
than I. M. Swedenborg, who, no doubt, according to M. Dupo-
tet, never was a genius, has told me, however, that the sun
which we behold was not a material globe, that thoughts were
living beings ; that a man had a universe enclosed in his sphere,
and a hundred revelations of the kind. In one of the three that
I have just mentioned, there is a total overthrow of all received
philosophy and wherewith to acquire genius.

M. Dupotet is suprised, as well as many other philosophers,
at learning nothing in what they read as to a future life, fi'om
the little harmony, as they say, which exists between the system
of each clairvoyante. I am not surprised at it, not I. These
philosophers did not write my book, and they wish to submit
the whole creation to their own arguments, and, through affec-
tion, they argue incessantly. What would you say to us if we
gave the key of these contradictions in three words ; ay, three
tvords only. We will do so ; free to you to see opened to us
the doors of Charenton (Bedlam) ; here they are : All is in all,
and everywhere. The heavens of the clairvoyantes, the earth
of mortals, are not places for them, but states. Each takes a
delight in his own when it corresponds with his affection ; he
makes of it either a heaven or a hell. Swedenborg has told us
this, and the state of our clairvoyantes proves it ; they are
wherever they will, in what they will, do what they will ; with-
out ceasing to be there, they are here below, they are in all,
everywhere, and all. Judge, now, from such a property, whether
there can be any agreement in what they reveal to us ; it is the
infinite of the infinite. I fear not telling you that the spirit can
quite as well be in the speech, in a single word, as this speech
and this word are in it. See whither I am leading you, since
you drive me to it. Come, have a little indulgence, gentlemen
of science, I am but a poor workman who earns his bread by
the sweat of his brow, who meditates and writes at night. Aid
me, and do not shackle me. I promise you that I will develop
these propositions in another work which I am now about,
merely wishing to prove to you in this the hidivi dualized exist-
ence of the soul, after its separation from matter, and the possi-
biHty of communicating with it. I return to our reply to mag-
netizers, on their arg:ument as to the communication of thousfhts.
I take the liberty of putting to them the following questions :

1. Is it true that a clairvoyante can see, hear, feel, and con-
verse with another being, at a distance ?

2. Is it true that it merely suffices to put him en rajyjport with
the names of the places and persons desired to be perceived at
these distances, in order that he may perceive them 1

If you answer these two questions in the affirmative (and you
can not answer them otherwise), you admit an intelligent being
or fluid, independent (in this state) of the material body, able to
know such things ; such being or fluid rightly deserves a name ;
we will term it a soul.

This soul, no matter its mode of perceiving places or objects
at a distance, proves to us that the material body is deorived of
this faculty, since it is necessary that some agent or other should
annihilate it (shall I say ?) to facilitate the intelligence which
animates it in thus performing functions without. This soul,
fluid, spirit, whatever you please, which encounters no obstacle,
and finds itself independent of material laws, can not be more
subject to annihilation than this matter, whose immortality, ia
an infinity of states, you acknowledge.

We can not admit a special law of annihilation for the spirit,
when we admit none for matter, the soul survives its envelope ;
we can not doubt it, or we must prove the contrary. If it sur-
vives its envelope, it is somewhere. It is not more unjindahle
for the clairvoyante than the place, the person, or the earthly
object, which he sees at a distance, without being in communi-
cation with them; but, will you answer, the person consulting
is en rapport himself with the thing asked for % I will answer,
in my turn, yes, in certain cases ; but, in many others, he is not
so. It happens to all magnetizers to make perceptible to their
clairvoy antes, places, persons, or objects, of v/hich the consult-
ing individual, the magnetizer, and the clairvoyante, have no
notion ; the information and descriptions are found to be cor-
rect. These experiments are ordinarily performed, in regard
to persons that have disappeared, objects that have been mis-
laid or stolen. The clairvoyante finds both the one and the
other; it must, therefore, be that these objects present them-
selves to his vievw at his desire, or that he has a means unknown
to us, of putting himself en raj^port with them.

If you admit that at the mere desire, or at the mere mention
of the name of the being or object lost by the clairvoyante, the
being or object is forthwith present to his eyes, you will surely
grant a being so intelligent as the soul when disengaged from
and lost to matter, the faculty of presenting'itself to the clairvoy-
ante, according to its desire, as this apparently inert object did.

I have ah'eady observed, that it is needless conducting the
clairvoyante toward the objects, that in order to see them at
hand it suffices to desire their presence. The perception of
lost or stolen objects is a proof of this ; not knowing where
these objects are, you can not conduct your clairvoyante toward
them ; they must, therefore, present themselves to him, agree-
ably to his desire. It may be the same, with regard to all
views at distance. I ask for the place, without being acquaint-
ed with it, and it is instantaneously present to me. (These
facts, which are within the reach of all, can not be denied.) If
we can not refuse the clairvoyante this property, we can not,
for the same reason, refuse him that of finding out the soul
separated from matter; by this deduction, we shall come to en-
chaining ourselves by undeniable facts, and to confessing the
possibility of the other proposition. Were we to conclude
otherwise, we should be but an extinguisher. We may object,
with our ifs and our whys, but we shall end by acknowledging
what we can not deny ; some formidable advocates of this sacri-
legious cause of obscureness will argue thus : The clairvoyante,
in all these facts, sees but material objects, for the reason that
these objects exist ; it may be the same with the soul, whose indi-
vidualized existence after separation from matter, is still a
problem.

My answer to such objection is, that in the search of these
hidden or stolen objects, the clairvoyante sees not only these
objects, he sees the traces left by them, he brings back to you
the scenes, the words pronounced by the thieves ; these traces
or words exist not materially, how can he see them ? How
hear them? Hear what has been said, and is no lonsfer beincr
said ! Does he not go further ? does he not see a certain
theatre, a certain battle-field, with what was acted on this
scene, and the blood that was shed on the earth a hundred
years before we were born ? If he sees these things, in what
state does he see them 1 No doubt, in the spiritual state, since
this theatre or battle-field is replaced by other ornaments or
constructions. Do you admit these facts'? these revelations
that you produce and obtain every day — that you mention in
all your books ? You will answer, yes. Then I will ask you
why you should admit that this theatre, and what passed on it,
should have left an image in the place where it formerly ex-
isted, so powerful that your clairvoyante could receive from it
an impression as active as a similar existing or present scene
could produce, and yet not admit that the beings that co-
operated in the representation of these scenes were alive like
them. (This is already the second time that I have made this
observation.) After such a comparison, if you deny the indi-
vidualized existence of the soul apart from matter, I say it
with regret, you are extinguishers or of bad faith ; in presence
of such revelations apparitions are needless. If I continue
collecting them, I do so less to demonstrate their reality than
to console my brethren for the miseries of this sorrowful
earthly existence ; this is what I had to say to the detractors
of " The Secrets of the Life to Come Revealed," and I ter-
minate by saying to them : No, the clairvoyante sees not in
your thought what can not be in it. No, the clairvoyante
clears no space, and knows no time, in order to communicate
with places, objects, or deeds remote, past, present, or future.

Let me once more remind you, since it is the fruit of our
own experiments, that in the first views at distance you ob-
tained from your clairvoyantes, you exclaimed : It is because
I, myself, have seen these places that he sees the image of
them in me ; the contrary was proved by describing to you
changes operated in your absence, recounting to you what the
persons were doing at the very instant you caused them to be
visited hundreds of leagues off. You acknowledged that these
things could not be in your thought, and you confessed that
the clairvoyante really saw at a distance ; now, you again take
up this worn out argument to combat the perception of souls :
but we have come to presenting you with apparitions that will
remove all your doubts in this respect, and that you will read
in this volume. We have perceived deceased persons, un-
known to the asker, to ourselves, and the clairvoyante ; we
have obtained information that could not be in any human
memory; where did the clairvoyante find these persons
and this information ? In the world of causes, which we
term the spiritual world, wherein is found whatsoever was, is,
and shall be.

Know, then, once for all, how to make a distinction between
the communication of thoughts and the perception of the
images which man has in him, representing whatsoever of ma-
terial he has seen in the course of his life. The communica-
tion of thoughts is mental speech, it is the mental answer that
follows this speech. No one exists, having obtained such ap-
paritions, who can say that the details given him were a com-
munication of thoughts, a mental answer to a mental question,
forming no communication with the clairvoyante. Without
questioning, and obtaining such information as can not be in
the domain of their memory, in case there were communica-
tion, it would be merely a communication of images, the whole
confined to those we might have in ourselves ; but, going no
farther, should it be admitted that such must be the case, it
would remain to be explained how these images are alive,
speak, and act ] Should we succeed in this 1 it could be done
only by admitting that one is a universe in abridgment 1 we
should be then far from denying the existence of the soul,
since we should have made of it an incomprehensible and
admirable masterpiece, which would be the infinite of the
infinite, and thousands of times tlie infinite of the infinite !
Only think, then, possessing in yourself the whole universe in
miniature! — all that has been, is, and shall be — all that has
been thought, thinks, and shall think. Oh ! you will not have
this vast definition ; your science is not sufficiently powerful to
admit and explain it, you prefer returning to the simple exist-
ence of the soul inhabiting places appropriated to its nature
and state ; but I, without possessing your science, I repeat to
you that all is in all and throughout all. Were you a little
less learned you would give yourselves up to the study that I
propose to you ; it is well worth the pains. If you admit
human immortality only in history, your progeny or your
statue on a public monument, may you be placed in your niche
to the admiration of gaping crowds, and let us venture into
a world that you reject because you know that equality and
fraternity reign there. Remain, I say, clad in doctorial orna-
ments, seigneurial or royal ones, in your niches, which are the
emblem of the statu quo ; we will practise science without
you, and more consoling science than yours.

Fourier said : " The civilized are so hateful that they would
disdain heaven, if every one entered it, and they delight in the
thought that a good round number will go to the devil."
Fourier knew you !

REFUTATION OF A WHOLE LIFE OF BEATITUDE IN THE "WORLD

OF SPIRITS.

Some persons, after reading the " Secrets," have objected
that there could not be any usages in the world of spirits as on
earth, still less objects adapted for such usages ; one of them
thought it extraordinary that there should be houses, furni-
ture, &c., and exclaimed while ridiculing this assertion :
*' Masons and tapestry-makers can't want for work there,
then !" I have but a few observations to make in this re-
spect : What is understood by life ] Is it not thinking %
Thinking of what ? Of something. What is this something ?
All that can be perceived by the eye, heard by the ear, and
that can fall under the other senses. 1. Places, accidents of
places, ornaments of places. 2. Living beings and of our
own nature, with whom we shall be in communication. To
be in communication it is necessary to speak. Speak of what ?
Of things past, present, or future.

These somethings ought to represent images to our eyes as
they do on earth. Without this I should not comprehend a
life in which we should not think. Thought is the sight of
something, speech is the name of this thing, sensation is the
touch of this thing. Take away these properties from spiritual
life, what remains for it 1 Nothingness ! Give it these prop-
erties, they can not exist without the things thought. From the
moment you admit thought, you admit the view of it ; thus the
thought of a place must represent a place in its entire form and
with its accidents ; there, a garden with trees, fruits, and flow-
ers ; an atmosphere, light of some kind ; farther on, beings of
a nature similar to yours, grouped, standing, seated or lying
on what bears them. These beings can not remain standing
or lying an eternity ; they must admire these fruits, intoxicate
themselves with the perfume of these flowers, breathe this sweet
atmosphere, contemplate the light by which they see these
things ; but if a whole eternity were spent in seeing only trees,
fruits, flowers, and grass, we should be soon tired of such a
state ; there must, we are sensible of it, be a progression, a
succession in the thoughts to feed the sensations, and this suc-
cession of thoughts gives rise to the supposition, as I have said
of thinking-, seeinof and feeling something- else. It is the infi-
nite of the creation that is before us ; palaces, houses, furniture,
usages, in short, must exist there. If all this exists there, it is
for the purpose of gratifying our sensations, our affections, and
our infinite desires. It will be objected that all these things
may exist in heaven without our being bound to fabricate them
as on earth. I answer that that is true.

Scarcely have you desired an object than it presents itself to
your view, because it is the type of your thought, and bears the
very form of the object thought ; but this does not do away with
there being affections that wash to fabricate, co-arrange, or em-
bellish the object thought as they do on earth. If man pro-
gresses in each of his thoughts and desires to take notes on
what he observes, makes a book of ihem in order to communi-
cate his observations to his fellow-beings, he must find paper
and things necessary to form this book, another will have the
affection of printing it, a third of publishing it, and so on. If
I wish to play music, although it be possible for me to have or
to hear it at my pleasure, if I prefer j)laying myself, I must
have instruments that I can make or find, ready made it is true,
without any other pains than merely desiring them ; but he
who has a taste for making such instruments has a right to
make them, since for him it is no longer a necessity in order to
live, but an affection that constitutes his whole happiness. An
architect has the same right; it is his supreme feliciiy to pro-
duce a masterpiece ; the mason's, to show his superiority in
the details of this palace, and so on. Take away one of the
things I have just enumeiated from the spiritual life, because
this thing comes not within the range of your tastes ; your
neighbor will have the same right. I, too, and we shall end
with annihilating all that constitutes the future life. Heaven
will no longer be even a place, a state, it will be nothingness.
I do not think it necessary to carry these conclusions any farther
in 01 der to prove the absurdity of such an argument. Those
who believe that singing the praises of God for a whole eter-
nity is the sole occupation of spirits must necessarily divest
spirits of forms, because forms demand usages, walking, seeing,
hearing, feeling, touching, &c. There is no need of forms for
singing; but what sing? The marvels of creation. And what
marvels since you refuse them admission into heaven ? Can it
be those you have seen on earth where all is but wretchedness
and grief? May God inspire you, bigot souls ! I remain
mute, and can not pi-aise God for a creation which I do not
understand ; if he gives me the means of understanding it,
being stripped of my material garment, it could only be from
observation. Observation supposes two contrary things ; if I
annihilate these things and their typical forms, how should I
observe and judge ? Come, then, you who will have neither
objects nor usages in the spiritual world, you shall be placed
like Napoleon on the column Venclome, when you are fatigued
with the posture you will ask God to change it.

If we admitted such a state of — imbecility, shall I call it? —
on our exit from this world, we must likewise be deprived of
our respective sexes, for love supposes an agglomeration of
sensations. What ! feel where there is no usage 1 Wherefore,
then, the creation male and female ?

If it must be that one day I can not admire and render
justice to the works of my divine Father, can not comprehend
their beauty, the utility, the harmony of their creation, I am
not the creature of his choice. If it be otherwise, he will
make me comprehend the pro and the con. I must observe,
compare, progress. If you take away from me the materials
for comparison, I shall not know whether the arts, usages, or
objects, which I have been acquainted with on earth were more or
less perfect, more or less useful ; if, on the contrary, you admit
the future life as a sequel to the terrestrial one, without sudden
transition, I comprehend in that case Eternity. I have, there-
fore, discovered nothing ridiculous in what my clairvoyantes
have told me on this head, though not one of them has told me
that usages similar to those I have just described caused excite-
ment there. But I, for my part, comprehend them ; I feel the
utility of them as an affection of happiness, and not as a neces-
sary impost, comparable to earthly wants. I have found
nothing ridiculous in what the learned Swedenborg advances,
in his works, on this subject. I beg my readers to consult them
for more detailed information, and worthy of being meditated
upon.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE CONTRADICTIONS CONTAINED IN THE
FIRST VOLUME OP THE " SECRETS."

Other persons have objected to me that the first volume of
the " Secrets" contained a few contradictions of this sort :
" Bruno, inspired by his guide, says that man is not free ;
Adele, inspired by M. Swedenborg says the contrary !" It
was because I wished to retrench naught from these *' Secrets"
that I allowed these contradictions and a few more to remain.

I owed to the science that occupies us, hefore all things, the
truth. My opinions in this respect are not in favor of free will,
as may have been seen in the course of this book by reasonino-s
which all the works I have consulted, and the discussions 1
have had on this subject, have been unable to destroy. Man
referring all in his scientific discussions to his pride, his wants
and his manner of seeing, can but err. He who, on the con-
traiy, detaches himself from matter, ri^es from humility above
this human comedy, best discovers all its springs. I am bound,
therefore, to enlighten the reader on this question. Adele
erred voluntarily. One day the abbe A , M. Lemoine
and myself, decided on summoning St. John to decide a reli-
gious question ; it was the abbe A who was in communica-
tion with Adele and questioned her. At the commencement of
the sitting we all three prayed God to deign to enlighten us
with his divine light. M. A , in his capacity as a priest,
was to preserve the clairvoyante from all evil influence, the
more so as I had left him at liberty to exorcise and purify her
agreeably to his desire. All the answers that he obtained were,
according to the expression of this venerable abbe, strictly
logical ; he had not addressed any question on the subject of
free will, but touching on one connected with it, Adele said to
him: "John, here present, orders me to tell you that man ma-
terial is not free ; that every being On earth has a mission to
fulfil, from which he can not depart. I objected to him that T
could not communicate such an answer to men ; but he ordered
me, in the name of God, to transmit it to you, and I do so."
" Why," said I to her, " should you refuse revealing to us the
truth V " I have ever revealed it hitherto," replied she ; " but
I could not make up my mind to say to men, 'You are not free
to do evil.' This doctrine was repugnant to my heart ; it
seemed much more just to let man believe that he is free in his
good and bad actions; but John said to me : * It is. better to be
silent than to alter an answer to the profit of falsehood ; I
advise you never to do so.' " Adele, out of a religious feeling,
had hitherto concealed from me this truth, and consequently
had perverted the answers of M. Swedenborg. Her self-love
seemed hurt at confessing this little subierfuge, which, however,
can not be regarded otherwise than as favorable to virtue.

I was unwilling to make known this particular, because, I
repeat it, I infinitely respect all beliefs ; I wish not to speak
against any. only I adhere to telling the truth and nothing but
the truth. Had I not been guided by this feeling, I should
have allowed no contradiction to subsist.

Let every one experiment without seeking in any manner
to influence the clairvoyante, and in most cases the truth will
be obtained. Adele is not easily influenced, for she has ever
maintained against me a position contrary to that w»^ have just
read. We must, moreover, be convinced that the spirit disen-
gaged from matter is not the more for that freed from its errors.
There is progression for it in its ideas ; but if the ideas delight
in such or such a system, they will run astray there as on earth,
the Roman catholic will not depart from his beliefs, the Jew
from his, and so on with all others, especially those who pas-
sionately delight in their beliefs. Many persons think that to
know all it suffices to be a spirit ; let them undeceive them-
selves in this respect ; they can do so, it is true, if such is
their affection ; but as there is no sudden transition between
one and the other state, the earthly affections are not forthwith
annihilated ; consequently, a man who on earth took a delight
in the mechanical arts, will not give you the solutions of a
jurisconsult ; a miller will not demonstrate to you the science
of metallurgy.

Behold a clairvoyante given up to himself, it is the exact
representation of the fii'st state of the world of spirits ; ask
him what he did or thought after remaining for a moment in
this state, the answer he makes will give you a notion of his
then predominant affection : thus you will not make of a clair-
voyante who delights in travelling a famous mathematician.
True, this comparison is liable to dispute, because the clair-
voyante is still under the empire of material laws and impres-
sions, but it gives an idea of the future life : thus the progres-
sion is not such as is thought, and I venture to affirm that many
men in their material state are much more advanced than
certain spirits that quitted the earth ages ago. It is a study-
that I propose to the spiritualists of a contrary belief; they
will see that they will be disabused. For this reason, there-
fore, we ougcht to make mention of all the answers made
us by clairvoyantes, the interpreters of spirits, without re-
trenching from them a syllable, in order to study what connec-
tion there is between them, and draw conclusions on certain
points, as I have on these. 1. Spirits issuing from this globe
progress in the affection which they have for such or such
positive or negative science. 2. Hence it is that certain spirits,
as we have already seen, wander about earthly places in which
they took delight. 3. These spirits are attached to our globe,
and have not yet passed into one of the superior heavens ;
hence it is that living in darkness they can teach but error.
^ Frror is as common to them as upon earth.
Spirits accord only in these few truths : —

1. They live in a happy state.

2. None of them has seen God in any other form than that
of the sun.

3. They obtain forthwith what they desire.

4. They have usages and experience sensations as on earth.

5. They know that they lived prior to their terrestrial life.

6. They acknowledge the utility of the earthly life in all its
joys and griefs.

7. They are grouped in societies of kindred affections.

8. They have no knowledge of time or space.

9. They know that that there are different heavens in which
we are very happy.

10. They are well aware of their immortality.

11. They have a recollection of their earthly existence, speak
of it with more or less pleasure ; but on a mass of details,
they contradict each other, each letting his responses flow from
his present affections, and referring them to the sects of which
he forms a part : we ought, therefore, to be very circumspect
in accepting such or such an answer more than another. It is
prudence that elevates man — passion causes him to err : let us
be content with what God permits to be revealed to us on the
future life, and not argue — we are too weak to handle this arm
with success ; let us humble ourselves before what we can not
comprehend — hope that one day God will suffer us to know
more, and give him a thousand thanks for the generosity he
displays toward us ! He only knows the truth and the utility
of all the things he has created ; let us walk with confidence
in the road traced out for us ; — it is useful for us !



APPARITIONS.



I HAVE deemed it fit to continue the same order in number-
ing the sittings as in our first volume.

Sitting 98. — M. Lucas, a carrier at Rambouillet, was very
uneasy as to the fate of his brother-in-law, who disappeared
froin the country twelve years ago, after an altercation that
took place one evening between him and his father. This
man, on quitting his family, made the observation that they
should never hear from him again. Since that period his father
died, and his succession (to which this man was the principal
heir) remained vacant through the inability of obtaining any in-
formation as to his son's being alive or dead. This very much
crossed the other heirs, whose affairs remained in suspense, as
they could not produce, as legally bound, a certificate of his death.
M. Lucas, having heard M. Renard say that I possessed a
clairvoyante who could remove all his inquietude on this score,
came and asked me for a sitting. Scarcely was Adele asleep than
she asked for this man by his name, as she usually does toward
deceased persons. She then said to us : "I see him ; he is not
dead ; on the earth is he, and not in the spiritual world." She
gave so exact a description of him to M. Lucas that the latter,
who no doubt for the first time beheld a somnambulist, was
quite astounded at all he heard, and declared even the very
gestures true to life. "I see him," said she, "in a foreign
country, where there are trees like those in America ; we don't
see such in France : he is basy gathering seeds from small
shrubs, not much more than three feet high. He has no wish
to speak to me, and consequently does not answer the ques-
tions I put to him about the country he lives in ; T see no one
from whom I can obtain any information. I am afraid of
meetino^ with wild beasts ! wake me ! wake me !" I did so
instantly.

Both M. Lucas and myself would have wished to be made
acquainted with this country. I told him that it was impossible
to make a spirit speak despite itself, especially if such spirit is
interested in concealing the place of its retreat, as appeared to
be the case with this man. M. Lucas fully appreciated this
reasoning, and left me quite convinced that it was really his
brother-in-law whom Adele had perceived, and seemed dis-
posed to believe him as really alive as she declared she beheld
him. I promised him that I would do my best by-and-by to
learn more about the matter.

99. M. Lucas, the person interested at the foregoing sitting,
returned a few days after to ask me if I had heard anything
new respecting his brother-in-lav/. I had not paid any atten-
tion to the matter. The mother of the lost man accompanied
M. Lucas, and asked me if I could give her a sitting. I made
a slight objeclion, because I was hoMing a conference with
several persons ; but, on the observation of M. Lucas, who told
me that this lady had come several leagues expressly to obtain
fresh information, and that the coach was waiting for her, I
begged the persons present to excuse me, and judge of the
experiment about to take place. Adele, once asleep, said, " I
see him." — " Where do you see him ?" " Here, present." —
*' Give us once more a description of him, as also of the place
where he is." " He is a fair man, browned by the heat of the
sun ; very corpulent, features pretty regular, hazel eyes, mouth
large, air sombre and meditative. He is in the garb of a work-
ing man — a sort of small blouse ; as at the last time, he is at
work, gathering seeds like enough to peppercorns, but I don't
think they are, as they seem bigger. This seed is found in
small shrubs ab jut three feet hicrh. I see a nesrro near, who is
doing the same thing." — " Try and obtain an answer to-day ;
let him tell you the name of the country where you see him."
"He won't answer me." — " Tell him that it is his good mother
whom he was so fond of, who is with you, and bids you inquire
after him." " Oh ! at the name of his mother he turned round
and said to me, ' My mother ! I shall not die before seeing her
again; comfort her, and tell her that I am always thinking of
her; I a.m not dead!'" — "Why does he not write to herl"
*' He has written to her, but no doubt the vessel was wrecked ;
at least he presumes so, as he received no answer. He tells
me that he is at Mexico : he followed the emperor, Don Pedro ;
was five years a prisoner, sufiered much, and will make every
effort to return to Fiance ; they will see him again." — " Can
he name the place he lives in ?" " No, it is far up in the coun-
try ; such places have no names." — " Is he with a European ?'*
" No, with a man of color." — " Why does he not write to his
mother 1" *' Because where he is no vessels come; he knows
not to whom to apply ; then, again, he scarcely ever knew how
to write, and now less than ever ; no one near him can render
him this service, no one speaks his languao^e ; he has much
pains in making himself understood ; withal, he never was of
an open or communicative disposition ; he has a somewhat un-
sociable look. It is a hard malter to get a word out of him;
one would thirdc he was dumb." — " In short, how manage to
write to him or hear from him ?" " He can't tell ; all he can
say is, ' I am in Mexico, I am not dead, they'll see me again.' "
— " Why did he thus forsake his parents without saying a word
to them, since he was happy with them 1" " This man was far
from being communicative ; he scarcely ever spoke, was very
fond of his mother, but had not the same affection for his father,
who was a stern, sour kind of man, and often used him roughly.
The cup had long been filled up to the brim ; it was not the
slight altercation he had with his father, the night before his
departure, that induced him to leave : it was a plan decided
on long before; he communicated it to no one, and started off
stealthily. Having embraced them all over night, he sneaked
off the next morning, without saying a word. Make yourself
easy, madam, you will see him again." The good woman
melted into tears as she recognised the truthfulness of each
detail given her by Adele ; she had not a word to retrench
from this description ; the character, the instruction, and the
departure of her son, were precisely such as Adele described ;
but what gives an air of greater probability to the clairvoy-
ante's recital as to the country he lives in, is, that some of his
relatives entertained the idea that he had enlisted into Don
Pedro's army, and took steps at that time to acquire a certainty
of it. M. Lucas furnished me with this particular some time
after wlien on a visit to Paris : no information, however, could
be obtained in this respect. What no less contributed to aston-
ish this good woman, as well as M. Lucas and the person pres-
ent at this curious sitting, was to see Adele, who, to screen
herself from the burning rays of the sun of these countries,
put her hand up to the left side of her face as if suffocating
with heat ; but the most marvellous part of the scene was that
she received a violent coup-de-soleil, that rendered all this side
of her face, from the forehead to the shoulder, of a reddish blue,
while the other side remained perfectly white ; and full twenty-
four hours elapsed before this deep color commenced disap-
pearing. The heat was so violent there for a moment, that it
was impossible to keep one's hand on it. Present at this sit-
ting was M. Haranger Pirlot, formerly a magnetizer, and hon-
orably known for more than thirty years in the magnetic
world. He told me that he never saw the like of this. The
good woman took her leave quite consoled, unable to account
to herself how that her son, who was in Mexico, could be be-
tween her and Adele, and how the latter could have received
a coup-de-soleil when nobody felt the heat, the weather that
day being very gloomy. I am not more advanced than she,
and believe that many others in our place will be like us. We
submit this question to the learned ; awaiting their answer, let
us pass on to another sitting.

100. M. Renard, whom we have already mentioned, begged,
me to address the following questions to M. Svvedenborg,
through the medium of Adele ; although they have been solved
in the first volume of the •' Secrets," to make myself agree-
able to my worthy friend, I felt bound to submit them once
more, while Adele was in her sleep, to this great ecstatico-
prophet, who presented himself with his wonted kindness,
*' Tell this good brother that M. Renard desires to know from
his lips whether Christ really existed." *' Yes." — " Does he
think that we might ask for him in order to address to him a
few questions as to his life and doctrine V *' M. Swedenborg
inquires whether you have a mind to cause all the spirits in
heaven to appear, and if he is wanting in complaisance to
answer the questions you ordinarily put to him. There is no
inconvenience in asking for Christ : but M. Renard and you
are insatiable. Spirits are like folks of the earth : when they
pay a visit to any one with a view to oblige, they like con-
fidence to be placed in them, especially when they do not de-
ceive 3^ou. All spirits are not at your orders, nor as com-
plaisant as M. Swedenborg ; the mode of answering of one is
not that of another; if the least disagreement is perceived, we
profit by it to oppugn and. deny all. Believe me, preserve M.
Swedenborg, and put not yourself in communication with all
the spiritual societies. He shows more kindness toward you
than toward any other ; if he sacrificed the same time to all
those who should desire to speak to him, he would have none
left for himself." — " I see no doubt nor harm in our questions."
*' There is no harm, but doubt : in short, what would you know
of Christ?" "We desire to know whether Christ was God,
in the full acceptation of the word, or merely the Son of God."
" Christ was not God — he was, like us all, the Son of God : he
had a special mission to fulfil : he acquitted himself of it, and
returned to heaven as the rest : that is all." — " Is he the chief
of the doctrine he taug^ht on earth 1" *' There are no chiefs in
heaven but God : all the members of the societies are there
equal — some speak, propose, discuss; others listen, and think
like them. There, where there is no disagreement, there is no
occasion for chiefs or masters ; harmony reigns there by the
power divine. I have already told you this — you are con-
stantly asking me the same thing." — " Do the celestial socie-
ties influence those of the earth?" " The celestial societies are
occupied with themselves, and no longer think of the earth.
If any earthly societies believe themselves in communication
with heavenly societies, they are mistaken ; and are so only
with scattered members that wander around them, and do not
yet make common cause with the heavenly ones. It is only
when God sees fit that it is otherwise ; but, in general, celes-
tial spirits have no inclination for recalling to mind the earth,
or holding communication with it, for they find our atmosphere
heavy and bad ; those that visit us must be good indeed to do
so." — '* For that reason, I beg you each time to thank them
for me. Inquire, also, why we have a knowledge of a mass of
apparitions of souls in pain, who claim the assistance of our
prayers to procure them peace, as they say." *' Those are
persons who are pursued by ideas of remorse ; they wander
around the earth, because they have not an ardent desire to
purge themselves of those thoughts that beset them ; they be-
lieve that our prayers are beneficial to them — deem them-
selves unworthy, from their faults, of entering societies that
would not admit them into their bosom, because they would
create trouble ; they are such men as Father Lauriot, who
make m.ountains of a mole-hill ; others that are really criminals,
but sufi^er at not being called to God ; they frequent the com-
pany of persons like themselves, with whom they form a society.
It may be said that their ideas are not harmonized ; they create
for themselves false positions ; they have no lively affection ;
but God insinuates into them, when he deems fit, other thoughts,
and they enter heaven with the rest." — " How is Christ looked
upon in heaven ?" " As a very good spirit; he is dearly loved,
that is all." — " And those who worship him as God, what does
he think of them V " Those who worship him as God, believe
him such ; and it is God who receives the homage of those
adorations. I have told you that all religions were equally
agreeable to him. Christ, knowing that he is not God, glories
not more in that which he taught men than the other founders
in theirs." — *' His disciples declare to us that there is no salva-
ion but in his name : they teach us errors, then 1" " All reli-
gions teach them. What they possess of pure ascends to God,
who is the sole and only object to whom they address them-
selves ; and what they possess of impure remains on earth, in
the hearts of men who knowingly do evil."

This sitting confirms what we have already said on this sub-
ject. Heaven is but a compound of societies, each represent-
ing the religious or philosophical doctrines that have existed
on earth; every one after his departure from this globe joins
that which represents his predominant affection, and, through
a gross error, each believes that his neighbor is damned if he
has not the same beliefs as himself, without considering that
religious beliefs are at bottom the same, inasmuch as they all
address themselves to God, to receive his blessings or thank
him for his generosity. The details alone differ; each believes
himself more acceptable to God by offering him what he him-
self admires most on earth, without considering that what God
prefers above all things is the heart and love of his children.
Thus we are assured that these religious beliefs, so full of con-
trasts, have left such an impression on the spirit of the man
who quits the earth, that they continue for a certain time to
constitute all his happiness. Hence he seeks societies in which
these beliefs are admitted, and becomes a member of the said
societies until, elevated toward truer thoughts, he enters a
heaven or superior state, where the pure truth shines before
him in all its splendor ; then the fusion becomes general.
These souls become acquainted with the true light, the Divine
light they have so ardently desired, and which they enjoy in
happiness. It is, therefore, those different beliefs continually
misleading man on his exit from this globe that cause our
clairvoyantes to present to us in their religious revelations con-
tradictions so obvious. They make acquaintance with spirits
that possess their affection, and answer in accordance with this
affection. If, on the contrary, the clairvoyante is not positively
a slave to any belief, his magnetizer the same, and both address
themselves to a spirit that on earth thought as they, there is a
much greater chance of approaching the truth. This is what
we have hitherto done, and I believe that the major part of the
revelations made us bear with tliem the seal, not of absolute
truth, but of an ensemble leading to it. What we can affirm
is, that in the superior heaven there exists a perfect equality in
age, beauty, form, position, affection ; one has not a jot more
than another ; it is the reign of happiness of which we all
dream, and which we shall all one day po^;sess.

101. After many indifferent questions which I had addressed
to M. Swedenborg, I put to him the following ones (through
the medium, be it understood, of Adele) : " 1 have not the
means of printing the first volume of the ' Secrets,' a good
part of which you dictated to me. I have spoken of it to
several publishers, who politely refused me because I had not
a literary name ; could you point out to me the means of attain-
ing my object without their assistance V " No ; it is a very
difficult matter. I know the trouble mine cost me to publish."
— '* Did you publish them at your own expense, or did God
supply you with the means by occult causes or transmissions
of money '?" " T printed my works at my own expense, but
sold very few in my time. Nobody would read them. In fifty
years it will be the same with yours as with mine at the pres-
ent time ; they will be read with pleasure. I received nothing
from spirits." — " Still they have the power of making such
transmissions ?" " Yes ; but it is never good to ask them for
them." — " AVhy so ?" " Because it is ordinarily evil spirits
that have this affection." — " For what object ]" " To draw
you into their society." — " What is the consequence of such
alliance with theml" " Living with them, and doing for others
what they have done for you." — " I can see in that but good."
" Yes, so far ; but this good is always done in some interest or
other that must sooner or later be paid for." — " Is any suffering
the result for the person obliged ?" " Yes, in this sense, that
he finds himself allied with a society whose usages are not in
harmony with his affections. We can not extricate ourselves
from this constraint before a certain time. If you had the
affections of these societies, you would not suffer with them ;
but, not having them, I advise you to maintain your inde-
pendence." — " None but evil spirifs have the power of making
such transmissions ?" " The good have likewise tliis power."
— " Why do they not oftener make use of it T' " Because
to deserve these favors of God, we ourselves must be as
pure as beneficent. Few men exist who merit them. The
good spirits know that the more we suffer on earlh, the
more agreeable we find the joys of heaven; and then, again,
they trouble themselves so little about the earth !" — " One
of my friends, M. R***, assured me that he found, some
time ago, fifty francs scattered about the place where he
locks up his money. He was in great difhcullies, having
but ten francs to last him out the month. He prayed, and
the following morning he found the sum." " M. R*** may
have been mistaken ; possibly he had laid by this money
somewhere, but could not recollect where ; for my part, I do
not believe that there is any transmission in this circumstance,
but still I may be mistaken." — " You grant that there exist
good and evil spirits that have this property 1" " Yes." —
*' Could you direct one to me ?" *• No, I have no wish to do
so ; I advise you not to try it, we should be weJl acquainted
with a spirit before thus giving ourselves up to it." Adele is
unwilling to proceed, telling me that she will never be an in-
terpreter to such arrangements ; that 1 have no reason to be
uneasy about my book, as it would be published by some one
who would appear in time for that purpose. 1 went on sub-
mitting to her several questions, which she answered agreeably
to my wishes, and continued thus : " For my part, I do n't
think it possible for me to tell you any more. Your work re-
capitulates, in this sense, all that it is possible to teach men as
to the future life. Did they know more of it, they would bit-
terly curse the earth, and find the joys of heaven much less
sweet. Though we can not form a just idea of celestial happi-
ness, we find a pleasure which we trace little by little before-
hand, less captivating. Besides, there exist mysteries which
can not be explained. All this is so foreign to our material
laws, that the time would be spent to no purpose in wishing to
make you comprehend what it is not given you to comprehend.

We are conscious of these mysteries, but can not explain them
by speech," — " Tn short, are all the deceased initiated into ther:e
mysteries'?" "Yes; more or less promptly." — "Can tliey
give an account to themselves of their departure from the
earth, their present state, the places they inhabit, their spiiitual
form and that which they assume to appear to us on earth V
" They account for all this to each other, for each other, in
their state, but they could not explain to you, material man,
how it is they perceive that they are called on earth — how they
resume their material countenance, and dress so faithfully —
how they can appear to us if we desire it, in all the costumes
they have worn on earth as in all the physiognomies they have
had at different ages during their earthly existence. For this
reason it is that a person who demands the appearance of a
deceased friend, if he ask the clairvoyante — ' Do you see him
with mustaches (for instance) or whiskers V The clairvoy-
ante will be able to see what is asked of him for two causes :
1. Speech is a creator ; it is never good to question in exper-
iments of this sort, but let the clairvoyante give the desciip-
tion without interrupting him, unless such description in no
wise resemble that of the deceased. 2. The deceased may
have worn in the course of his earthly existence those mus-
taches or whiskers which we desire the clairvoyante to see, and
yet not have worn them at the time of his decease. It is the
same with regard to the dress and the color of it ; whatsoever
man has worn on earth is imprinted on him, nothing is lost.
Accordino- to the penetration of the clairvoyante's view through
these impressions, which are repeated hundreds of times in one
and the same year on our bodies, the description will more or
less correspond with the one desired. It often happens that at
a later period, aided by some information, we shall know that
the deceased was really in the conditions in which he appeared
to the clairvoyante. He will never happen, for instance, to
perceive a fair man for a black, a bearded man for a beardless
one, an old man for a young one ; but all the visions I have
just detailed may take place, and this very often will cause a
doubt as to the apparition. A skeptic may also, by ironical or
captious questions, be the cause of the greatest mistakes. "We
must be penetrated with a certain religious respect, for the
spirits of darkness are ever ready to lay hold of the least op-
portunity to sow error. He who seeks to make the clairvoy-
ante err is punished in his turn ; he sought error, and he finds
it. There are also, some that may be involuntary on both
sides, some a rising from the want of habit in the deceased of
setting in play all the springs of the seemingly material enve-
lope in which he appears ; speech is as strange to him as the
eailh on which he lived. He may render his thoughts badly,
seeing that in heaven language is wholly made up of sensation ;
thus you perceive that matter can neither appreciate nor judge
of spiritual laws as it would wish."

I leave to the reader the task of judging of the precious in-
formation of this sitting. Is this the language of a madman or
mere visionary ] I think not.

As we have seen, Adele tells me not to be uneasy about the
printing of my books ; that some one toill come to my assistance.
I will not attempt to retrace here the history of the tribula-
tions this publication gave me, but I will say with gralilude
that one day M. Pirlot, a respectable old man, presented himself
at my house to inquire whether the subscription I had opened
was filled up. On my reply in the negative, and telling him
how uneasy I was, seeing that I had not required beforehand
from the subscribers the amount of their subscription, this
leaving: me in the same embarrassment as if I had none at all,
inasmuch as the printer was unwilling to take this subscription
as payment, this gentleman drew out of his pocket-book a bank-
note of 500 francs (Si 00), and handing it to me, said : " This wiU
do away with all your difficulties." I knew not whether I was
dreaming or awake. I offered a receipt, which this gentleman
would not accept, saying to me : " You will return it me
when your money comes in. I would that it were in ray
power to make you a present of it, but I am not rich, and have
sufficient confidence in you to trust to you." This was the
second time of my seeing this gentleman. I cultivated the
acquaintance of this honorable citizen, and received with pleas-
ure wise counsels from him whenever I stood in need of them.
Another beneficent friend of science, equally unknown to me
as the former, made up the remainder of the sum necessary
fur the printing, which, as Adele had predicted, was not to
disturb me. Oh ! Secret Power that directs us, who can
divine thee 1

102. Madame Lotme, a grocer at Rambouillet, having heard
speak of Adele's speciality of communicating with the deceased,
having long been desirous of making sure by herself of the de-
gree of belief due- to such recitals, undertook this journey ex-
pi-essly to solicit the apparition of her grandmother. Adele,
after having visited (spiritually) this lady, says that she sees the
person asked for giving the following description : " This
woman is not so tall as the lady here present; she appears to
be stronger, and about seventy or seventy-two years of age;
she seems to me still very fresh ; her hair is gray — it must
have been of a chestnut color ; her chin is rather long and face
wrinkled, like that of all old people. I see her in a cap with flat
bands that go round just so (Adele designates the form of a cap
worn by country people) ; she has over her shoulders a red
square handkerchief; her dress is that of a countrywoman —
a flat corsage and a striped woollen under-petticoat. I see her
with something in her hand ; if not a snuff-box, it is a spec-
tacle-case. This woman has surely been very mirthful, good,
and dearly loved. For my part, I should be very fond of her.
She suffered much dui'ing her life, is now happy, and would
not come back on earth for all the gold in the world."

Madame Lorme declares herself highly satisfied with the
exactitude of these details.

103. Madame Lorme, of whom we have just spoken, on her
return to Rambouillet, received a visit from M. Renard, who
had addressed her to me, and on the inquiry of my friend, this
lady told him that Adele had rightly hit upon the sufferings she
expei'ienced ; but that she had made a mistake as to the appa-
rition, it not being her grandmother that she had perceived.
My fiiend sent word to me what this lady had told hiui, re-
gretting that the apparition experiment had failed. I was
naturally astonished at such a communication — I who had heard
this lady say at each detail given her by Adele on the person
that appeared — " ^Tis just so, 'tis just so.'* I forthwith for-
warded to my friend a copy of the testimonial, and begged him
clear uj) this affair. A few days after I received the following
letter : —

" I have good news to tell you. Proceeding forthwith to
Madame Lorme's I showed her your letter, when she said to
me : ' Good heavens ! the clairvoyante hit rightly enough on
my bodily ailments, but it was not my grandmother who came.'
The following Saturday, I again spoke to her about it; same
answer. ' Perhaps,' said I, ' there are two ladies of this name
in your family V — ' No,' replied she. I returned the next day,
Sunday evening; Monsieur Lorme was absent. She ex-
claimed. : ' Oh ! my poor M. Renard, yesterday, when you
were gone, it all at once came into my head that I had an
aunt, Dame Vallee, which is indeed the name of my grand-
mother, and who was her sister-in-law ; she lived at Nogent, and
died four or five years ago at the age of seventy or seventy-two.
She was small, very mirthful, a Roger hon temps. She wore
caps with flat bands, a square handkerchief, a striped woollen
under-petticoat, and a bodice without skirts, such as is worn
in Beauce ; she had always her spectacle-case about her, as
she often sewed up coarse linen bags. Ah ! she is, indeed,
the woman ; 'tis I who was wrong; goodness me, how I repent,'
&c., &c. She repeated this version to me a number of times.
You may imagine, my friend, what pleasure this recital gave
me; I am still quite joyous at the thoughts of it. You know
me; having an idea that the good Dame Lorme might tell me
this to console us, I repaired to her mother's at Grenonvillers ;
there the same account. M. Millard, her father, told me the
same thing. It is, indeed, our aunt, a merry little creature ; in
short, such a one as your clairvoyante described. This fact
confirms us in the belief that Adele has not the communica-
tion of thoughts. I will write to M. Dupotet ; I should think
that he will insert this fact in his Journal while sj)eaking of
your work. If Adele had the transmission of thoughts, she
would have depicted the grandmother of Madame Lorme;
seen her in her brain. This is a very precious incident."

As my friend, I look upon this incident as a very precious
one. But, it will be asked me, w^hy Madame Lorrae replied,
** Just so, just so/^ when it was not what she desired 1 To this
observation I will reply, that this lady lost all consciousness
when Adele visited her (spiritually) ; it was not without some
trouble that I restored her to the use of her senses. This
lady found herself in this state for the first time in her life ;
she knew not w4iat to think of it, and I believe that she was in
haste to quit us, fearing a relapse. This, no doubt, induced
her to say, " ' Tis just so, His just so. Let me escape as soon
as possible, for I no longer know where I am." Without the
perseverance of my friend, this precious apparition would be
looked upon as false. My friend, in his letter, that was de-
livered to me by Madame Lorme, gave me merely the surname
of the deceased. I asked for her by this name only, and hence,
no doubt, the mistake. We have already made mention of two
similar ones in our first volume, others will be seen in this ;
great precautions, therefore, should be taken in this respect.
A false application of names would cause a failure in the de-
sired apparition, and often lead to the rejection of a tiuth,
which would be perverted only through the fault of the asker.
Take note of all the incidents, however strange they appear;
by-and-by we shall find the solution of them.

In the apparition we have just cited, the communication of
thoughts can not exist, as rightly observes my friend, who thus
terminates his letter : —

" Madame Lucas afforded me much pleasure from the ac-
count she gave of your admirable sitting, when your good
clairvoyante had a coup-de-soleil, in the perception of Mexico.
These facts confound all the religious and philosophical writers.
" Receive, &c.,
" Ch. Renard.
Employe aux hypotheques de Rambouillet."

104, M. Renard, whom we have just mentioned, begged me
to get a small bottle of water magnetized for him, by Adele,
when she should be in her sleep, in order to cure or calm an
irritation of the conjunctiva, which prevented him from read-
ing and looking steadily on an object. I begged Adele, while
asleep, to render my friend this slight service. M. Sweden-
borg was present at the sitting : Adele begged him to
strengthen by his action the virtue of the water ; this good
spirit did so with pleasure. Adele held the bottle up, present-
ing it thus to M. Svvedenborg, who magnetized it, and breathed
on it. She returned it to me, saying, •' It is good." I was about
to paste some labels on different bottles ; I put one on this
bottle, on which I afterwaid wrote magnetized water. Three
hours had scarcely elapsed when I no longer saw on the label
but the word ivater, the other word had disappeared. I again
wrote on it the word magnetized, and, next day, at the moment
of sending this bottle to my fi'iend, the word magnetized had
again disappeared, leaving no trace behind it. I wrote it a
third time, then forwarded the bottle to its destination. I was
naturally surprised at the disappearance of one word out of
two. I had written with a goose-quill, touched no acid, made
this label as large as a Hard, out of the same paper as the rest.
On none had the ink disappeared — the paste was the same ;
what, then, could have caused this disappearance % Why had
the word water undergone no alteration ?

Already had I forgotten this incident when my friend wrote
to me that he had received the bottle, bearino^ a label with
merely the word water on it ; he gave me to understand that I
ought at least to have indicated what water it was, since I had
put on a label. I answered him that I had even written on it
three times magnetized water, and could not understand how
it was that one word only should remain. I could not inform
myself better in this respect than by applying to M. Svveden-
borg. I begged Adele to mention to him this phenomenon, in
order to know what he thought of it. M. Swedenborg replied
to her: " I told you to beg your magnetizer to put on the bottle
divine ivater spiritualized^ Adele confessed that she had forgot-
ten this injunction. I inquired why it should be more necessary
to put on it divine ivater spiritualized than water magnetized.

She answered : *' Because it was by the permission of God
that M. Swedenbo]-g spiritualized, and not magnelized it. It is
only material men who magnetize, spirits spiritualize." — " For
my part," replied I, " this action seems to me similar to ihe
other, since this water has not jjassed to a spiritual state, as we
see by our distillations," '' Who tells you that it has not been
in the spiritual state 1 Let M. Renard preserve it, it will do
him a great deal of good." — '' It was M. Swedenboi-g, then,
who took care to eftace the word magnetized ?" " No, he no
longer thought of the matter; it is the water itself that carried
away this word while filtering through the pores of the glass."
— "I can't understand that ; it could not have filtered, or the
label would have come off, and the word water would likewise
have been effaced. Explain this phenomenon more clearly."
" There is no phenomenon : the will and the fluid of M. Swe-
denborg were in this water, which was not to bear the word
magnetized ; consequently the water caused it to disappear,"
— " You affirm that it was not M. Swedenborg, nor any spirit,
that effaced this word ?" " It was the water itself." — " To per-
form such a work this water, then, has a will % It is alive,
then ?" " It had the will and the fluid of M. Swedenborg, that
sufficed it." — " Then this is as much as saying that it was M.
Swedenborg himself who effaced this word ?" *' He troubled
himself no more about it; be content with this explanation. I
find myself forced to be so, let every one do as I." My friend
wrote word to me that he was cured in two hours ; he applied
it, also, to a contusion, the consequence of a fall he had had; at
the lapse of a few instants he felt nothing more of it. I looked
upon this fact as marvellous enough to take its place in the
" Secrets."

105. M. Mirande, director of the printing-office, Belin-Man-
dar, at St. Cloud, to whom I intrusted the impression of the
first volume of the '* Secrets," experienced much pleasure in
reading the proofs, and knew not what to think of such mar-
vellous facts. One day he confided to me that he was ac-
quainted with magnetism only by name, and begged me to tell
him sincerely whether all I said in this work was strictly true.

I repeated to him what I said in my introduction, that " I
should deem mj'self the most coDtempiible being on earlh if I
specuUited on such falselioods. All that I recounted was the
sacred trulh." He then said to me : " Would you be so kind
as to give me a sitting?" I eagerly ofFeted fo gratify his wish.
Adeie visited (spiritually) his daughter and wife, who could not
for a single moment doubt her excellent clairvoyance. Madame
Mirande can not make use of the thumb of her rififht hand.
Adele asked her if she had not magnetized some one 1 This
lady replied that she was acquainted with magnetism only
by name; but that from what she had seen Adele do, when
showing M. Mirande how he should magnelize his daughter,
whose arm is paralyzed, she recollected that a doctor had once
taught lier how to perform frictions on the arm of one of her
friends who had lost the use of it. She had rendered her this
service for nearly a. fortnight; but finding that it fatigued her
and gave her pains in the thumb, she left off; and it is only
since then that her thumb has been in this state. Adele said to
her : *' It was magnetism that you performed then ; the doctor
ought to have warned you to shake your finsrers to disensfaoe
yourself from the bad fluid you absorbed, and wash your hands
in water acidulated with vinegar, as I recommend your husband
to do after each magnetization." This lady acknowledged that
Adele's was a just observation, since her thumb was not in this
state previous to the above time, and that she had received no
blow or any injury that could have occasioned what she felt.
(A warning to those who do not believe in the transmission of
disease.) M. Mirande, from the first sitting of somnambulism
he had ever seen, was convinced of the reality of what was
said with respect to maladies. But he wished to know what
opinion to come to as to the revelations of the " Secrets ;" con-
sequently he begged Adele to ask for the apparition of his
brother, whom he believed killed in the Russian campaign.
Adele, not seeing him in the spiritual world, said that he was not
dead; that she saw him on earth. She gave the following
description of him : "I see a tall stout man, with brown hair,
fine black lively eyes, and of a tender expression; a mouth
neither large nor small, beautiful teeth, nose well made, cheeks
colored, air gracious, and very cheerful. He seems to me about
thirty years of age, and is rather taller than M. Mirande. He
wears the uniform of a sub-officer (I believe), because I see
him with only one epaulette, blue coat, pantaloons of the same
color, with scarlet edgings, shako with visor ; altogether he is a
fine man." — "Ask him in what country he is]" "He does
not know, or lie has no viind to tell me. He says that he has
undergone much suffering. He was made a prisoner and sent
to the very interior of Russia, in countries bordering on China,
1 believe ; he tells me that his brother will see him again."
*' AVhy has he not written to him V " He did write, but the let-
ters have either been lost or miscarried." — " Why does he no
longer write 1" " He knows not whether his brother is still
alive." — " Tell him that he is alive and takes upon himself to
find out the place of his retreat." " He answers that he can
not say when, but that he is in hopes, one day, of taking his
brother by surprise." — " What does he do there ?" *' He is
very comfortable, has lands of his own, turns them to account,
and employs many persons. Could he have managed to dis-
pose of his property, he would have been before this in France ;
but thereabouts purchasers are not to be found as with us; he
can't tell when he shall succeed in selling off." — " Let him
write to his brother." " He has no opportunity. You think it
an easy matter ; he is very far from the sea ; then again he has
a wish to take his brother by surprise, when he returns, rich
and happy. He is not selfish, he has an excellent heart, but he
is not free from ambition ; he always was ambitious. He has
dreamed of only one thing in his life, — being rich in his old
days, and he is at the height of his wishes." — " Is he married V*
** Yes ; but he has no children. Next time I will beg him to
show me the country he lives in, as well as his house and wife."
Adele is fatigued, and desires to be roused. M. Miranda
asks for further particulars as to the costume of his brother.
Adele repeats what she has already said, and adds that " she
believes she saw gold lace on his breast, what we call hrande-
hourgs ; she likewise thinks that he had white facings to his
coat." M. MiraTide acknowledcred that all the details as to the
personal appearance were exact, as well as those in respect to
the character, and so forth, of his brother. The brother of this
gentleman had served in the departmental guard, previous to
the Russian campaign. M. Mirande believes that such was the
costume, only he did not know that he was a sub-officer. He
is much surprised that his brother, who must be fifty-six years
old, should look no more than thirty. Adele makes the obser-
vation to him that she sees him at the moment he left France.
"At that time," replies M. Mirande, "he was not above one-
and-twenty. He looks to you full thirty ; no doubt the fatigue
he underwent made him grow old soon." Adele resumes :
" As you knew him only a soldier of one-and-twenty, he appears
to me an officer, and older. Several years may have elapsed
since that time and the moment I see him. This is very admis-
sible. If I beheld him at the age one-and-twenty, it would be
said that I see in the thought. If, on the contrary, I saw him
at the age he is now, fifty-six, his brother would not recognise
him." M. Mirande can very well understand this. He has not
the least doubt but that it was his brother who appeared. Ho
can not recover his astonishment. I will add, as a reflection to
this apparition: 1. If Adele had seen this man in M. Mirande's
thought, she would have seen him as a private soldier, about
tw^enty-one years of age. 2. It would have been sufficient for
her to have given this gentleman a few particulars, then to have
broken off with the observation that his brother was dead. Such
was M. Mirande's opinion. Adele, on the contrary, gives de-
tails as to the existence and life of this man; she makes judi-
cious observations. If she saw him at his present age, and in
his present dress and occupations, his brother could never have
recognised him. The only objection admissible is, that he ought
to have given the name of the place he lives in. It remains to
know whether he is able or willing to do so. To be able, this
place must have a name; and all the countries of the globe are
not like France, where each hamlet is dependent on a city, this
city on a department, &c. Those uncultivated, remote coun-
tries, but little known to geography, possess not names so easy
to class as with us. We experienced the same difficulty in our
perception of Mexico. Then, again, if this man is unwilling
to acquaint us with the place he lives in, for reasons of his own,
we can not force him. He evades the question by saying : " I
have been a prisoner; I have written ; I have no opportunity;
I know not whether my brother is still living," &c. The future
will tell us more about it. This apparition proves to us that if
men still on earth can appear in the dress, the features, and age,
they no longer have, souls disengaged from matter may surely
have the same power ; and we acquire the certitude, by this
fact, that all that I have said, in this respect, is correct. Each
garment, each year, imprints an ineffaceable image on our bod-
ies, which may be found again, at all times, agreeably to the
desire of the spirit. I have made this experiment several times ;
I have asked for persons living on earth at different periods of
their life ; they have appeared at the age demanded, clad in the
costume they then wore. I have made inquiries of them, and
obtained the assurance that this was correct. I was far from
having known these persons when of the age at which I asked
for them. In somnambulism, there is a continual source of ob-
servation. To succeed we must not argue ; we must study —
not believe without pi oofs, and not deny without knowing. I
will even go so far as to say that we have no right to deny what
we can not comprehend.

106. I take advantage of a visit paid me by Emile Rey, of
whose sittings we have read in the first volume of the " Secrets,'*
to beg him to allow me to magnetize him, as I had a few ques-
tions to put to him. It was not without some trouble that I
could prevail on him to consent to my wishes, his family having
told him that such experiments would make him ill. This child
is but twelve years of age, and would be an excellent clairvoy-
ante if conducted with perseverance ; but he prefers playing to
sleeping, which is natural enough at his age. A few days be-
fore I had submitted to him a few questions which his guide
was unable to answer ; I had a mind to get a solution of them.
Once asleep, I tell him to ask for his guide. " Here he is," said
he. — *' Ask him if there are any books in heaven." " He tells
me there are none." — " Ask him, once more, if we have already
lived on a material globe before appearing on earth." " He
answers, ' No.' " — " What is the festival called, at which, the
last time you saw him,'he told you he had been crowned V*
** The feast of the angels." — " What kind of pleasure did they
take that day V " They danced a great deal in a circle." —
*' What is this day called ?" " St. Nicholas' day, it was Mon-
day." — " But you saw your guide before Monday, and the feast
had already taken place ; ask him again, very slowly." " He
replies that it was St. Nicholas' feast." — '* Your guide, then, is
very fond of dancing in a circle, that he took so much delight
in it." " Ah ! yes." — '* And while he was dancing, what had
become of his horse ; no doubt he had put it in a stable V " There
are neither stables nor houses in heaven ; there is but a large
garden, a beautiful one. He put his horse in this garden.
Horses are not so vicious there as on earth, they destroy noth-
ing," — " Are they all little boys together 1" "Yes; but there
are also little girls." — " Do the boys play with them ?" " Yes ;
each piays with his own." — ''How his own]" "Each little
boy has a little girl, whom he terms his companion, and with
whom he always plays." — " Has your guide also a companion ?"
" Yes." — " Does she ride on horseback with him ?" " No, she
is not adroit enough." — " Could he let you see her ]" " He is
going to fetch her." Emile waits a moment, then exclaims :
" Here she is; she is a black." — " A black, what do you mean ?"
*' Yes, she is a negress." Fearing that it might be an evil spirit
that had a mind to play us some trick of his own, I attempt-
ed to drive her away in the name of God, but Emile said:
"They are really sent by God, and you can't drive them
away." — " Then, tell me how this negress is dressed 1" " She
is in a beautiful white robe ; she is rather taller than Ais." —
" Where was she born ?" " At Neva." — " That is a cold coun-
try, I believe. Was it not rather at Java, or Nouga-Hiva 1"
" No, she says Neva." — " Did Ais know her on earth 1" " Yes,
at Paris, but he saw her only twice ; she lived opposite his house."
— " Has she any relations with her in heaven ?" " No." — " And
Ais V " He has an aunt." — " You once told me that he had
his father there V " He replies that he never told me so ; 'tis
I who made a mistake." — " The parents of this little negress,
are they still in Paris ?" ** She says that she believes that they
have returned to Neva." — " Is she black in heaven, as she ap-
pears to you on earth ?" " No, she is as fair as Ais." — " What
is the color of her hair in heaven ?" '" Flaxen." — " And Ais]"
*' He has fine black hair." — " Of what color are their eyes V
*' Both of them have blue eyes." — "Do they never quit each
other ?" " Ais says no ; but," observes Emile, " since he came
to see me without her, he must surely quit her." — "Ask him
again." " He replies that he leaves her only to come and see
me, and to go and see his aunt in heaven." — " Has this little crea-
ture also seen God?" "Yes." — '* In what form 1" "I have
already told you, in the human form." — "How is he named ?"
" Our Lord Jesus Christ." — " Is it Jesus Christ who is the God,
Creator of heaven and earth ?" " No." — " Who then ?" " It
is God."— "Who is Jesus Christ?" "The Son of God."— •
" But you say that in heaven he is called God." " He is called
God, but he is not God ; he is the Son of God." — " What you
tell me, is that really the answer made you ?" " Yes." — " Does
your guide eat in heaven 1" "Yes." — "What?" "Fine
fruits." — "What fruits are they?" " Such as on earth." —
"Does he undergo any sufferings ; experience any fatigue?"
"He does not suffer, and is never fatigued." — "Does he sleep
sometimes?" "Yes." — " On what does he lie down ?" "On
a beautiful turf in the garden." — " Ask his companion if she
dearly loves him, and whether she makes much of him ?" " She
says that she does, indeed." I awake Emile.

As I have already ob.-erved, it is very diiKcult to put ques-
tions comprehensible to children of this age, and from Emile's
answers we perceive that he is in accord with many of the
revelations we have read. This* way in which children per-
ceive God proves to us that each enters the society that corre-
sponds with the belief in which he was brought up on earth,
and continues there the same usages. Christ is the God of the
Chiistians; the Maliometans, Jews, &c., have each their own.
The true philosopher has but one who is neither the one nor
the other of these teachers, but who is all, in all, and through-
out all. It remains for us to know if in heaven a negro
preserves his color, and can be united to a white ; in Adele's
next sleep we will submit to her these questions, though she
has already answered the first one. We see that Emile has
sufficient judgment not to be the dupe of an illusion, by the
judicious observation he makes when his guide tells him that
he never quits his companion.

I will observe, for my part, that I should not comprehend
the utility of a guide such as that of Emile, and all those who
are, it is said, constantly beside us. If I admitted that they
were charged with a continual surveillance of our actions, they
would be slaves like ourselves, by sacrificing to us all their time.
It must be otherwise, or our life would be theirs. I do not
believe that they are bound to us in any other way than in
proffering us counsel when we address ourselves to them ;
were it not so, it would be difiicult to reconcile their happy
occupations with our troubles. AVe see that we are not
called on to explain all in our present state. Eternity is
before us !

We will study in this the question of free will ; for either we
are or are not free. If we are free, why influence us ; if we
are not free, the influence becomes in like manner unlawful.
We will refer, on this head, to what has been said in our first
volume.

107. Adele is not apprized of E mile's sitting. I have pre-
pared the following questions, which I beg her to submit to M.
Swedenborg ; " The two beings created for each other, are
they in every respect alike as to physiognomy ?" " No, they
are only exactly similar as to affections." — " May one be a
white and the other a black ?" " Yes." — " Can a white be
united to a negress V " Yes." — " Do negroes preserve their
black complexion in heaven ?" " In heaven all men are white ;
it is only on earth, from the effect of climate, that they are of
different colors." — " When blacks reappear on earth, do they
resume their black color ?" " Yes, it must be so, otherwise
they would not be recognised." — " Negroes among each other
do ihey see themselves black, if such is their affection'?"
«' There are no negroes who like their color. When they com-
pare it with that of the whites, they envy the white color.
They prefer us in all. Black women seek after white men,
and black men after white women. They have no affection for
their color, had they any they would be deprived of it in heaven
where all men are white." — " Can a black child be united with
a white child, each having died in its own color ?" " Yes." —
*' Have children, among each other, books to study 1" " Those
that desire it have them."—" Is each pair of children under
the special care of a superior spirit charged with their instruc-
tion V *• The spirit charged with this instruction has not less
than a number of children, and that number is twenty." —
" What kind of instruction is given them V " That which God
deems suitable." — " Are children crowned at a feast which is
general with them ]" " There are religious festivals and usages
in heaven as on earth ; but all children are generally crowned
at the age of seven years." — " There are years, then, in heav-
en ?" " Time, as I have before said, is not reckoned there as
on earth ; it is no longer a necessity, one is not obliged to put
off till the morrow the desire which is satisfied as soon as
formed ; the calculation of time becomes needless there. It is
only for children still subject to the usages necessary to com-
plete their instruction that time is counted." — " Children, from
their earliest age, can they be united if they died at about the
same time ?" " Yes, but they are not ultimately united before
the age of fifteen years ; it is the age of eternal union." —
"Can a child be ignorant of its having lived spiritually on
another globe before appearing on earth ?" ** No one is ignor-
ant of such existence ; it is for want of thought if some do not
speak of it." — " Children perfected, do they caress each other
by kisses or other demonstrations ?" " Yes : but their ordinary
caress is shaking hands affectionately until they are ultimately
united." — " There have appeared to us children who did not
seem to have made any progress since their departure from the
earth ; do they remain long in such state 1" " A time more or
less long." — " Can they, like grown-up persons, remain an un-
limited time in innocent pleasures V " Yes." — ■' Do children
believe that they speak through speech or thought?" " They
believe that they speak through speech." I had put this ques-
tion to Emile's guide, and he answered me in the same sense.
Having exhausted the questions I had prepared for this sitting, I
v^^as about to rouse Adele when she made a gesture of surprise,
and tendered, with the greatest vivacity, her hand to some one
who was near her, and caused her so powerful an emotion that
she shed tears in abundance. "What creates in you this sur-
prise 1" said I to her. " It is Alphonse." — " What ! Alphonse,
who for so long a period has not paid you a visit 1" (About
eighteen months.) " He, himself," replied she. — " Has he any-
thing to tell you '?" " It seems to him, he says, but two days
ago." — " He does not grow weary where he is." " I perceive
as much." Adele expressed a wish to chat with this cherished
brother; T left her a moment, but soon perceived that she was
entering the complement of ecstasy. I felt her pulse, to guide
myself by its pulsations, when I thought it time to recall her to
earth ; 1 did so, and she obeyed me without a murmur, exclaim-
ing : " Yes, our departure from this miserable globe, our
descent into the grave, is the first step we take toward pei-fect
equality ; fortune, title, grandeur, ugliness, deformity, grief,
misery — all this passes under the spiritual level, and emerges
from it, equalized for ever ; love, fraternily, replace egotism
and ambition. Oh ! my God, wherefore men do they not ap-
preciate thy divine mercy 1 wherefore dost thou send me back
among them 1 My time is not ended, let us re-enter this prison
and hope !" I had sacrificed this sitting, as I have said, to
verify whether all that Emile's guide told me was correct; we
have seen that there is accord : 1. As to the color of the hair,
which may be different between two beings, as we have the
proof direct in Ai's and his companion, hers being flaxen and
his black. 2. As to the possible union of a white with a
negress. 3. As to the disappearance of the black color in
heaven, where all beings are white. 4. On the necessity of
appearing on earth in the color we bore there. 5, On the pos-
sibility of having books in heaven, if children are fond of them.

6. On a mentor, who superintends their education; Ai's had
told me in a former sitting, that a saint instructed them. This
child is so lively that he scarcely awaits the answers made him ;
to this may bo attributed the mistake he made as to the decease
of the father of Ais. We see by M. Swedenborg, as by M.
Mallet, that a number consists of 20. 7. There is also accord
as to the coronation. 8. As to the festivals. 9. As to the
possible union and caresses of two children. 10. As to their
belief, in communicating with each other, through speech ; this,
also, Emile had told me, when, on the contrary, it is through
thought, through sensation. Here, then, are ten secrets in
which they perfectly agree. It is necessary to observe that I
did not magnetize this child once in two months, his mother
having an objection to it. We may judge what facility is pre-
pared for somnambulists in communicating with the deceased,
especially when rightly brought up for this purpose, and prU'
dently guided in this speciality. I return to an observation to
which I did not give sufficient importance : that is, to prepare
the questions we desire to address, not to suffer ourselves to be
led away by those raised by the answers we obtain; keep them
for the next sitting, you will have had time to reflect on them,
and prepare them better. They may, sometimes, accord with
others that have preceded them, which would be a needless
repetition, for we have been enabled to appreciate that an answer
very often contains several solutions ; hence it is, that at the
first sitting, Binet used to say to me : " You have already been
answered that question." — I did not believe it; I had not com-
prehended him, and I found at a later period that he was right.
Such conversations, likewise, present in the reading a void
which is, at times, painful. It will be understood that this is
not a history whose every detail should be consigned with har-
mony and a certain elegance of style, in order to arailse. Here
we instruct ourselves, pick up information in the road of the
infinite, the unknown, to construct the universal history of cre-
ation and the human destination. We are but a very poor
workman for a monument so colossal. A skilful architect will
one day come to unite these materials, and adorn with them the
edifice at which we have been courageously working for so
many years. Many questions, also, are found unanswered ; the
spirit, no doubt, perceiving that our intelligence is not open to
such revelations. It is silent — and we insist not. "We ask for
the spiritual obole with humility, and stop in time when we
find that we are importunate.

Many magnetizers are easily enough disgusted with som-
nambulism ; good somnambulists are always useful to consult;
it is very frequently the magnetizers who disorganize them by
the strangeness of their questions. We should be convinced,
once for all, that it is necessary to train every somnambulist
to one speciality, suited to his tastes and the kind of instruc-
tion we desire. How conceive that a somnambulist should
answer at the same sitting questions hurried, and so little in
accord as these : " Can you tell me what I have in my pocket V*
** Can you read this letter?" " Can you see where I suffer?"
" Can you tell me what my brother is doing in Africa V*
" Can you see whether I shall gain such a law-suit V " Can
you tell what such a person thinks of me ?" " Will the lottery-
ticket I have purchased turn up a prize?" " Can you tell me
what has become of my husband, whom I have not seen these
twenty years ?" and a thousand other like questions. The
world thinks that a somnambulist who sees and knows a cer-
tain thing can see and know all. The magnetizer himself is
no less insatiable. Consider that mistakes must be the conse-
quence of such a mode of operating ; too many are often made
even in following a route with great circumspection. What
can we expect from such a chaos of questions ? Deception for
all, shame and vexation for the magnetizer, and insanity or stu-
pidity for the somnambulist thus tortured ; fortunate for him
if physical tortures be not added to moral ones. I am not at
all surprised that somnambulism should lose in the public mind
its sacred and divine character. You wish to learn so much
from it that you know nothing. If, in spiritual researches, we
were to proceed in this way, we should obtain but very little.
It is necessary, as I have said, to write down beforehand the
questions we intend putting — acquaint the clairvoyante with
them, that he may prepare for them. These questions should
be clear and few in number, touching only on one subject,
with no objections, and thus terminating the sitting. The
answers obtained will supply new questions for the following
sitting. Never make two similar experiments at the same sitting y
if you would succeed ; no pride, no interested calculation. Be
jDatient, kind. The stone that caused your fall to-day should
warn you to pick out a better road. It is for you to guide
your clairvoyante in it carefully and firmly.

108. When I intrusted to the printer my manuscript of the
" Secrets," I had not a duplicate of it, my employment permit-
ting me not to copy such a work : I recommended it, therefore,
to M. Mirande, director of the printing-office, harassed as I was
by a secret inquietude, still further augmented by the some-
what unfavorable disposition of mind into which my prospectus
had thrown certain members of different sects. Several of
them having come to me for more ample information as to the
religious tendency of this work, I had frankly answered them
that my object was to tell all that had been revealed to me,
without, in aught, perverting the meaning to the advantage of
any particular belief. I agreed not with these gentlemen for
two reason : 1. I believe God to be infinitely good — not sub-
ject to fits of vengeance and cruelty. 2. I believe that in
all religions we might be saved. No more was necessary for
these stupid and egotistical men to make them augur ill of the
soundness of my work. One day a disciple of Swedenborg
quitted me, saying : " Monsieur, with such disposition of mind,
you can but have written your work under a very bad influ-
ence. It could not have been M. Swedenborg who came to
you ; but I predict to you that in a few days he will appear in
person to you yourself, to undeceive you and forbid you print-
ing it." I answered this gentleman, that '• the day I should
have the honor of such a visit would be one of the happiest of
my life." He quitted me in a very bad humor, being unable
to contain his displeasure before a lady present, who was a
follower of Swedenborg, and worthy of respect fi'om her great
age and enlightened understanding, the fruit of long and
painful meditations. Matters stood thus. A vexatious idea
came into my head, that if it were possible, certain persons
inimical to this work might make away with it. One day
I received a proof to correct, with a part of the manuscript,
of which it was the reproduction. What was my surprise on
seeing that twenty-six pages of the manuscript had been so
burned that it was very difficult to read their contents : these
pages were actually those containing all the revelations of M.
Swedenborg. I was confounded. Next day M. Mirande came
to my house : I begged him frankly to tell me, since this acci-
dent had been attended by no untoward results, whether it had
occurred before, during, or after the com230sition. This gen-
tleman replied that it happened before the composition, in the
room of the reader. The latter was about looking over the
manuscript ; some one came to speak to him ; he laid down this
part on the top of his stove, which was very hot at that mo-
ment, and perceived his distraction only from a strong smell of
burning; he instantly withdrew my manuscript, which, had it
remained there a second lonsj'er, would have been annihilated.
I knew not what to think of such an accident, when yesterday
I asked M. Swedenborg the cause of it. He replied : " This
accident was prepared by evil spirits, who wanted to annihilate
the truths I have revealed to you." — " Is it to you that I am
indebted for its non-execution V *' Let it suffice you to know
that good spirits watched over its preservation, as they watch
over yours and your claitvoyante's. Had these evil spirits the
power, they would lay a spell on you. But fear not ; those
who conceived such vengeance will be the first to read you, and
will learn to repent of their error. You ought to remember
that I came the morning after this accident, to assure you that
your work would appear unshackled, for such is the will of
God. Be calm : among my disciples, as in all religions, there
are false men who pervert to their profit my writings ; but they
will not succeed in establishing their doctrines." I did not
exactly recollect, not having taken down the dale, whether M.
Swedenborg: came to see Adele the morninsf after this acci-
dent ; but I still await the fulfilment of the prediction of his
disciple, and I think that, after reading this work, he will be
enabled to judge whether it has been dictated by the evil one,
or l)y a beneficent spirit. I availed myself of the presence of
M. Swedenborg to put to him the following question : " At the
last sitting you explained to me how years were estimated in
heaven ; but I did not perfectly comprehend your explanation :
could you furnish me with a little additional information on this
point]" "In heaven there are no years as on earth; I have
told you that children dying before the age of seven years,
were all crowned at that age, and those fifteen years old in like
manner. I merely borrowed the word * years' as a figurative
expression, to make myself understood by your clairvoyante,
for in heaven they are degrees. The age of seven years rep-
resents the degree of knowledge ; that of fifteen the degree of
love, and so on." Adele said to me : " It is true that M. Swe-
denborg always spoke to me of degrees; but, not comprehend-
ing these degrees, I begged him to explain this to me other-
wise, in order that I might the better reproduce to you what
he said to me ; for if I do not myself comprehend, how should
I make you do so ? Then again, he told me that time was not
reckoned in heaven, where all was by degrees of affection.
On earth, children seven years of age, are, it is said, at the age
of knowledge ; it is this want of knowledge that is crowned in
heaven : the child, were it not to enter this degree till after
twenty of our years, represents the child of seven years with us.
It is the same with respect to the age of fifteen, when we feel on
earth the first approaches of love. In heaven it is a degree —
an affection similar to that of the child entering the state of
knowledge. There is no limited time : when this affection en-
ters the person, we say he is in the degree of love, which cor-
responds to the age of fifteen on our earth." I am aware that
some of M. Swedenhorg's works treat of degrees, but I am not
acquainted with them. (I leave the reader to judge of the
revelations of this sitting, in respect to the accident that befell
my manuscript.)

109. The count D' , honorably known to all the magne-
tizers in the capital, one of the most devoted and generous
disciples of magnetism, a subscriber to tbe " Secrets," conse-
quently aware of Adele's speciality, solicited from this clair-
voyante a sitting for the apparition of a deceased person,
possessed, at the time of his death, of a brilliant fortune, and
having made a will in favor of devoted servants and other per-
sons. At his decease all papers of this kind disappeared, and
it was to obtain information in this respect, without informing
us of the object of his solicitation, that this gentleman requested
me to magnetize Adele, I asked for the deceased, this gentle-
man being in no wise en rapport with Adele, and the latter, not
knowing the object of the apparition, she said: "I see near
me, and seated, an old man, who says he is M. D ; he is
wrapped up in a sort of dressing-gown, of a brown color ; he
must surely support himself difficultly on his legs, which I see
trembling under him, inasmuch as he has just risen. He seems
to me not quite so tall as M. D' , here present; he is thin,
but his frame is sufficiently developed, betokening that he must
have been pretty strong; his hair is gray, no doubt it was once
brown. He has a very open and remarkably fine forehead,
hazel eyes, his face, though thin, is pretty wide, his nose rather
pointed, the complexion fresh and healthy enough. He must
have been a fine-looking man, what we term a nice old many
The whole of this description is exact, with the exception of
the dressing-gown ; this gentleman having worn only a riding-
coat when at home. Adele observes that in that case it must
have been wide enough to cross over the chest like a dressing-
gown, and over his knees where he crosses it as if afraid of
the cold." This observation is acknowledged as true ; M.
D' — ■ — can not call to mind whether his nose was pointed ;
Adele takes her own in her hand and gives it the form of the
one she wishes to describe, what we term an aquiline nose, but
somewhat sharp at the end. We verify a portrait which M.
D' — has in his hand ; the nose in this is of the same shape
as Adele has shown, the nostrils having this remarkable pecu-
liarity that they are much shorter and more arched than the
part separating them, thus giving it the form described by
Adele. The latter could not have seen this portrait, which
she did not know was in the pocket-book of M. D' , par-
ticularly as she had not the faculty of seeing objects at hand ;
had she seen it she could not have described the old gentleman
as seated. The portrait representing only the bust, she had
seen him in a riding-coat and not in a dressing-gown. Let us
continue. *' This man has a very meditative air, he was not
very communicative with persons of a different persuasion to
himself; he was well informed, and possessed a fine library.
He has an excellent heart, upright, just, and open ; he is much
hurt at the turn his affairs, relative to the property, have taken.
He had with him two women, one taller than the other, one
older than the other. The tallest often entered his room ;
through her ministration is it that important papers have dis-
appeared to the profit of a third woman who stood in no need
of this increase of fortune, but she has a hard, selfish, covetous
heart. She possesses those papers which have made her richer
and at the same time more detestable, by the spoliation she
operated to the prejudice of unfortunate creatures who had
more need of the property than she. This woman is not alone,
she has accomplices : in the first place those who gave up to
her these papers, inasmuch as she did not take them herself;
she could not do so, but there were others deposited with cer-
tain persons, which she knew of and bought up. This is the
cause of her present uneasiness ; she is far from being happy ;
she fears their indiscretion, she will give up the papers, and
the unfortunate persons they concern will enter upon their
rights." At my observation that it depends only on her will
to destroy these papers, Adele resumes : " That does not depend
on her, the finger of God is there ; she can not do it, she has
taken them up several times to throw them into the fire, but
an invisible hand held her back, and she was let off to hide
them anew ; they were first in a clothes-press, then secreted in
the wainscotting, then under the floor; she knows not where
to put them. She is already eaten up with remorse, and the
beneficent spirits will so prevail over her that she will find an
opportunity, a pretence, to deliver up these papers. This
gentleman assures me that the heirs whom they concern have
no reason to be discouraged — that light will be done them
without any legal proceedings ; for nothing could be proved.
It must come of itself through obsession, and this will take
place sooner than it is thought. This woman is so monstrous
that she herself accuses the unfortunate creatures she has
robbed. Oh ! miserable wretch, you already suffer much ; your
torments are not at an end !" exclaims Adele. — " By what
means can they recover this succession V *' Through the
means of M. D' , here present, who was left executor to
the will ; who is the only one who can do it, and is interested
in it by his duties as testamentary executor." — M. D' is
so moved, and convinced of the reality of what he hears, that
he is unable to hide a few tears offered by his sensibility to
misfortune. A servant of the deceased, who faithfully dis-
charged his duties to his master for twelve years, and who is
better enabled than any other to recognise the truth of these
details, asks if he was not put down in the will ? " Yes,"
replies his master ; " T am grieved at the injustice of this
woman, whom, when on earth, I knew well enough to mistrust
her, but not well enouoj^h to baffle her intrigrues. You will lose
nothing, justice will be done." — " Did you not put out at in-
terest some money for me ?" *' No, I did intend doing so, but
I put you down in my will. I spoke of this, my intention, to
some one." — M. D' says that it was to himself that this
gentleman made this confidential communication, and that he
is the only person who can settle the business, provided he had
the papers. The poor servant cries out to Adele : " Could we
not seize these papers V The latter replies : " You want to
know if I could deliver them up to you ? I see them very
well ; but to take them, where they are, we must be author-
ized. How effect a legal seizure without more proofs 1 She
is rich and you are poor ; do not grieve. He who rules all is
more powerful than this wretch. Let those act who concern
themselves themselves spiritually with this affair ; it can not
long resist their obsession." — Further questions being need-
less, I rouse Adele. M. D' congratulates her on her ex-
cellent clairvoyance, and declares himself convinced of what
I have advanced in the " Secrets," Persons who can see only
matter will never believe but that this woman would make
away with these papers ; but materially speaking and thinkino-,
she would make away with them, as she would, fear the indis-
cretion of those who gave them up to her and those who aided
her in this spoliation. The papers by this fact being a primary
cause, would become a secondary one. This woman must
have made this reflection, which diverted her from all thouQ:ht
of destruction : she still finds it in her power, by preserving
them, to repair at a later period the wrong she has done ; no
longer having them, and being denounced by her accomplices,
she would fall into greater difficulties than ever, having thus
no proof of the quantity and value of the gifts, which might
then be estimated at more considerable sums. Without admit-
ting the intervention of spirits, if we stop at this thought
it is sufficient; but, for my part, I believe what I heard.
Adele was so lucid in all she said, that she surely spoke the truth
as to the spiritual obsession this woman would undergo, and
which, sooner or later, will force her to repair her wrongs.

110. The abbe A , a doctor of divinity, a man of pro-
found learning, travelling to acquire fresh knowledge, of an
open and sincere heart, a Spaniard by birth, on his arrival in
Paris, heard in all quarters much talk of the phenomena of mag-
netism ; which so piqued his curiosity that he addressed him-
self to the baron Dupotet, as the man of the highest standing
in this science, and best enabled to demonstrate its reality, pos-
sessing saloons, and a journal, in which the most curious and
novel facts are brought to light after verification and an im-
partial judgment. M. A became acquainted, through this
channel, with the publication of the " Secrets of the Life to
Come Revealed," to which he subscribed, as it might possibly
be in consonance with his beliefs, and throw light on a few
psychological questions which had hitherto remained lansolved.
Scarcely had he read the work, than, as a studious man, he
hastened to pay me a visit, and submit to me some reflections
suggested to him by different passages in my work. I took
upon myself to give him a proper solution of them ; he then
said to me : *' Monsieur, it is a matter of discussion between
us, if you wish to accept it ; but there is a more positive fact
on which I desire to be enlightened, that is, to see, by myself,
whether it be possible to evoke the souls of the deceased. I
believe, above all men (by my ministry) in their existence ; but
I very much doubt the possiblhty of our entering into com-
munication with them in the manner you announce." " Try,"
replied I ; "you will betler believe by your own experience
than my vv-ord." *' To try," resumed he, " there must be suit-
able subjects, and I have none. If a clairvoyante could only
describe to me a brother I lost now about two years ago, I
would then believe in what you announce, and, what is more,
I would say that your book is an immense event for psychology."
Adele, present at these observations, seeing how desirous this
gentleman was of being convinced, and assured, above all, of
his good faith, said to me : "If you wish to send me to sleep,
we will beg of God to grant us this favor." As we per-
ceive, all was improvised, and the gentleman stranger, de-
lighted at Adele's offer, eagerly accepted it. Scarcely was
she in the state to answer, than I asked for the name of the de-
ceased, not wishing any communication to exist between him
and Adele ; he answered me "Joseph A ." "VYe asked for
the latter. After a moment's waiting, Adele said : " I see be-
fore me a man rather taller than the gentleman here present,
with brown hair, a mild and expressive look, of a pretty good
mien, slightly colored. He seems to me an affable man, but
severe in his ministry, for I see him in a very droll dress ; he
has a sort of wide pantaloons made in a queer fashion, and of
the color of pansy ; I can't see the colors very well, he is
rather too far off He has small open shoes, and I see a sort
of mantle over his shoulders. Oh ! but it is a fine costume, T
never saw anything like it ; this mantle seems to be a silk one
and of a deep scarlet color, it comes down to a point as far as
his knees; he wears also a small white collar that comes down
over this mantle or cloak ; I don't know what it is called, but it
has no cowl, such as our priests have to their cloaks. Ah!
good heavens, 'tis pretty, this costume, I should never grow
tired of looking at it ; he has a small hand. What could this
man be ] Not a priest, he has not the dress of one." — " Ask
him where he died V '* He is a foreigner, he answers me a
droll name, I can't repeat it. He could not speak French, he
makes signs to me." — " Did he not say Alicant ]" " Yes, with
two other outlandish words. I'faith, I don't know, not I," —
" Of what disease did he die 1" *' A disease of the chest. Oh !
he was long ill, he supported his illness with great resignation
and fortitude. I am certain that he was a good and open-
hearted man ; he was very fond of his brother. I told him
that he was here, and he made signs to me that he was always
thinking of him." — " What age does he appear to be V " I
should say about five-and-forty."

Observations. — M. A acknowledged the exactitude of
all these details. What Adele takes for a sort of pantaloons is
an ornament similar enough to a priest's stole, appearing to
the eye like the two legs of a pantaloon. This gentleman was
fifty-one years of age ; he did not look so old. He was a
Spanish canon, and unacquainted with the French language.

M. A finds not a syllable to retrench from these details ; he
puts his hands up to his face, and exclaims : " 'Tis enough to
upset all reason — all received ideas ; I am convinced — thanks,
thrice thanks. The details of the dress were sufficient for me ;
there is nothing like it in France ; you can have no notion of
it." Astonishment, admiration, were the accompaniments of
this sitting. It remains for me, however, to explain why this
man could not answer. When 1 said that the language of
spirits was unique, universal, the language of sensations, still
there are exceptions ; the fact being that the clairvoyante must
be in a very elevated state to communicate by sensation, and
interpret the meaning of it in material language. Adele gave
us a proof of her good-will, by answering us questions which
she herself must have interpreted to the deceased by the afore-
said language ; but as this requires much study on the part of
clairvoyantes, in order to steer clear of errors, they generally
dislike this kind of communication. If clairvoyantes answer
not suitably the questions put — the effect of a bad interpreta-
tion — it appears ridiculous, as we have seen in the case of
Father Lauriot ; they feel that they can not thus compromise
the truth of these perceptions by needless questions in the very
presence of the apparition. This proves that there is no com-
munication of thoughts, as they would answer all. I am not
always able to know what I desire ; and what T do not desire
is often explained to me with details that leave less room for
doubt than the solutions I demand. Therein, then, is a mission
which God alone knows.

111. M. B , a magnetizer and subscriber to the "Se-
crets," desires an apparition-sitting. No sooner is Adele in the
required state than we ask for M. B , Earnest Paul, a de-
ceased brother of M. B ; the mother of this gentleman is
present at the sitting. Adele says, " Here he is." — " Give us
a description of him." " I see him with bright chesnut-colored
hair, and fine open forehead ; eyes approaching a hazel color,
brows sufficiently well arched ; nose somewhat coming down
to a point ; mouth middling size : he wears mustaches, which
are lighter than his hair; he has a clear, pale, delicate com-
plexion ; round chin ; delicate frame, though he must have
been pretty strong ; illness has weakened him considei'ably ;
he wears a dark-colored coat — an olive color, I believe; he
has a doleful, calm, suffering look ; he has surely labored under
some affection of the heart and chest, and experienced great
weakness in the legs. He was not without his sorrows — he
inwardly tormented himself without showing it ; he was at
times meditative and absorbed in gloomy ideas; he loved
some one, and this was the principal cause of his sorrow; he
was very sensitive." — "How old does he look 1" "About
one-and-twenty ; his stomach has been greatly weakened by
youthful excesses." — " To whom is he united in heaven 1" " I
know not whether it be his sister that he points out to me.
I see a dark young girl, with fine black eyes and rosy cheeks."
— " Ask him who this young girl is ; he has no sister dead ; is
it a relative]" "No, this young man did not always live in
Paris; he knew this young girl in the country." — "Is it his
companion V " No, his companion is still on earth ; this young
girl is a friend." — " By whom was he received in heaven ?"
"By his grandfuther." — "His faiher had a dream, in which he
beheld his son in heaven witli his grandmother." " The dream
is true, but the fiist person who received him was his grandfather,
his father's father — he whom he knew on earth ; he opened to
him his arms, the young man rushed into them : his grandmoiher
was among the rest of the persons who awaited him. It is im-
possible to seize at once the picture of sucli a reception. He
still found himself under the influence of a sort of bad dream ; it
was his grandfather whom he first rec<'gnised. He had scarcely
any agony. He did not believe in magnetism ; he desires me to
tell his brother that he believes in it now." — " Who watched
over his dead body*?" "His family." — "Where was it de-
posited?" "In Pere-La-Ghaise." — "Did it remain in the
same grave 1" " No, it was removed to that of his grandfather,
the person who first received him in henv n." — " Win) Wv^re
the persons who followed him to the gravel" "He noticed.
his brother more than any of the rest." Adele is fatigued, and
we leave off. M. B , the brother, is cjuire delighted at
this experiment, but his mother is plunged, into the most pro-
found grief: her son tells her, through Adele, not to mourn for
him, as he is much happier than she is ; he would that her time
of trial were over; he came to visit her several times in her
sleep, in order to comfoit her ; he did not come to remind her
of him i?] order to add to her grief, as he well knew the bitter-
ness of her regret. He appeared likewise to his broiher ; he
will appear to him again : he thanks his brother for having
buried, him. M. B finds not a syllable to retiench from
this mass of details; his mother preserves but a single doubt
as to the shade of the eyes — they can not exactly recollect
what color they were. God has permitted that our faith should.

Be strengthened more and more. M. B , desirous of con-
cealing his name, out of family considerations, signed the du-
plicate of this sitting, to guaranty me in future against the
reservations that some forgetful and wrangling men might raise
as to the reality of what they have heard and acknowledged as
true. Henceforth, I shall act in the same way. The morning
after this sitting, M. B came to my house to tell us that
he had called together his family, to make sure of the precise
color of his brother's eyes, and that the generality of reminis-
cences was in favor of the color described by Adele. This
particularity gave me great pleasure, inasmuch as this gentle-
man having said to Adele, *' You are wrong ; my mother thinks
his eyes were blue ; do you persist in seeing them of a hazel
color ?" Adele replied, " It would be very easy for me to say
as your mother, since she believes them such, and that would add
to the truth of all I told you ; but I should be telling a falsehood
and not saying what I saw : to me they are as I have described
them." It was in consequence of this declaration that the gen-
tleman convoked a family meeting, and thought himself bound
to inform me of the result. M. B confided to me that he
had often had a visit from his brother in his dreams; that some
time ago he dreamed, that after his brother was dead and laid
out, he beheld the lid of the coffin raised, his brother rise up
on his feet, extend his arms, tearing the shroud, and say
to him in a calm, steady voice : " Why do you weep for me ?
Don't you see that I am not dead ; on the contrary, I am born
to life — this is the entrance to it [pointing to his coffin] — we
shall meet again ; be calm and hope."

When M. B found a somewhat similar phrase in my
Secrets, he was struck at the coincidence of such revelation
with the assertion of his brother. This coincidence alone —
God be praised — made a spiritualist of a materialist.

112. The abbe A , already mentioned — appearing to
be no longer convinced by the details given him by Adele, on
his brother's apparition, which he solicited at the 110th sit-
ting — came to acquaint m.e with his doubts on this head. At
this moment Adele was asleep. He proposed calling for the
sister of his maid-servant, whose name was Antoinette Carre,
and who had been dead many years.* I asked for this person,
and Adele said : *' I see a person of middling stature, with
light-brown hair, about five-and-forty years of age, not pretty,
small gray eyes, large nose, rather thick at the bottom ; sallow
complexion, wide mouth ; she has what we call a thick neck ;
she has lost some of her front teeth, and the remainder are lit-
tle better than stumps ; she wears what is termed in the coun-
try an undress — corsage of a brown color, striped under-pet-
ticoat, somewhat short ; a full apron, such as countrywomen
wear ; she has a square handkerchief on her neck ; her hands
betoken hard work. She used to work in the fields ; she had
a brother, who died after her, but he is not in the same radius
as she, for, without being altogether a worthless fellow, he was
not very steady. This woman seems to me to have been a
very good kind of creature."

* This gentleman afterward told me that all the details of the apparition of his
brother were strictly true ; but some doubts had been raised in his mind by the
observation that " these apparitions were but a ti'ansmission of thought." It was
to convince himself of the contrary that he asked for a person unknown to him.

M. A took away in writing these details, and answered
me through the same medium. I extract the following pas-
sages : "After four times reading over to Marie-Frangois
Rosalie Carre the above description, she declared it so exact
that she could not do less than recognise her own sister, Antoi-
nette Carre, in the woman who appeared to the somnambulist;
as to her brother, she declares that he died after her sister, as
Adele has said. She couples with all this a circumstance not
unworthy of attention. She says that she dreamed, on the
night of the 30th January (the eve of the sitting), that she was
by the graves of her brother and sister, but that her attention
was directed most to her sister's grave. (She had never before
dreamed of her since her death.)" Signed A.

I will observe, in my turn, that M. A , as well as his
maid-servant, were not aware, not even the very day of the sit-
ting, that we should ask for this woman. It was quite on a
sudden that I put the following question to this gentleman :
" Do 3^ou know any deceased person whose apparition could
convince you?" To which he answered : "Ask for the sister
of my maid-servant ; so there will be no influence or communi-
cation of thought, as she is not here, and is wholly unaware of
what is about to take place." As we have just seen, we met
with perfect success ; this woman, the better to prove to her
master that what he had heard was true, declared that she her-
self had given her sister the square-necked handkerchief de-
scribed by Adele. The apparition of Antoinette Carre must
destroy the malevolent objection of the transmission of thought;
or, indeed, we are all insane in attempting to prove the exist-
ence of a soul to fools.

Fresh Particulars. — M. A came a few days after
this sitting to my house, and informed me that his maid-servant
had seen, the night before, a man from her own part of the
country, to whom she read over the description given of her
sister, which she had in her hands, asking him if he knew such
a person. The man replied : " Why, it is your deceased sister
whose portrait you have drawn ; there's no mistake about that."
— M. A 's maid-servant observed to him that the descrip-
tion nnade mention of a small pimple on the cheek, and that she
had never seen on her a mark of the kind." The man replied :
"You are wrong, for she had one there," pointing out to her
the place. This woman at last recollected it, and was but the
more convinced, as well as M. A , who desired this perfect
exactitude, that left no room for doubt. The arrival of a third
person was necessary to confirm the truth of this particularity,
which, consequently, could not have been seen in the thought
of any one. (I had forgotten to make mention of this little
mark in the description that has been read.) M. B , of the
111th sitting, came yesterday to tell me that he had a female
somnambulist, who perceived his brother precisely as Adele
had seen him ; she had told him the very same thing as to his
reception in heaven by his grandfather. M. B asked her
for a few particulars as to the young person who accompanied
him at the time of his appearing to Adele. His brother replied :
"You knew her at Paris: you have been in her company.
Don't you recollect an excursion that a party of us made on
the water to a certain place, where we spent the whole day ]
there were two persons with us — it was this little brunette,
to whom some one you know paid his court." M. B has
a perfect recollection of this particularity. Here, then, is a
fact extraordinary enough, to which I had attached no impor-
tance at first. This young girl, who appeared unasked for, and
to whom we paid no attention, finds herself described and rec-
ognised by a second clairvoyante, whom M. B questions
on this subject. In these experiments, there is a concatenation
which it is not given to man to define.

113. M. Favre, of Lyons, a subscriber to the " Secrets," be-
ing at Paris on business, came to ask me for an apparition-sit-
ting; he expressed a wish for Adele to see his wife, Madame
Favre (Marie Helene, nee Mathieu). Adele said : " I see a
woman still young, of middling stature, with auburn hair, hazel
eyes, hollow and encircled with black and blue spots ; nose pret-
ty well formed, rather long than short; middling-sized mouth,
thin lips, pale complexion, set off by a slight color, chin rather
long, beautiful hands, although thin, well-formed nails, physiog-
nomy mild and languid. Her ailing condition grieved her very
much from the pain it occasioned her husband, and the persons
who nursed her. She must have had an inflammation of the
stomach ; she was not treated rightly ; she must have suffered,
too, from the chest, and an affection of the heart. I perceive
that she was greatly beloved, for she seems to me of a very
sweet disposition ; she had so little will of her own that she
must have pleased everybody ; she suffered with fortitude.
Without her disease she would have been of a pretty strong
constitution. She is an angel, this woman. She is very happy,
but her happiness will not be perfect till she is reunited to her
husband. They were born for each other, she dearly loved
him : she is often with him ; though, fearing to affect him,
she keeps his material body in ignorance of this, but she
promises me that he shall see her in a dream. I see beside her
an aged woman, smaller than she is ; she tells me that it is her
mother who died before her, and received her in heaven ; she
had always dearly loved her, and prayed God for her. This
woman has gray hair, but it must have been darker than her
daughter's ; she stoops a good deal, and this makes her look as
if hump-backed, and gives her a very ungraceful air. She had
an asthma, from which she must have suffered much."

M. J. Vermale, of Paris, who had accompanied M. Favre,
begs Adele to ask for Madame Anne Louise Vermale [nee
Chardon). Adele says : " I see a very little old woman with
gray hair, she is very gay, lively, and cheerful ; she has a very
pleasant air, and is always smiling. She has very expressive
eyes, a very open forehead, thick eyebrows ; she is open-hearted
and frank, not in the least afraid to offend persons by telling
them her mind ; her thoughts are as lively as her movements.
This woman tells me that she is your mother ; she was very fond
of you, she had no other son but you, you were very good to
her, so that she was able to appreciate you. She suffered in
her legs which were very swollen and painful. Her death was
easy enough ; her stomach was swollen in her last moments,
she was very much oppressed, could scarcely breathe ; she must
even have had the death-rattle, this was caused by the inflam-
mation of the stomach. She was very courageous; she has
small feet, and must have been very pretty in her day. She is
very happy, always thinking of you as when she was upon
earth ; she tells me that she has already appeared to you in a
dream, and will appear to you again."

These two gentlemen, as magnetizers, appreciate with enthu-
siasm the precious lucidity of Adele, take her by the hands and
thank her with an overflowing heart. One would say that their
soul was confined in the sphere of the departed spirits ; no more
constraint, a demonstrative happiness ; a few tears are almost
always the result of these sweet emotions. We see in this sit-
ting three persons appear, one of whom was unasked for. The
details, this time, speak not of their dress, but, by way of a
change, give a description of their qualities, their ailments, their
sufferings ; all this proves to us that if the body or the image
of the material body as well its accompaniments are not anni-
hilated, the actions, the sensations, even, are from all eternity !
In presence of such facts not a single doubt can be raised.

114. Adele was suffering from a nervous pain throughout the
entire left part of her head. At first we thought it a fluxion.
then an epidemic malady attacking all nervous constitutions.
This pain varied in its crises ; we thought it over at night, on
the morrow it returned. Adele could not visit herself (magnet-
ically) in her accesses, which were not unlike fits of madness ;
her face became of a dark purple color, the lower jaw trembled
convulsively, a tremor that gained the whole body; anger was
the result, she struck her head with her fists violently. Scarce-
ly could I prevent her from becoming a victim to her passion.
In the intervals of these crises she no longer felt anything, and was
unwilling to visit herself, for fear as she said that the pain would
return. As I have before said, Adele is very obstinate, and in-
dependent of my influence in her sleep as in her watchful state.
I could not by any means induce her to procure for herself re-
lief ; we employed fumigations, cataplasms, cleared the lower
passages, and I magnetized her perseveringly, but all was of no
avail. Nearly three weeks had passed away, and we still had
the misfortune to see her suffering without being able to afford
her any relief, when I had recourse to another somnambulist,
who prescribed a few remedies, which, however, were attended
with no favorable result. I was ill myself, consequently not in
a fit state to magnetize her. If I attacked the part affected by
passes, I only made her suffer more. At first I took this addi-
tional suffering for favorable crises, and as the precursors of a
cuie; but it was no such thing. An idea came into my head
to magnetize her at a great distance, by the look only, fixing
the extremities of her feet for a longer or shorter period of
time. This kind of magnetization procured but momentary
relief. We were in hopes that, cleared of the redundancy of
blood, she would be cured ; such, however, was not the case.
M. Blesson, a friend of mine, and a magnetizer, one of the best-
hearted men on earth, perceiving my inability to perform a
cure, proposed trying himself. I accepted his offer with joy
and confidence, thinking that it was a beneficent spirit which,
having pity on us, animated M. Blesson, and would remove all our
inquietude. Under any other circumstance I should never have
allowed any one, however well-intentioned, to operate on Adele,
but at this moment it would have been egotism ; she suffered
too much, and my impotence commanded me to attempt all.
This gentleman did all that it is humanly possible to do under
like circumstances, and obtained no better result than myself.
On the 19th of February she took it into her head to snuff up
po.wdered camphor in great quantities ; this so irritated her that
she found fault with my purchasing a pair of under-stockings,
which I had procured her for that very morning, in the idea
that they would keep up a gentle heat in her feet and disengage
her head from the blood or fluid which might thus cause her
suffering. At any other time Adele would have thanked me
fur such attention, being as she was, of a just, upright, and
grateful disposition. It was otherwise : she tried to pick a quar-
rel with mo. I did my best to persuade her by calm and logi-
cal reasonings, but this brought on in her an alarming fit of mad-
ness. Her face became injected with a dark blood; she took
up a table and dashed it aside, opened the window, and was
about precipitating herself from a fifth story, when, as quick as
she, and endued with a strength I never before knew, I seized
her round the waist, pressed her against me with violence, and
breathed coldly on her forehead, with such conviction, such
power, that her teeth clacked, her whole body bent backward,
and she uttered shrieks of pain, as if I were breaking her bones.
(Adele is a very stout, strong woman.) She begged me to
cease this powerful breathing, which I can not too highly rec-
ommend to magnetizers, as having succeeded with me in many
circumstances wherein all medical and human means appeared
impotent. Could man produce, by other emanations of the
body, what he is capable of producing, through breath, he would
fancy himself a God. His error would be a very pardonable
one ; for it is necessary to have done what I have many a time
done to appreciate so magical a power. When her head ap-
peared to me cool, and her mind calm, we advised her to go to
bed, which she did without any resistance. The blood flew up
to her head, and an hour's delirium was the consequence. I
magnetized ker to bring back the blood to the extremities.
Exhausted as I was, obtaining no result, I threw myself on a
seat, my heart broken with grief and fear, the tears in my eyes.

I entered the state I Lave already once known, and the residt
of which I mentioned in my " Secrets,*' under the article, " Can
Cures be performed through Prayer ?" I prayed the Lord to
extend his infinite goodness even to me, to restore to reason this
unfortunate creature, who, I believed, had lost it for ever. I
called to my aid the good Emmanuel Swedenborg, who, in so
many circumstances, shielded us with his powerful protection,
and enlightened us with his divine light. 1 remained at prayer
for some time ; half an hour had scarcely elapsed when we saw
Adele kneeling in her bed, turning toward the right, and appa-
rently speaking to some one. I asked her who was there. " It
is M. Swedenbirg," replied she; "he is good, he is just, all-
powerful, humane; he magnetizes me, and wishes me but good."
I thought that she was still in her delirium. I attached no im-
portance to this scene, which however greatly affected us ; she
lay down again, after an instant, and appeared pretty calm. I
then proposed replacing her handkerchief on her head to keep
away the cold, which was so inimical to her pain. She said to
me : " My pain ! M. Swedenborg has taken it away. I shall
have it no more ; he has thoroughly assured me of that." I
perceived that she was asleep. I said to her : *' Who put you
in this state V " M. Swedenborg. You may wake me ; I am
well." I opened her eyes. She was in her ordinary state, very
much astonished at finding herself in bed, and having no recol-
lection of what had passed. She was calm all night. The next
morning she had no pain ; the external sensibility, which had
not left her for a minute since the invasion of the malady, as well
as a i'ew small ulcers and large swellings gorged with blood,
which she had on her gums, all had disappeared. She could
eat at her ease, which she had been unable to do since the com-
mencement of the attack, especially of warm dishes, which re-
doubled her pain. I was disposed to believe in a miracle — if
there be any miracles in nature — at any rate, in a superior ac-
tion. On the 21st, I threw her into a sleep fcfr the preceding
apparitions, and asked her what we were to think of her pain.
She answered : " We ought to thank God, who, alive to your
prayer, favorably heard it. Our protector, M. Swedenborg,
magnetized me, and removed my pain ; he sent me to sleep, and
assured me that I should feel it no more."

I leave every one to think of this cure as he deems fit, I
prayed mentally ; Adele w^as in a delirium, and certainly did
not hear me. Half-an-hour after, at the moment I least
thought of it, so invaded v^^as I by a thousand confused thoughts,
M. Svvedenborg took possession of her, agreeably to my wishes,
and performed in a few minutes, what, in three weeks, the
magnetism of two persons — somnambulism and medicaments
— had been unable to effect. He restored I'eason, health, and
peace, to a heart that was bereft of them !

Note. — Adele has never since experienced a similar attack.
Thrice thanks, Lord ! thanks, good Swedenborg.

115. The 6th March, the abbe A asked of me a medi-
cal consultation for a person at a distance, in whom he interests
himself. The consultation over, this gentleman desired to
put the following questions to Addle : " Which is the state of
mind or thought most agreeable to God ?" " That of having
a holy confidence in him, and an ardent love for our neighbor."
— " Are all religions agreeable to God V* " Yes, when they
are founded on these two principles." — " But the practices of
these religions, are they approved by him ?" " Yes, when
they aim at the object I have just defined." — " Still, human
reason is less repugnant to accepting the offerings or sacrifices
made to God in certain mild religions than in others which
seem ridiculous or savage." " There are no ridiculous or
savage practices in the eyes of God, the disciples of such re-
ligions believe they make themselves agreeable to him by offer-
ing him such a thing, or praying to him in such a manner. It
is the love with which they are penetrated for God that ani-
mates them, and God accepts with the same impartiality what-
soever is offered him with a view of being agreeable to him !"
— " There existed, and there still exist, nations that offer up
human victims tt) God in theii' sacrifices; is that agreeable to
God V " Yes, for these men offer up to him their dearest
possessions in the persons of their children, brethren, and
friends ; they give him a proof of a superior love which
God can not reject, especially when these men are convinced
of the value of their offering, and make it not with indif-
ference." — " In that case, in what does evil consist ?" " In
doino- it wittintjly." — " Deio^n to be more clear?" "The
rational being who coolly resolves on an action which he knows
to be bad in itself, and the results of which he has the convic-
tion must create trouble, and are condemned by morality, such
a one does evil, since he calculates it, appreciates it, and exe-
cutes it for pleasure's sake." — " What punishment does God
reserve for him 1" " God consigns him after his material death
to a place apart, where his thoughts are gradually purified, and
make room for thoughts of love toward his neighbor; thoughts
he has never known." — " Why has he not known them ]" *' Be-
cause he has had no confidence in God, who is the principal
basis of all happiness." — " What is the effect of this confi-
dence 1" " That of receiving in one's heart a ray of the divine
light, and driving from it darkness." — " What do you under-
stand by light and darkness 1" *' Good and evil thoughts." —
** How unravel these thoughts ?" " This divine ray thoroughly
unravels them ; it gives birth to all the good thoughts that seek
its influence, and drives away the evil ones that dread it." —
" And in what way ]" *' In this way : the heart of man is
more and more purified, stripped of the evil thoughts that
oppressed it, and becomes acquainted with the greatest happi-
piness desirable — the love of God and the love of all!"
M. A says that Adele is in accord with the case of con-
science we admit in theology ; evil exists only in the knowledge
we have of doing it. Reflect on this somnambulic morality, ye
learned of the age ! study it, and tell me if ever anything
grander, more reasonable, and more admissible, ever emanated
from your thoughts ?

116. M. Duteil, a member of the Magnetological Society of
Paris, and a subscriber to the " Secrets," desires like the
foregoing persons to judge by himself of the precious clair-
voyance of Adele ; he solicits the apparition of Madame Du-
teil, his wife, by her maiden name, without apprizing us that it
was his wife. Adele sees a young lady, who may be from
about eighteen to twenty years of age (she was twenty-eight),
whose hair is of a deep flaxen, eyes of a dark hhie, forehead
pretty open, smooth and handsome, nose rather pointed, slight
rosy colored cheeks, ordinary mouth, thin lips, round chin,
hanging down a little, and forming the hollow under the lower
lip; doleful air; she is not stout, her hand is long and thin.
She must have been of a very mild disposition and possessed
of a good heart. She suffered in the chest and from violent
palpitations of the heart. Her speech is gentle. " M. Duteil
asks whether she was married V She replies to Adele : " Yes,"
adding, " you know my husband well enough, and so does the
person who tells you to ask the question." Adele says : " He
may, but I don't." M. Duteil asks whether she had any chil-
dren ] She answers that she left behind her a little girl.
" Has she been long dead ?" " Yes," replies she (she has
been dead six years). Adele again asks her the name of her
husband. She repeats : " You know him well enough and so
does the person present." M. Duteil then informs us that he
knows this lady's husband well, inasmuch as it is he himself;
this removes the inquietude in which Adele appears to be in
trying to find out who this man can be, and proves to M.
Duteil as to all those who believe in the communication of
thoughts, that if such were the case Adele would have seen
immediately who this lady's husband was.

Adele adds that she perceives near Madame Duteil an aged
woman, sixty years old at least, with gray hair, face wrinkled
all over; she must have been very corpulent ; she seems to
her rather shorter than Madame Duteil, whom this woman
says that she received in heaven in her capacity as grand-
mother by the mother's side. She has a very cheerful and
pleasant look, and wears spectacles ; this seems rather droll to
Adele, inasmuch as it is the first person she has seen wearing
them. This apparition uncalled for, so much the more aston-
ishes M. Duteil as he declares he never knew or saw this
woman ; it was not without some trouble that he was able to
gather the following particulars : —

" I, the undei'signed, certify that the grandmother whom I
never saw, and of whom I could not have been thinking, as
she died a very long time ago, at the age of seventy, constantly
wore spectacles, and was, in fact, of a very cheerful disposi-
tion ; this I have learned from her only grandson.

117. The prince of Kourakine, secretary to the Russian
embassador at Paris, having read the " Secrets," presented
himself at my house with the baron Dupotet, M. Hebert de
Garnay, and a fourth person, to ask me for an apparition-sit-
ting. I sent Adele to sleep, and told her to ask for the princess
K , the sister-in-law of this gentleman. Adele replied :
*' I see a tall dark young lady, about 28 years of age (she was
22), with dark hazel eyes, rather small than large, pale com-
plexion, fine forehead, nose rather thick at the top, but pretty
well formed, upper lip thick, eyebrows pretty thick and
arched ; a supine carriage, speech mild, air calm and resigned.
This lady sufteied much from the heart and the left side of her
bosom. I perceive that that side is quite black ; she suffered
also in the lower part of the body, in the bladder, and very
much in the head. She was not much of a talker. I see be-
side her a little boy of a fair complexion, about five years of
age ; she was surely fond of children."

This gentleman acknowledged the truth of these details,
apart the color of the complexion, which in her latter days was
of a violet color. He does not know this child, and prefers
addressing metaphysical questions to his sister-in-law, through
Adele, to obtaining any fresh particulars as to her dress. She
gives him very satisfactory answers, among others she tells
him that she has already appeared to her sister (the wife of this
gentleman) in dreams ; that is quite true. She speaks with
difficulty, v/ith constraint, as she did on earth ; this arose from
her sickly condition which caused her much suffering. I did
not get this sitting signed by the prince as he was to return ;
but the events that suddenly took place in France forced his
departure ; the testimony of the baron Dupotet and M. Hebert
de Garnay would guaranty, if necessary, the truth of the
above particulars.

M. Dupotet desires in his turn to summon one of his old
friends, Dr. Dubois, who had been dead about fifteen months.

Adele says : " I see a man, whose hair is quite gray, and
very scanty in front ; he has an open forehead, prominent near
the temples, thus making his head as if square. He may be
about sixty. He has a couple of wrinkles on each side of his
cheeks, a fold under his chin, making it appear double ; neck
very short — he is a short thick-set man; eyes small, big nose,
mouth rather large, chin flat, hands thin and small. He does
not appear to be quite so tall as M. Dupotet : if he is not
stouter, he is broader shouldered. He wears a brown riding-
coat, with pockets at the side. I see him draw out of one a
snuff-box, and take a pinch. He has quite a droll gait; he
did not stand firm on his legs, he must have suffered from
weakness in them. His trowsers are rather short. Ah ! he
did not clean his shoes, for they are covered with mud. Alto-
gether, his dress is not a rich one. He had an asthma, for he
breathes with difficulty. I see also that he has a swelling in the
lower part of his body ; he wears something that presses on it.
I told him that it was M. Dupotet who asked for him. He
talks to me of magnetism with incredible volubility ; he speaks
of everything at once, mingling all together; I don't under-
stand a word of what he says ; he speaks so fast that he even
sputters."

M. Dupotet begs Adele to ask him why he has not appeared
to him as he had promised. He answers : " Give me time to
consider where I am ; I have but just arrived; I am studying
whatsoever I see. I will give you an account of all when I
appear to you." — " What day did you promise me you would
do so?" "One Wednesday." Adele adds: "This man must
have been forgetful ; I am certain that he was very absent in
mind." — M. Dupotet again asks : " When will you appear to
me?" *'l can not fix the time, I will endeavor to do so within
six weeks." — " Ask him if he liked the Jesuits." At this name
he takes such a leap in the air, extending his arms, and exclaim-
ing, " The Jesuits !" that A dele quickly moves away, and
remains so alarmed that she no longer dares speak to him. M.
Dupotet declares that all these details are so very exact that he
can not retrench from them a syllable. " This man," said he,
" was of an inexhaustible conversation, mingling all the sciences,
of which he was a great amateur, and so volable of speech that
he actually sputtered, as your clairvoyante says. He was very
careless of his person, and was so absent in mind that he some-
times forgot to take his meals. AVhenever any one spoke to
him about the Jesuits he would jump in the manner Adele has
described. He was always very dirty ; it is not surprising that
the clairvoyante should see him in shoes covered with mud."
He had, indeed, promised M. Dupotet that he would appear to
him on a Wednesday or Saturday. M. Dupotet acknowledged
the exactitude of this apparition in No. 75 of the "Journal du
Maofnelisme."

118. Madame D , possessing, like every one else, her
share of incredulity, wishing to trust to her ow^n judgment, in
preference to that of her husband (professionally versed in such
matters), desires in her turn an apparition. She is accompanied
by M. IT ; and begs Adele to ask for M. B , Jacques.

Adele says : " I see a man, about thirty-six years of age, of
middling stature ; black hair, rather long, coming down to the
bottom of the ear, but not as is worn in the present day ; com-
plexion pale, face thin ; hazel eyes, large and hollow, but of a
mild expression, nose rather long and sharp, air sad and down-
cast." Madame D interrupts Adele, to inquire the malady
of which this man died. The latter I'eplies : " I don't perceive
any grave malady in him — I see only indisposition; but, good
gracious! this man has been killed! by a firearm — a pistol.
He has blown out his brains ! Oh, the wretch ! I can under-
stand his sorrowfulness. I told you so, those who commit
suicide enter not forthwith — they wander around the earth!"
— "What, then, is their suffering 1" " That of being unable
to enjoy light as the rest." — " When does he hope to enjoy it ?"
" When the time that he should have accomplished on earth is
terminated." — " That is to say that he will thus wander to the
age of sixty, were he to have lived to that age materially 1"

*' Yes." — Madame D inquires whether this gentleman
knows her. "Yes; she is related to him by marriage." —
" This gentleman only knew madame by her maiden name ; he
could, perhaps, tell you the degrees of this relationship V *' I
asked him whether madame was his cousin. He replied : * She
is more than that to me ! more than that !' From this excla-
mation, one would say that madame is his mother, or as much
as a mother — at any rate, he seems to be as attached to her as
if such were the case." — " Tell him she has married the baron
D : and ask him if she has acted agreeably to his wishes !"
"Oh, my poor wife !" exclamed he; " may you be happy — it
is the sole wish of my heart." Adele turns toward Madame
D , and says to her, with an air of astonishment, " You
were, then, the wife of this gentleman !" The lady replies in
the affirmative — Adele continues : "He says that he applauds
this union ; but, at the same time, he seems pained at it, for he
was very fond of madame. This man, without being positively
wretched, is not happy : his ideas have suffered — they are still
asfitated, and under the influence of those that drove him to
suicide."

When Adele asked for this gentleman, there first appeared a
person about sixty years of age — a tall, strong, handsome man,
decorated with orders, &c. Madame D , not recognising
in this personage her husband, pays no attention to him, and
has no recollection of his being, or having been, as he terms
himself, a friend of her husband's. Toward the close of the
sitting I put a few questions to him, seeing that he did not for
a moment, quit M. B . He answers me that he appeared
first, because M. B , his intimate friend, who was asked
for, had no mind to appear; that he dragged him along — must
we say, by force ; that we are indebted to his entreaties for M.
B 's appearance. This gentleman says that he never quits
his friend, whose mental condition gives him much pain.
Madame D acknowledges all the details of the appa-
rition of her husband as quite exact, and is confirmed in the be-
lief that it was Impossible to read in her thought, seeing that
Adele would have forthwith seen and told her that she was the
wife of this- gentleman — a revelation, for which we were indebt-
ed as we have seen, to a question foreign to this communication.
Madame D is also further convinced by the double appa-
rition, which she had not asked for, and the personage of
which is unknown to her, and, consequently, not in her thoughts.

119. M. Hebert (de Garnay) editor of the "Journal du Mag-
netisme," more inclined to believe in the communication of
thoughts than in the reality of the apparition, asks for that of
M. J. Hebert, his uncle, whom he says he never saw. Adele
perceives a man about the same size as M. Hebert, but stronger,
with auburn hair, beginning to turn gray ; he is round shoul-
dered. Here M. Hebert interrupts Adele, saying that he can
not appreciate such description, and desires, in order to be con-
vinced, but one thing — let her tell him of what kind of malady
he died. Adele replies : " His complaint lay in the head ; this
man was insane. Ah ! how disordered are his ideas. I see
that he died mad, but I could not affirm that madness was the
cause of his death ; I rather believe it was the treatment he
underwent." M. Hebert resumes, " My uncle became blind in
his insanity ; is this accident to be attributed to his sad con-
diiion?" "I do, in fact, perceive that his eyes are shut, and
this proves to me that he could not see; but they were not
completely closed. I see them half open. I can not tell
whether this arose from his insane condition ; I believe it is an
effect of it, a congestion of blood. Ah ! how droll is a mad-
man's head.

M. Hebert asks what could have been the cause of his in-
sanity. Adele replies, " I perceive that an idea of interest is
predominant." — ^" Is it a commercial interest V ** No, not a
commercial interest, but a private one." M. Hebert says that
this man became insane at the age of eighteen or twenty, and
died at upward of fifty, having been neither rich nor in trade.
We think that if Adele's judgment is correct, he must have
been in love with some young person richer than himself, and
wished to be wealthy enough to wed her. With madmen the
objects of their insanity do not always correspond with their
position in the world.

To the name of Hebert there first appeared a young man
from twenty to twenty-four years of age. I ask Adele who this
young man could be whom M. Hebert had forthwith dismissed
as not being the person he asked for. Adele replies, " It was
no doubt the same gentleman who wished to appear to me as
he was before being insane. M. Hebert having desired to
know of what he died, he, perhaps, reappeared in the wretched
state in which he ended his days. This is merely a supposition
of mine," repeats Adele.

Next day I requested M. Hebert to sign his name to this
sitting, and this he did with a very good grace. But, would it
be believed that this gentleman, who ought to have been con-
vinced by the revelation of the insanity alone, which for any
other would not have been sufficient, seeing that it could be
read in the thought, took advantage of this circumstance to give
utterance to these absurd remarks : " The somnambulist has
failed ; she reads in the thought. I was aware that my uncle
died mad, it was not difficult for her to read this in my
thought." I reply to M. Hebert : " If she saw this particularity
in your thought, she has not, therefore, failed ; if she has failed,
she does not, therefore, see in the thought. To be consistent
and impartial, you ought not to have stopped her in the midst
of the particulars she gave you of the person, whom, as you
say, you had never seen. A reason the more to be convinced
that you had not this image in your own thought. But no, you
wish this system to prevail, and you hasten to put a question
that deviates from the true one ; you are answered right, and
then you exclaim that you were aware of this answer. Why
put the question t If you were answered wrong, you would
cry out still louder.

120. Hitherto I have omitted no error of my clairvoyante
nor any of her truths. I have said in my preface of the " Se-
crets" that I should deem myself the most contemptible man
on the face of the earth if I speculated in falsehoods. Because
penetrated with this truth, I make mention of the slightest de-
tails concerning these apparitions, of which I could give a sum-
mary without entering into these minute particulars for which
the reader may blame me, but which he will not despise at the
bottom of his heart. Since I have just cited an inconsistent
contradiction, I ought to follow it up with a ridiculous person-
age who acknowledges the thing he denies. This type of a
man will form a diversion by its eccentricity, to the types hith-
erto known. The abbe A , whose curious sittings and
frank conversion we have here, desired to have his conviction
shared in by a protestant minister, named Rostan. The latter
had two sittings, and was convinced at the last one, of which I
shall make mention after this, seeing that at the first one there
was an involuntary error on his part in asking for the deceased.
This gentleman signed the testimonial of this sitting with pleas-
ure, because he declared himself satisfied ; he made known
his conviction to one of his colleagues who is the person we
are about to converse with, and whose incredulity and ambigu-
ous answers will be appreciated.

He asks for M. Francisco Solano Constantio. Adele says
that she perceives a person from fifty to fifty-six years of age
(true), a fine corpulent man — that is to say — very broad across
the shoulders and chest (not very so), smaller than Alphonse
(true), dark brown hair (it was black), half gray (true), high,
open forehead (true), sensitive sight, what is termed v/eak sight
(true), middling size eyes of a dark blue (true, but they were
large), eyebrows turning gray (possible), nose broad at the top
(I know not), I see a scar on his right cheek (I know not),
countenance meditative and agreeable (true), rather cheerful
than austere (true), he has a sweet smile (true) ; he has still all
his front teeth (true) ; he has suffered from oppressions (true) ;
he had an affection of the heart causing violent palpitations.
He was weak on his legs and forced to sit, as if subject to fits
of fainting (I know not), I presume that he had the gout in his
right leg (I know not), I see no mortal malady in this man,
only his ideas seem to me disordered, wild (he died of apo-
plexy). He often felt a great heat in the lower part of bis
body, and this often disturbed the whole system (1 know not).
He had gray whiskers (true) ; wore a riding-coat, white cravat,
his shirt-collar turned down (I know not).

'* Do you recognise in the portrait just showm you that of the
man you asked for?" "No." — "For what reason?" "Be-
cause he was exceedingly stout, and his particularity has not
been spoken of as very remarkable." — " When the clairvoyante
told you at the commencement that he was a fine corpulent
man, you replied : * Not very so ;' this scarcely accords with
what you nov\^ observe to me. Did you know this man well,
and did you see him at the time of his death V " I knew him
very well ; I even dined with him a few days before his death."
— " How is it that knowing him so well, you can not say whether
he was dressed in the manner described to you ? In this appa-
rition are found six-and-twenty particulars, fifteen of which
you acknowledge as true ; to six of them you answer, * 1 knov/
not ;' to one — ' It is possible.' That which you acknowledged as
possible, and the ten that you are not aware of, may very well
correspond with the fifteen you confess to, thus not one could
be rejected. You are not convinced; we will ask for another
apparition, but first swear to me that the person you are
about to ask for is really dead, and that your intention is not to
gainsay or influence the clairvoyante in order to make her err ?"
" I swear it." — " What is the name of the person you demand ?"
" Robert Fitter."

Adele says : " I see a person older than the first one (true) ;
he is tall and rather thin than stout (true); hair more of a
flaxen than auburn (true) ; face very thin (true) ; forehead
rather prominent than flat (true) ; nose long (true) ; nostrils
open (tolerably so) ; eyes hollow (on account of his thinness) :
they do not seem large (they were large, not extraordinarily
so) ; cheek bones prominent (on account of liis thinness) ; mouth
rather larg-e than small (true) ; chin h)ng (rrue) ; ihe neck ap-
pears long (true) ; a frill to his shirt (sometimes) ; dark colored
pantaloons (true) ; he did not wear boots, he wf)re shoes (true) ;
he had a diy cough (pretty often) ; he suffered in the chest and
stomach (when dying, yes). The seat of his complaint was
there."

" Well, monsieur, are you convinced ?" " No ; she did not
say that he had an aquiline nose." — " Recollect, monsieur, that
she could not find the expression, and the better to make you
comprehend how she saw it, she dwelt upon the end of his
nose, thus making it bent in the middle, and consequently
aquiline." " I did not perceive that." — " M. Rostan, your
friend, M. Blouet, and myself, all three of us perceived it
and rightly understood it." " Possibly ; but I can not believe
that the person who came was the one I asked for." — " Will
you read over again the written description, and point out in
your handwriting where you find there is any error." '* Yes."
— This gentleman returns to me the paper we have just read,
signed with his own hand, with the words as I have given them
between parentheses.

" If I let you speak with this pei'son and he answers your
questions, will you believe ]" " Yes." — " Ask what you please V
"Was Jesus Christ G-od, as to his human part as in his spir-
itual part V " He was God in his divine part, and not God
in his human part." — " In heaven is he looked upon and recog-
nised as God 1" '* Yes," — "Was he conceived by the Holy
Ghost ?" *' Yes." — This gentleman declares himself satisfied
with these three answers ; but A dele seems not to be in the
least so, she says to me: *'I can but reproduce the truth ;
these things were answered me, T was bound to tell you them ;
as they accord not with what M. Mallet once told me, aid me
in asking for him that I may see what he will oppose to the
minister who has just made me these answers." This observa-
tion of Adele sharpens our curiosity ; we are eager to obtain
an answer. M. Mallet comes and throws light on the question
by these words : " Monsieur is a protestant minister and be-
longs to a society of similar persuasions. It is the same with
all spiritual societies, they continue holding the same beliefs as
they had on earth." "But you, a catholic minister, what do
you think of these things, your religion admits them likewise 1"
" I am not of the same opinion in this respect." I observe
to Adele that in such case it is very difficult for us to obtain
the truth, and advise her to search for it by herself. She was
very much fatigued, and unable to give us the solution.

M. Rostan asks M. de Bosneville what he thinks of an image
that makes such answers. The latter says: "They would
induce me to believe in the real presence of our pastor ; but I
am not convinced of it." " Where do you think that she
could get the exact description she has given you, and the
words you have heard ]" " She may supj^ose all this." I ask
this gentleman in my turn whether he could by the same sup-
positions reproduce to me the same amount of particulars as
he has just heard, with respect to my mother, who is dead.
He replies : "I could not; but that does not prove to me that
this gentleman was present here." I reply to him in my turn,
" God bless you." This gentleman finds himself in the sorry
position of denying what he affirms, as I have already said. It
is a contradiction that I should never have thought it possible
to meet with in an educated man. What must he think of a
testimonial which he sig^ns as exact, and denies as true 1

121. On the evening of the foregoing sitting M. Lemoine, a
magnetizer and an excellent somnambulist, came to beg of me
to magnetize a lady, his somnambulist, in order to see if I could
obtain more decided effects than himself. Scarcely had I
begun, than Adele, having absorbed, no doubt, all the fluid that
I gave this lady, fell asleep and into a state of catalepsy. I
quitted the lacly to attend to Adele, whose arms only were
paralyzed. I asked her the cause of this ; she replied that,
having been magnetized in the afternoon, she was not yet freed
from the magnetic currents passing from her to me ; that these
same currents had invaded her, bringing in their train the ner-
vous irritability of the lady I was magnetizing, and this had
occasioned the catalepsy. I disengaged her, and. left off mag-
netizing the lady, seeing that a third person was beginning to
feel my influence, M. Lemoine himself, who could scarcely
keep himself awake. We altered, the arrangements of this
soiree, foreseeing that, otherwise, I should have three clair-
voyantes at once to guide and question. This soiree was solely
at Adele's expense, and we had no reason to repent of it; she
gave a medical consultation to the lady, whom she saw for the
first time ; this proved (from the lady's own affirmations) to all
the persons present that she was as powerful a clairvoyante
for diseases as for spiritual perceptions. I addressed to her the
following questions, which the abbe A , present at this
sitting, begged me to put to her : " Was Jesus Christ God, in
his humanity as in his spirituality ?" " He was God only in
his spirituality ?" — " Had he two bodies, one material and the
other spiritual ]" " Yes, and for this reason he died mate-
rially and lives spiritually." — " Is he looked upon in heaven as
God ?" " Yes, by those who believe in his divinity." — " He
was not, therefore, positively God ?" "He was the son of
God, like us all." — " Was he begotten by the Holy Ghost '?"
" Yes, it is the Spirit that begets all." — " Was he begotten like
all other men, through the medium of a man ?" " No, herein
it is that he is superior to them." — " You fall again into the
same error as just now, when the protestant minister put to
you the same questions." " Just then I could not explain what
T know now, that I am in a superior state. What raised
Christ above other men is this- — that, by the way in which he
was made flesh, spiritually and not materially, he had a recol-
lection of his former spiritual existence, the one we have all
had, and which we do not remember, from the force of our
materialization. Not having undergone, like us, the laws of
matter, he was not suhjected to them, and remembered on earth
what we shall remember in heaven. He had, therefore, this
degree of spirituality more than we ; hence his saying — ' I am
not the Son of man, my Father is in heaven ; and not upon
earth.' If all men were aware of their primitive existence
they would not call themselves fathers, they would all know
that they have but one Father, who is the only true God, and
they would term themselves brethren as Christ termed them.
If the pov\''er of Christ was great, consider how great was his
suffering — he who came down from heaven upon earth, where
he was to fulfil a mission so painful — he who had constantly
before his mind the joys, the felicity of heaven, and the trou-
bles and anguish of the earth. If you can understand his
position, you will conceive his having the right to speak as he
did ; but you will also know that he never said that he was
God, he was but his son, his envoy on earth, and he was con-
tinually saying to men : " Pray to my Father, who is in heaven."
" What, then, is the mission he had to fulfil ?" *•' To instruct
men in the existence of God, in which at that period there was
little belief" — " If he had not appeared on earth, could men
have been saved in the sense understood by the church ?"
" Those who lived before his appearance on earth are equally
saved with those who since then have not heard and never will
hear of him." — " The men who preceded Christ, were, accord-
ing to Scripture, in direct communication with God — as Abra-
ham, Moses, &c." " Those who put Christ to death were not
in communication with him, since they disowned the word of
God, which Christ came to re-establish among them." — " All
men who exist and have appeared on earth, do they descend
from one man alone named Adam, and one woman only named
Eve ?" •' This first man and this first woman are but a fiction,
an allegory. The world has always existed, and will ever
exist, just as it is, or nearly so." — "Did the Virgin Mary
really remain a virgin after bringing forth Christ V " Yes,
since he was begotten without the aid of man. She is not in
the same condition as other women." — " Had Christ any broth-
ers throuoh the medium of the same woman ]" " He did not
want for brothers, since we are all his brothers; but never
7nan knew ihe virsfin. She had too higrh an idea of her mis-
sion, after bringing into the world such a son of God, to give
herself away to a man." — " Are the Jews guilty of the sin of
Christ's death"?" "Materially, in our eyes, yes; and, spir-
itually, he was doomed to be crucified. All passed in his mis-
sion just as had been decided upon. They did but execute
what they were destined to execute." — " Is St. Peter the rep-
resentative of Christ on earth "? Has the power to bind and
unbind men?" "One being only has the power to punish or
absolve — that is, God." — " Does he who observes the ten com-
mandments of God stand in need of submitting to others ?"
" He who observes to the letter the ten commandments of God
can dispense with the rest." — " Jesus Christ, however, con-
ferred on the church the right of making commandments ?"
"Jesus Christ taught the sublimest of morals ; and gave coun-
sels, which, if followed, would not have given birth to all the
calamities of which we have been, and still are, victims; but
men have perverted his morals, his precepts, his actions." —
" He did not teach the communion as it is practised ; baptism,
as it is administered, and all the other ceremonies, which the
church practises in his name V '* There is very little of him
in what the church teaches at the present time." — " The gos-
pel, however, ought to be sacred in this respect V " The
gospel is like the rest — whatsoever the hand of man touches
it spoils." — "Was the birth of Christ predicted, or not, by
prophets V " No." — " The prayers which are addressed to
Christ as God, or mediator between God and man, are they
more agreeable to God than through any other medium 1"
" In the first place, it is better to address ourselves to God
than to his saints ; in the second place, whatsoever is addressed
to Christ in the name of God, reaches God, since whatsoever
is addressed to God, no matter where we be, is known to him,
himself being everywhere, and in all." — " God, then, has no
preference for any particular religion V " All religions, with-
out exception, are agreeable to him." — " Still this diversity of
creeds, which bi'ing in their train so many disorders and errors
ought not to exist under a God who should wish to make
known the truth ?" " Much rather should you say that some-
thing else ought not to exist. If man retrenched all that dis-
pleases him in the crealion, and all that he can not account for,
he would find very few useful things ; but God thinks other-
wise, and we can not be judges of his actions."

I beg to observe that I am not responsible for the repetition
of the questions that will be found in my work on this head.
It was M. A who put all those mentioned at this sitting ;
and it must be granted that Adele answers them quite logically.
The definition she gives us of the nature ot Christ and his prop-
erties is unexceptionable. Though matter has some diflficulty
in admitting it, it would account for the state we name the
ecstatico state in which he lived.

This sitting merits the attention of studious men. M. A
appreciates the powerful lucidity of Adele without accepting
all her definitions, and finds her very consistent in her answers.
I make the observation to this gentleman, that if it be impossi-
ble for history to prove, documents in hand, the period of the
appearance of Christ upon earth, he might very well have pre-
ceded the pretended prophets who announced his ajDpearance,
and would give ground for Adele's reply on this point. But it
remains for us to find out how a material being should be engen-
dered without the participation of another material being. To
enter upon the subject, we will observe, that if there was a first
material man he was born without the assistance of his species,
and still more miraculously than Christ, who was fecundated in
the bosom of a woman to imbibe there all the juices necessary
to form the material tissues. So, then, what God may have
once done, he could do again; what even he may not hitherto
have done he can do whenever he pleases ! We have seen in
the first volume, from the explanation given us by Binet of the
act of procreation, that when a New^ton, a Voltaire, a Napo-
leon, or any other superior genius, is to appear in the world,
God intrusts the care of his introduction into the organs of the
woman to angelic spirits, who strip the material seed (which
serves as an envelope to the spirit becoming incarnate) of all
the material particles that could disturb the ascension of ideas,
and the accomplishment of the great things which these spirits
are destined to promote. Is there not a certain affinity between
this definition and that of the incarnation of Christ, the latter
having a far superior mission to fulfil to that of Newton, Vol-
taire, or Napoleon ; being about to be the direct intermediate
between the word of God and the heart of men, between heaven
and earth, to live in a continual ecstasy, work miracles, which
matter approaches through magnetism, but which it can not
produce in all their force and splendor. It is, therefore, mat-
ter only that paralyzes us in this property which we find more
perfect in magnetic ecstasy, wherein cures, and the most mirac-
ulous things, are produced, because the soul is less dependent
on matter, a property which we find divine, through the aid of
prayer, wherein all men then are direct ministers of God. We,
therefore, naturally acknowledge : 1. That if we perform not
miracles, it is because matter is opposed to this. 2. That all
spirits being created from all eternity, with the same faculties,
the same number of thoughts, if they be not all equal in genius
on earth, the fault lies with matter. 3. That this inequality pre-
sents itself from the cradle. Therefore, the germ must have
been impaired in its course, or by long abode in the being from
which it shoots. It is more probable that its defect lies in
the germ, since Binet tells us that angelic spirits are destined
to purify it at the moment of its introduction. If it be thus,
wherefore should not God, desiring to form a man more perfect
than the rest, deposite direct in the bosom of a woman (of a very
pure material nature), a spirit, without having recourse to the
assistance of a second being, which, in such a circumstance,
performs pretty closely the functions of a machine, by deposit-
ing there an object which it has received elsewhere. The
woman performs a contrary office, she supplies this spirit with
the material dress. Had God dispensed with her assistance, he
would have transgressed the laws that rule nature. I see no
transgression in freeing the spirit from this law of cohabitation,
which serves, as we have seen, only to impair the germ in the
impure deposite wherein it is obliged to sojourn, without any
utility to itself. I see nothing more incredible in the birth of
Christ than in the creation of the first man ; and what I have
just said, proves the almost possibility of cabalistical, and even
catholic assertions ! Bat it is fur from my intention to conclude
that such is the case.

122. The pastor Rostan, of whom mention is made in the
preceding sitting, after the conversion of the abbe A , de-
sired to obtain in his turn an apparition. He asked for a per-
son unknown to him, whose name had been given him : but a
mistake had been made in handing over to him the name, hence
a person presented himself, whose description we took, but
whom we could not recognise ; such, at least, is the version of
this gentleman, and I do not imagine that he wished to impose
on me. I proposed to him a second sitting, seeing, above all,
that he clings to asking for a person wholly unknown to him,
so influenced had he been by the arguments of M. Hebert. He
then requested his maid-servant to give him the name of one of
her acquaintances, who had been dead some time ; he came
with this name, and asked for Jeannette Jex. Adele replied :
" I see a woman who is not tall ; she may be from thirty to
forty years of age ; if she is not hump-backed she must be bent
a good deal, for she has a very awkward deportment. I can't
make her turn round. Her hair is of a brown color, approach-
ing a red ; she has small gray eyes and a large nose. She is not
good-looking ; she has a long chin, a receding mouth, and thin
lips. Her dress is that of a countrywoman. I see her in a cap,
with two flat bands rounded over the ear. She must have suf-
fered from a determination of blood to the head, and she was
troubled with pains in the stomach. I see a swelling on the
lower part of her body, on the left side, and a sort of tumor
on her bosom. She was ill a long time."

M. Rostan presented the written description of his maid-ser-
vant, and returned it to me after adding thereto his signature
and the following observations: —

" This is true as regards the stature, age, dress, deportment,
malady, and the deformity. " J. J. Rostan."

This gentleman went and called upon M. H , accompa-
nied by M. A , to tell him that he was convinced, and could
not doubt the truth of this apparition. M. H replied : <' It
is not thus that I should pretend to make an experiment; your
maid-servant gave you the name of this v^oman ; it suffices her,
being in your service, for the clairvoyante to see in her thought."

M. A observed to him that the clairvoyante had never
seen this gentleman or his servant ; that she had had no cor-
respondence with any one ; that she had been unable to tell
him the name of his father, which he caused to be asked of
his deceased brother. This name, and many other things
which she answers not, are, however, in the thought. If a
name pronounced be sufficient to create a speaking, gesticu-
lating image, answering questions that have no material solu-
tion, representing maladies very often unknown to all, deformi-
ties that have been seen by none of the persons present, to
obtain counsels, find out hidden things, why then, in faith, you
present to me a much greater difficulty than that of admitting
that the soul can come to a clairvoyante, as we cause to appear
to them, every day, material places which are at very great dis-
tances. Then, tell me how you would go to work to believe.
I would give a name to a person, who should transmit it to
half a score more, from mouth to mouth, and the last one only
should ask for the apparition. What you therein propose is
the same thing. It is not because this name shall have passed
through half a score of mouths that the clairvoyante will lose
the trace of it ; and if the person who shall have given the
name recognises the apparition as true, you will say what you
say of all those who confess to you that they are convinced —
you will say that they are simpletons.

I should advise this gentleman to say at once, I believe not
in the existence of the soul ; 'tis sooner done. As a chemist, I
admit the life of aggregation, but I refuse its individuality, for
the reason that I can spread out or divide the elements into
myriads of parts, and collect them into one and the same essence.
I will ask chemistry, in my turn, whether, because it is easy
for me to collect in a bag millions of grains and separate them
individually- — to form figures and numbers, ad infinitum, with
their assistance — I can snatch from them, or deny them, their
life individuahzed in each of them? Whether, for instance,
because I should have the pretension to take from them a mul-
titude of different species and make them one compact mass,
from which I would draw a juice or different juices, and having
no affinity with the nature of the species which they were each
called upon to propagate — v/hether I am right in thinking that
the multitude of essences composing them, because I have
united them, will not separate hereafter, to return to their
primitive individuality, without mingling and losing in aught
their property, and one day again compose the same grain that
I have pounded 1 If you answer in the negative. Monsieur
Chemist, you will condemn yourself; for, if you compromise
the forms and essences in the vast laboratory of nature, I know
not how you will maintain the procreation of each species by
the laws of affinity and attraction — those two great, intelligent
creators, that know so fondly how to find and join each other
again, to separate and still rejoin for an eternity, without hav-
ing the power to annihilate themselves. You hear ! Ah !
savans, you wish to explain the possible by the impossible ;
you wish not to refuse a sort of intelligence to the flower, the
mineral, to gas, to ethers, and you would refuse it to man, or
at least, if you admit it, you do so only momentarily ; you anni-
hilate the intelligence we term " soul," to the profit of the mass,
though you know that the mass is but the assemblage of the
infinity of individualities. What ! I shall hear you maintain to
me that such a color, or shade of color, can not blend with a
different color, that it will come to decorate this petal of a
flower without ever being deceived — regenerate such form
without ever changing it. This flower and this form will
restore to space the particles of which they have been but an
aggregation. These particles can never be annihilated, accord-
ing to your physical notions, and can never reaggregate to
create other forms. Thus the violet will be ever such ; the
rose in like manner, in the same corner of the earth, in the
same pot ; the molecules and the aroma composing these flow-
ers will be individualized to eternity : that is to say, that the
violet will not be formed of the pai'ticles of the rose, because
each grain has its essences of attraction ; and nature, to millions
and millions of combinations, in no wise mixing them, will ever
restore to the attraction of the grain the particles belonging to
it. What! I shall see this with my eyes every year — all my
life ; and you would deprive my species of this individualized
immortality. What ! it shall not be possible for my soul to
communicate with its species, as this flower communicates with
the invisible colors which are soon to decorate it ! What !
this law of attraction, of universal individuality of all the par-
ticles of the creation, exists for all, excepting for me ! Come,
come, gentlemen-chemists ! you take phlegm for spirit, corrup-
tion for a mattress; leave, for a moment, your distillations and
your cohobations ; convey your eyes to heaven, with your hand
on your heart ; pray the great Distiller of life and light to en-
lighten you on this question ; meditate on the phenomena of
somnambulism — and you will no longer believe that you are
only mere clods without life and hope !

I still thank you for your kindness in conceding us such an
album of images ineffaceable and full of life. In our first vol-
ume, we ventured to propound that we must have within us a
sort of living panorama of all that we could have seen or
known in the course of our existence. We confined ourselves
to this, and did not think that you would be so well prepared
to admit a proposition which appears at first sight so incredible ;
you who refuse to admit the soul — a thing, however, very ad-
missible. No doubt it is because I expatiated less on the first
proposition than on the second one, that you return to it now.
Well ! I am more generous than you : I grant you that a clair-
voyante may see this impression of living images, or at least
appearing such; but I will ask you, in my turn, how it is pos-
sible to have in one's self the impression of images of things or
objects, one has never seen and heard of? You will say that
it is by a sympathetic thread that, from body to body, the clair-
voyante communicates to the object. In the sitting about to
follow, you will perceive that you are wrong ; for the person
appearing died in 1578. No being on earth could have known
him, consequently the sympathetic thread is destroyed. Since
you do not admit it, you concentrate it merely iu this material
existence. How will you account for such a person being
seen ? That is beyond your proposition. There are more
than ten persons forming the chain of 1848 back to 1578;
you may, if you please, assure yourselves of the description,
whether as regards the person or dress. As for me, I have no
need of these proofs. Had you read those which I present in
this second volume, you would not thus venture to compromise
your reputation as savans. You must be aware, however, that
I could not have known M. Swedenborg, Father Lauriot, and
many others mentioned in this work, who came unasked for,
and declared themselves either friends or relatives of the per-
sons appealing, and wholly unknown to those who asked for
the apparition. You perceive it; 'tis an infinite maze, that
requires to be studied, and I can assure you that I will tell you
much more about it in the aforementioned work. In this I
content myself with establishing facts which shall serve me as
materials for the other. Oh ! then you will see that we shall
be able to understand one another, especially by leaving to
Cesar the things that are Cesar's. Now, only, as a guide to
you, remember that the clairvoyante can spiritually see men,
places, and actions, passed ages ago, that are in no human liv-
ing memory ; that he can also see places and actions that will
happen but in the course of ages, and this is still less in the
memory of any one !

You have written, and all magnetizers have made these ex-
periments, and still make them every day. If these things
exist, be so kind to this soul, this image of the Divinity, as to
admit of its being one of these things, and you will believe in
its individuality as in that of all these things. It will not be
more difficult for the clairvoyante to perceive than the action
which it is to perform in a century or two. You understand,
the action is the effect, the soul the cause, in simple physics.
Good faith, chemists ; I know your sensitive part : you did not
write this hook.

123. M. Lemoine, the magnetizer, desires to enter into com-
mumcation (through the medium of Adele) with a spirit that
used to be engaged in astronomical pursuits. He begs of me
to ask for M. Antoine Mizaud, the author of several works treat-
ing on this science, and who died in 157S. Adele says that she
perceives a man about seventy-five years of age. His hair is
gray. He weai's a dark-brown great-coat coming down to his
legs, with black velvet cuffs to his sleeves ; large buttons ; while
breeches made of stuff* striped as dimity used to be ; white
ribbed stockings, sharp-pointed shoes with buckles ; good broad
countenance ; eyes hollow and small ; large nose, low forehead,
face wrinkled, though pretty full ; air cheerful, &c., &c. — " Aisk
him if he still pursues the study of astronomy and meteorology."
" It is his predominant passion." — " Can he give me any infor-
mation on this head V ** That depends." — " Does he believe
it possible to foresee and predict the changes of weather, their
influence on the earth and the harvests V " It may be : but on
earth he had not arrived at the degree of knowledge necessary
for such results." — " Could he answer a few questions M. Le-
raoine would wish to put to him on this subject 1" "He will
answer what God permits, because there are limits." — " Could
he tell whether there are any elementary spirits ?" " All the
elements are penetrated with spirits — are but a compound of
spirits." — "That is not what I desire to know; the cabalists
pretend that these elements are inhabited by spirits bearino-the
human form, which they name elementary spirits, and which
unite themselves to men according to the desire of the latter."
" This gentleman tells me that whatsoever exists materially,
exists S2:)iritually. Thus in heaven are found air, fire, earth,
and water, as here below ; the spirits disengaged from matter
that desire to inhabit the elements can do so according to their
aflTection. He knov/s no other spirits but these in the human
form. He does not busy himself with cabalism." — " You are
one of the oldest spirits inhabiting the spiritual world we have
hiiherto asked for; have you noticed this length of time, and
do you think there are any spirits that reappear on earth?"
This gentleman bursts into a laugh, and rejDlies that where one
is comfortable, there is no wish to change quarters ; that he
has had no time to grow weary, and that we come but once
upon earth. When in heaven we are there to eternity, &c., &c.

I beg those persons who maybe enabled to assure themselves
of the exactitude of the description given by Adele, to do so for
their own sake. This apparition, of itself, destroys the objec-
tion of communication of thoughts.

124. General De Wagner, a Prussian, and a learned magne-
tizer, desires the apparition of Marie-Helene Wagner, his wife,
and best somnambulist, whg died some years ago. Adele says
that she perceives a woman, from forty-six to fifty years of age,
not very tall, having auburn hair, dark-blue eyes (this gentle-
man says that they were light-blue) ; a very expressive and
lively look ; a fine, smooth forehead, like that of a woman of
thirty ; nose well formed, but rather large ; slight flush on her
cheeks, proceeding from her illness ; pale complexion, dimpled
chin, thin breast, but developed ; broad shoulders, small, well-
formed hands, beautiful nails. The state of her blood was the
chief cause of her illness ; she suffered from violent palpitations
of the heart (she had an aneurism) ; her stomach was also weak.
She must have experienced an uneasiness in the lower part of
the body ; a heaviness in the matiix, the ligaments of which
were relaxed on one side, and contracted on the other ; she
must have suffered from the stitch in her left side ; the blood
flew up to her throat and head ; she must have experienced
fainting-fits, syncopes. She was weak on her legs, for I see
her seated ; she also experienced a lassitude in the arms. She
was assuredly good, frank, and, above all, endued with great
fortitude ; more ready to pity others than herself"

M. Gilot L'Etang, a wealthy planter of the isle of Bourbon,
a magnetizer also, having accompanied his friend the general,
asks, in his turn, for Fran9oise G-rayelle. Adele says : " I see
a woman, older than the last one, with gray hair (it was white),
middling size (she passed as tall) ; she is thin, and has black
eyes, that look hollow, on account of the thinness of her face ;
rose pretty long, chin long, hands thin, back rather crooked.
She assuredly was subject to fits of passion, that were soon
over ; her movements are still lively. She suffered in her chest,
and had a dry cough ; she must have been very much oppressed
in her last moments ; she had great difficulty in digesting what
she took ; she suffered in the back — this pain reached up to her
neck ; she also experienced a pain in the right leg. She was a
very religious woman ; her being so tended to make her calmly
bear her sufferings. She was also a good woman, but not very
communicative out of her own circle of fi'iends. Her physiog-
nomy wears an air of marked dejectedness." — " Whence pro-
ceeds the pain of which you speak V* " From a fall." — That
is true ; she put her hip out of joint, and suffered much from
this accident. "Did she take snuff?" Adele immediately
takes a pinch of snuff offered her by this lady. The gentleman
says that this lady, who was his grandmother, merely inhaled,
the smell of snuff. — " What fruits was she, above all, fond of?"
" Peaches, strawberries, and the quince." — " That is very true.
What odor did she prefer breathing ?" " The jasmine." — " It
is true that she had one at the foot of her window, which she
tended carefully and with pleasure. But there was another
odor that she was fond of?" " The lady makes no answer." —
The gentleman says that it was that of the citron, which she
was constantly scraping in her illness. Adele exclaims, when
I put to her the question, " I did, indeed, see her with an orange
in her hand, and not a citron." The gentleman says, " Possi-
bly she prefers now the smell of the orange. Will you be so
kind as to ask her whether she has not any recommendation to
make her grandson?" "Let hira observe moderation in an
enterprise he is about to engage in, and abstain from obliging
a gentleman who solicits or will solicit him."

I forgot to mention, at the sitting of General Wagner, that
he begged his wife (an ex-somnainbulist, as we have seen) to
visit him, and acquaint him with a few remedies for his heaUh.
What she prescribed for him was precisely what he was then
taking, and what she had ah-eady pointed out to him when on
earih. Adele at this moment appeared much astonished, ex-
claiming, ''Here is a. droll fact. I see this woman, of ordinary
size, gradually entering her husband's body ! I lose sight of
her, find her again, and then lose her again. How can it be —
since she appears to me as big as he — that she can thus dis-
solve herself, shall I say, in his breast, and in still less too ? O
my Grod, how great art thou, and insignificant are we to com-
prehend such miracles !" We have no time to discuss here
these phenomena which theology remarkably well treated of in
former times, and the solutions which it has given us in this
respfect — solutions that have not been accepted, for want of
proofs : magnetism is destined to supply them, and to re\ivify
many beliefs which have passed for so many follies. We will
treat of this article in a work that will form a sequel to and the
complement of this. I will observe that, in the two foregoing
sittino-s, there is wherewith to puzzle the detractors of these
apparitions. Let them be read over again, meditated upon,
and the conclusion come to will be that the communication of
thoughts stands for naught in them, from the few errors which
ought not to exist in them, and which I have taken care to
mention with exactitude, in order to disburden my conscience
from all accusation of partiality, and prove to men that I seek
the truth with all the strength of my soul, and will combat error
with the like devotedness.

125. Colonel Ro2:er, havinsr read the " Secrets," and noticed
in them an article respecting the son of Louis XVJ., begs me
to ask for the monarch himself, who could give me better infor-
mation on this head than M. Mallet had done. Adele says that
she perceives a corpulent young man of handsome physiogno-
my ; but she makes the observation that, having seen his por-
trait, she can but give such a description as every one is ac-
quainted with, only she says that she sees him in a coat without
any decoration ; he wears a white cravat, and his hand appears
to lier small and well made. " Ask him if his son is still living
on earth ]" He replies, " Yes." — " Does he know where he
is?" "He does, but has no wish to say. He makes the ob-
servation, * With your republic, did you find him, you would
guillotine him!'" — "Observe to him that under our republic
no one is guillotined." " *0h !' says he, ' I have no wish to tell
you ; he has suffered enough as it is, poor child !' He weeps,"
says Adele ; the latter shares in his sensibility. — " How did he
escape from the Temple V " By the assistance of a man wholly
devoted to him, and who himself suffered a great deal." — " Who
was this man V "He won't name him; he is always in fear
of compromising." — " Will his son be one day called upon to
reign over France V " He answers, ' No ; there is a sufficient
number of pretenders without him.' " — " Can he tell us any
more about him V " No." — " Is he himself happy ?" " Yes."
— " Is he with his wife V " No ; he knows her too well now."
— " Did he suffer much in dying ?" " He did not suffer a sin-
gle instant ; he was no more, before the instrument struck
him !" — " Still, he displayed much courage ; he even wished to
speak ?" — " Yes ; Iflit he fainted away on the block, and felt
nothing." — " AYhat did he wish to say when he was forbidden
to speak V " He wished to make his confession to the people,
for he was a very good man ; he v/as by no means culpable —
he was the victim of intriguers ; he still weeps. I won't ques-
tion him any more. I perceive that I recall painful things to
him. 'T would be wrong in me to continue."

126. The viscount D'Orsay, president of the Magnetological
Society, an enlightened magnetizer, in no wise doubting the
future life of the soul, but desirous of knowing how far a clair-
voyante could communicate with it, begged me to give him an
apparition-sitting the lltli May, 1848.

He desires that Madame Marie Rose Blanche Boulenger
should be asked for. Adele says that she perceives a tall
v^oman about forty years of age (she was but thirty-five), with
auburn hair, fine forehead, fine black eyes with long lashes and
of a sweet expression, nose aquiline and well formed, cheeks
slightly colored with a rosy tint, mouth small, beautiful white
skin, very distinguished air, queenly port ; sweet look, affable
and severe in certain circumstances ; small, well-formed hand,
and beautiful nails. She must have suffered from the heart,
and also experienced a heaviness in the lower part of the body;
she was very courageous, and not sufficiently careful of her
health. I think she died of an ulcer in the womb.

M. D'Orsay puts the following questions : " Is she happy?"
" She is hajopy like all virtuous women." — " Does she think of
and take an interest in her children ]" " She was very fond of
her children whom she left behind her with regret, especially
her last child who was of a very tender age." — " Is she satisfied
with all of them V " Yes ; excepting one whom she is unwil-
ling to name ; she says that her son knows this gentleman very
well." — " Is she reunited to her husband'?" "That is to say,
her husband is reunited to her, because he died after her ; they
are together, because they were very fond of each other. This
lady's complaint must have been the cause of her sitting a good
deal, for I see her seated in an arm-chair t;overed with scarlet
velvet. I see beside her a little boy from four to five years of
age, with curly fiaxen hair ; she was very fond of children, she
tells me that this child died before her ; his name was Edward ;
you have seen him at times at her house, with his mother. On
the answer of M. D'Orsay that he can not recollect this child,
it is told him that he will do so. M. D'Orsay thus signs the
testimonial : — -

" I certify that the above details are perfectly correct, and
that I was greatly astonished, as well as delighted, to find once
more in this description all the reminiscences left me of my
mother who died thirty-three years ago.
" Viscount D'Orsay,
" Cite Veron, Montmartre.'*

At this sitting we see appear, before this lady, a child that
died more than thirty -three years ago, and this child even now
does not look above four or five years old. We have before
seen that children dying at this age continued growing — a law
to which, as some persons will say, this one appears not to
have been subjected, had we not a declaration of the same kind
telling us that children dying as such appear to each other as
full-grown men, and that the latter see them as children ouly
with respect to their affection, which is, to be fond of children.
The law that prevails over all the laws of the spii'itual world
seems to be this — whatsoever surrounds us is conformable to
our affection. Thus, if this lady be pleased to see this child, a
time that corresponds with a thousand years of our earth, she
will ever see it at such age, inasmuch as a more advanced age,
requiring a more fully-developed form, will suit her less. It
will be asked if, in fact, the child is full grown or not 1 I will
answer : It is of the form and size of all spirits ; but the spirit
that sees this lady enjoys only faculdes and appearances of
properties which the child had at this age — projDerties that may
be detached from him, ad infinitum, and may satisfy a whole
multitude, without aught being taken away from his personal
individuality, as the flame of a taper is in naught diminished
because it has communicated a hundred or a thousand particles
of its flame to a hundred or a thousand other tapers.

We need but meditate to come to a conclusion ; in combat-
ing we come to no conclusion !

127. M. Blesson, a zealous propagator of beliefs in spiritual-
ism, as a pure and beneficent magnetizer, brought to my house
one of his friends, to whom he had praised up Adele's lucidity
for perceiving and conversing with the folks of the other life
(as is vulgarly said). This gentleman asked for his mother.
Adele sees a woman of ordinary size, about sixty years of age
(this gentleman observes that his mother was but forty-four
when she died). I made the observation to Adele, who an-
swers : " Possibly ; but in the state she appears to me I should
take her to be this ao^e. I am certain that it is the g-entleman's
mother. Doubtless her malady pulled her down very much."
This gentleman grants that such may be the case. Adele con-
tinues : " I see that she has light, even gray hair ; a forehead
more prominent than flat : eyes large, and very dark, but not
black; nose rather sharp and a very thin face. This woman
was very mild and kind-hearted, of a lively disposition, but
good and frank. She has a very thin hand, even a skinny one.
She breathes with difficulty. She must have been frequently
obliged to unfasten her dress, vi^hich I see open in front ; she
suffered principally froin a disease of the heart. Her chest,
also, was out of order. Ah ! I see a lentil on her neck." Her
son wishes to know whether she is happy. She replies :
" Yes ; but I shall be more so when my husband has rejoined
me." She adds that she was very fond of him. Her son again
wishes the following questions to be put to her : " Have you
anything to announce to me to my advantage ? Do any mis-
fortunes threaten me 1" " No," replied she, " my son is as
happy as one can wish to be on earth ; but I strongly enjoin
on him to be very prudent, or some misfortune might happen
to him." — ** Does she see her daughter who is dead ? Are they
in the same radius ?" " No ; they did not sympathize too much
with each other on eartli; she merely sees her at times." —
"Does she see her son Auguste oftener ; he, too, is dead?"
" Yes ; he seldom quits her. She was fond of him." — " Has
she anything to say to her son Adolphe, who is still on earth?"
" He has no fixed position. He will not be exempt from trou-
ble, but eventually he will be very happy." — " And her other
son, Victor, what does she think of him V " He would not
have been in his present position had he gone on with what he
had undertaken : but he will succeed, God protects him."
This lady, before disappearing, recommends her son present to
take good care of himself. The gentleman thus acknowledges
the exactitude of the above details : —

Allow me an observation as to the remarkable mistake Adele
made in the appreciation of this lady's age, according to her
son. If Adele had not been sincere, she would have gone
from this estimation, but, on the contrary, she answers that she
should be more inclined to think her above sixty than under
that age. This gentleman's lady, who was present at this sit-
ting, makes the observation, that the great sutfermgs this person
has endured have possibly made her look much older; that her
son is unable to judge of this, inasmuch as he had not seen her
for a long time when she died. This simple observation
destroys all idea of communication of thoughts ! The rest is
perfectly exact. The answers made by this lady as to the
position of her children, still on earth, prove that she is not so
separated from them as might be supposed.

At the same sitting, M. Blesson desires the apparition of his
grandfather. Adele says that she perceives a man about sev-
enty years of age. A stout man, with gray hair, very open
forehead, the top of the head bald, eyes neither large nor
small. By-the-by, he has a large nose, well formed, but promi-
nent enough ; the lower lip hangs over a little : this gives his
mouth the appearance of jutting out instead of receiving, as is
usual at such an age ; air very agreeable. He is very upright,
and still appears very nimble ; he died from a rush of blood to
the throat. He was surely very fond of walking, as it now
forms his deHght. He was very partial to M. Blesson, and.
has dandled him many a time on his knees. He recommends
him not to torment himself, as all will turn out better than he
thinks for ; he prays to God for him. He says he is very
happy. Surely he must have had a bad habit of shaking, hands,
as he gives me his, saying that he has business to attend to.
He still thinks of his daughter, whom he was very fond of, and
who was very good to him. He again recommends his grand-
son to make himself easy, as all will turn out well.

NoTE.'-^M. Witt came to me the day after the foregoing
sitting to tell me that he had questioned a person who had
nursed his mother in her last illness, and she had acknowledged
all the particulars as quite exact, particularly those concerning
the unfastening of her dress in front, inasmuch as she was un-
able to bear any pressure on the chest. M. Witt had not seen
his mother for eight years before her death ; he could not be
aware of this particularity, which is no proof of the communi-
cation of thouo;-hts.

128. Madame C asks for Madame S. B . Adele
says that she perceives an old lady, with gray hair, projecting
forehead, eyebrows pretty thick, fine large eyes, nose ordinary,
mouth well made, rather small than large; chin well formed,
a pretty cut figure, slight rosy color on the cheek-bones, small,
well-made hands, middling stature, and altogether a lady-like
looking woman. She was lively and good ; of an open dispo-
sition, speaking freely her mind, and sorry for it the moment
after. She suffered in the stomach, and from palpitations of
the heart; she had rheumatic pains, and suffered from lowness
of spirits. She was long ill, and supported her illness with
fortitude, told no one the full amount of her suffering, took
consolation in religion, but in a religion of the heart. She
must also have experienced a sort of weight in the lower part
of her stomach. I believe she died of a suffocation, which, I
think, was the consequence of a neglected cold. I see that
her lungs are choked up — this was the cause of her difficulty
of breathing, especially when dying ; her agony was a very
long one. Despite her great sufferings, she has an air of sweet-
ness overspreading her countenance. She is an angel, who
quitted the earth, regretting only those she left behind her,
From her virtues she had no fear of death ; she tells me that
she is your mother. She must have had a son whom she dearly
loved as she did you. She is happy, and desires you to be
informed that you have passed through trials that will never
be renewed. She recommends you to take good care of your
husband, saying that he is a worthy man, deserving all your
attention ; she adds that her position, happy as it was on eartli^
was not sufficiently so to prevent her from tormenting herself
very much, and that she was not truly happy till she entered
the world of spirits.

Madame C expresses a wish that M. F. C. should be
asked for. Adele perceives a man less aged than the lady who
just appeared, with black hair mixed with gray — a fine, tall
man, forehead open, eyes middling size, eyebrows thick, and
standing out a little, nose ordinary, but pretty large, mouth
middling size, chin round, forming a hollow under the lower
lip, agreeable countenance, short neck, broad-chested, shoul-
ders rather thick, a good round belly, fine manly air. He must
have had something the matter with hi^ight leg ; he apparently
died of apoplexy. I discover no disease ; I only see the blood
rushing violently to the heart, which, perhaps was taken for an
aneurism. He was badly doctored, it was but a thick blood
that stood in need of being purified — that's all. He has a fine
constitution. He was, doubtless, brave, delicate, loyal; there
are few like him. He is happy and even blesses the doctor
who so ill understood his complaint. He would not have
committed a base action, even to save his life ; however, he
was not unhappy on earth. He sees his family, with whom he
is not, at all times, inasmuch as he was and still is fond of
walking. He is always thinking of those he left behind,
and still preserves for them all his affection, excepting one
friend, who caused him much sorrow in return for the good he
did him.

This lady desires, out of family considerations, to conceal
her name, making no objection, however, to signing for me the
testimonial, and affixing thereto her address to be made use of
if necessary.

129. M. Petiet asks for M. Jerome Petiet. Adele sees a
young man, about twenty-four or twenty-six years of age (he
was thirty), not so tall as his brother now present. Auburn
hair, rather long ; open forehead, arched eyebrows, black, and
rather hollow eyes, nose rather long, pretty well formed, com-
plexion fresh, skin very white and delicate, mouth middling
size, round, dimpled chin. He was weak in the chest; he
would have been strong had it not been for this. He wears a
large gray vest, old-fashioned buttons, such as are scarcely ever
seen now. I don't think they are brass ones, nor of the same
stuff as the vest. They don't look to me very bright; his
pantaloons are of a dark color, and he wears low-quarteied
shoes, without any inst^. This man was of a stubborn dispo-
sition, selfish, devoid of sensibility, had a sinister look, was not
very communicative, devoid of candor, and having but little
affection for any one. His death was natural, though sudden ;
he experienced suffocation. — Adele stops her breath as he did,
and coughs as he did ; she says that " he must have had moxas,
or a plaster applied to his back — and this accounts for the sore
I see there. He had no disease, however, in that part; the
spine was sound; those who applied such remedy to him did
not know the seat of the disease ; his carriage is bad, back
round, without being humped."

M. Petiet finds nothing to retrench from these details, which
are very exact, and confirm him in his belief that the applica-
tion of this plaster, advised by a man, a stranger to medicine,
brought on his brother's death, which was almost sudden.

Note. — The buttons that Adele was unable to define were
in metal, of a dirty-white ground, and surrounded by a blue
circle. In this apparition is a phenomenon extraordinary
enough : that is to say, Adele experienced the same kind of
illness as this man. I was obliged to disengage her by passes ;
she suffered horribly. What answer can we make to such
facts ? unless it be that the past, present, and future, are only
conditions of being with matter — only a succession of different
states, which in a particular state are ever represented in the
present — and this would confirm (for this state only) the be-
lief in a creation without beginning or end ; that is to say, an
actual, momentaneous one. Stay not to observe what precedes
and what follows creation ; the state which it represents to you
is for you whatsoever is. I shall be asked whether this man
himself suffered at this moment as Adele appeared to suffer.
I will answer, no. He is in the world of causes, wherein hnr-
mony reigns. Had Adele been totally disencraged from her
material body, the latter would not have suffered ; it is only
the sight of the state of the material body of this man at the
time he suffered, that awakens in Adele sympathetic effects in
the material molecules, and produces this suffering, the impres-
sion of which remained on the spiritual body of this man. We
have already said that it was possible for a clairvoyante to
perceive a deceased being at any age of his life, as well as in
any dress he may have worn at different periods of his life. It
must be the same with all external wounds and internal dis-
eases : nothing is effaced; they are so many impressions left,
to recall, no doubt, to the individual possessing them, what he
has suffered or done at such an age, and to facilitate in him the
comparison of his actual state with his prior one, and this must
ever be to him a source of happiness; his present position is
ever preferable, and that to which he aspires, as an eternal
progression, must surpass all the rest. Thus, how many pev-
S(<ns on earth are there who feel sick at the sight of a sore or
the letting of blood ; how many sympathetic eff*ects are there
that are communicated in all nervous effects, such as gaping,
laughter, crying, epilepsy, convulsions ; how many persons that
are unable to follow the respiration or diction of another per-
son without stifling, &;c., &c. I once noticed in Adele a fact
of this nature, which I find it impossible to account for. She
was consulted by an asthmatical person ; she was seized with
sympathetic fits of asthma, and in a few seconds expectorated
great quantities of thick mucus of a yellowish-green, with the
same effort and as often as the patient. Her pocket-handker-
chief was full of these thick humors in a few minutes ! Adele
never spits ; and, habitually, she perceives rather than feels the
ailments of sick persons, although she has the two properties at
once. I leave medicine to explain this phenomenon, as I shall
leave many others to psychology and physics.


130. I ask for my father, who had been dead two months.
Adele sees him as slie knew him on earth. I put to him the
following questions : " Well ! you who dreaded death so much,
are you satisfied with being dead V " What ! dead ] who
told you that I was dead 1" He feels of himself, and exclaims :
•' Zounds ! I am as much alive as you." — " But you have left
the earth." " Zounds ! that's true : I didn't think of that." —
*' Are you reunited to my mother 1 have you seen her ]" " Yes,
I am with her. Magnetism did me good ; 'twas that that drew
me out of this." — "What! drew you out of this! you don't
think, then, that you are no longer among us V " No longer
amono^ you! where am I, then ?" ''In the spiritual world."

"Zounds ! that's true : but I don't always go " He feels
of his stomach, and says to Adele : " Something must be done
for this." The latter replies : " In the place where you are,
there are no like wants." " How stupid I am ! that's true. I
have some trouble to habituate myself; I always fancy I am
on earth." — " What do you think of the contents of the oook
your son has published on the spiritual world, and which he
was so pleased at communicating to you, to console you and
give you hope of a better world 1" " What book, pray ? All
right ; I remember ; it is the truth. When is he coming to see
me ]" — " You know that he is still upon earth, and can not
come to you before his time." "True; I didn't give that a
thought. And you — pray, are you going away already?" —
" I am not going away ; on the contrary, it was I that called
you here. Tell me how you pass your time." " I admire
whatever I see ; all this is so surprising, that it can hardly be
believed. Sometimes I see myself still in my own room; then
I feel and see that I am no longer upon earth ; it's enough to
make one lose his wits. However, I no longer suffer, and feel
very happy." Adele breaks off the discourse, observing to me
that my father has been in this state too short a time to be able
to give a good account of it.

My father was eighty years of age at the time of his death.
Formerly a captain in the merchant-service, habituated to an
active life, and having lived sixty years with seamen, by whom
he was generally esteemed, he had preserved in his conversa-
tion a few terms not in use with educated persons. Adele says
that she heard them.. What will no less astonish those who
read these curious observations, is the seeming doubt, the uncer-
tainty he preserves as to his present state ; at times he con-
founds it with the terrestrial state ; and this sitting, strange as
it may appear, fully confirms the assertions of Swedenborg, in
this respect, in his " Treatise on Heaven and Hell," where he
says : *' Many spirits, possessing very strong earthly affections,
can not, on their arrival in the spiritual world, believe that
they have quitted the earth ; they often remain a long time
in this uncertainty." And this is what happens to my father
on this occasion. Oh, men ! study this science, and reject not
the works of a great ecstatico-prophet, a profound thinker, as a
heap of reveries or hallucinations, valueless to science, and by
no means conducive to the happiness of mankind. We will
pass on to another apparition of a similar kind to the last one,
presenting in another way the same solutions.

131. M. Blouet, knowing the speciality of Adele from experi-
ments he had solicited of her, and verified by other clairvoy-
antes (in his capacity as a magnetizer), came one day to impart
to me an idea that had just come into his head, and of which
the following is a summary : One of his friends possessed a
house at Beauvais, in which lived a woman who had, it was
said, fifty francs a-day to expend. This woman, as the tale
goes, did not expend this money, but every day put by two
louis, which she took care to procure at a money-changer's.
She died forty years ago. Tbis gentleman purchased the house
she lived in, ransacked it, and found nothing. He sold the
property to a third person, reserving to himself the right of
making, at any period of time, researches in this house, guaran-
tying, however, to defray all expenses, make good any damage
done to the premises, and reward the proprietor with an equal
share of the treasure. This gentleman had told his tale to M.
Blouet, when the latter entertained the idea of asking for the
said deceased woman, and endeavoringf to obtain information
on this head. He asked his friend for her name : I magnetized
Adele, and we summoned this person. Adele saw a tall, thin
woman, about sixty years of age, with gray Lair, large nose,
watchful air, sharp in speech, miserly, common, and maniacal.
She was in bed over the shop. Said Adele : *' I see a large,
rusty key in her hand ; I perceive that she is afraid lest her
gold should be discovered. I ask her where she hid it.
She replies that she put none away. She must have been
troubled with an asthma. She tells me that she had three cel-
lars." Adele tries to make this woman speak in a more
straightforward, manner; she can not succeed, and besfs us to
inquire whether the description she has just given is exact;
this would encourage her to ask the woman a second time. M.
Blouet having no knowledge of this person, took away with
hira the written description to send to his friend.

Second Sitting. — We again ask for the woman with the
treasure, though we did not as yet know whether it was really
she who presented herself, having no certain information on this
point. Adele sees her, and says to us : " This woman has pre-
served her earlhly affection, the enjoyment of gold; avarice has
not quitted her, I shall have a hard job to get anything out of
her." — " Try and make her understand," said I, " that her ma-
terial gold is no longer of any use to her, she may have as much
of it as she likes spiritually." " She makes answer," said
Adele, " that she is well aware of that. But when she returns
upon earth, how is she to live ?" — '* She thinks, then, of return-
ing upon earth 1" "Yes, she is the first person I have heard
make this observation ; she has not left the earth, she is ordi-
narily in her cellar, which is the place where I see her, and
where I suppose she has hidden her treasure; she, but a mo-
ment ago, said, how shall I live when I return upon earth, and
now she says to me that she did not so much as put by a couple
of sous a day." Then takes place between Adele and this
woman a contradictory dispute, in which the former strives to
entangle her in order to snatch from her her secret, but all the
clairvoyante's efforts are fruitless. Adele says to me : *' This
money must surely be buried at the bottom of the lowest cel-
lar, at the foot of the wall ; there must be in that spot a wooden
box, under a \nvo:^e stone. Let me be put in corresponclence
with some one who has lived in the bouse, I shall see best by
myself; it is useless trying- to get any information from this
woman, and I won't speak to her any more ; she listens to noth-
ing, she wishes to conceal from me her thoughts, and tieats me
as a tbief." I make the observation to Adele that it has often
happened that she has seen places at a distance without being
acquainted with them ; that she may, in like manner, try and
find out this house and these cellars. She replies : " I do not
say that it is impossible; but it has never happened to me to
see places without being in communication with persons who
are acquainted with some one dwelling in those places; then,
when the person who is in communication with me desires to
render perceptible to me another person, whose place of resi-
dence, I suppose, he is ignorant of, I find ihat I have a starting-
point and an object. I desire the fluid of the person at a dis-
tance to come and join that of the person whose hand is in
mine; an effect of attraction is operated, uniting the two fluids
which touched each other formerly, and thereby I obtain a con-
ductor that directs me ; but there is nothing similar to this with
this woman, who is no longer of the earth." Adele appears
very much fatigued, and I rouse her.

Third Sitting. — M. Blouet gave an account of this fresh
sitting to his friend, who came himself to the house a few days
after, and assured us that, from the information he had obtained
as to this v/oman, Adele had given a correct description of her
as well as of the place where she used to go to bed, and the
three cellars which still exist. I put this gentleman in corre-
spondence with Adele, who told him the spot where she thought
the treasure would be found. The gentleman acknowledged
that the particulars relative to the cellars were exact, and as
to the treasure researches only could prove how far she was
correct.

Note. — A fortnio^ht after the above sitting:, M. Blouet and his
friend searched the cellar in the spot pointed out by Adele, and
discovered, three feet under ground, a large stone, which they
had much difficulty in raising even a little. M. Blouet slipped
his hand underneath, and felt a sort of puddle ; this discouraged
him. They gave up their search. Three days after he re-
counted these particulars to Adele, who declared that that sig-
nified nothing, as she had seen a treasure there ; that he ought
to have raised the stone and continued his search. Had he
found nothing; the treasure must have been removed ; but she
was certain that, were it no longer there, it must have been
there. He went after his friend. They raised the stone ; dug
to the depth of two feet ; discovered a bed of flint-stones, and
a good deal of mud, a consequence of the infiltration of water
that rose to this height ; they acquired the certainty that this
stone had been cemented, that something extraordinary had
taken place here. The stone was of granite, two feet and a
half long, nearly as wide, and four inches thick. They thought
that the treasure had been previously removed. For my part,
I think that my friend was very wrong not to raise the stone
higher ; and to leave it thus for some days at the mercy of
strangers, who, assuredly, would not hesitate, considering why
and how it came to be cemented in such a place. Had the
treasure been previously removed, no one would have taken the
trouble to replace the stone in the same state and cement it
again. My friend was more confident, and less curious, than I.
At these three sittings we liave arrived at proving two
truths : —

1. That a deceased person may be seen by the mere aid of
his name, without leaving room to suspect communication of
thoughts, which can not exist in this experiment as in many
others we have already read, for M. Blouet and his friend never
knew this woman ; they can not, therefore, represent the image
of her.

2. That spirit disengaged from matter is not, for that reason,
disengaged from material affections, and that the elevation of
the state in which it finds itself in the spiritual world depends
much on the affection it had on earth for such or such celestial
or terrestrial belief. The affection only constitutes the state in
which the spirit finds itself. If you are under the empire of a
fixed idea (would it not correspond with all the heavenly joys
which we figure to ourselves in the world of spirits), you are
not the less its slave for a longer or shorter period of time.
We are called, we acknowledge it, to register truths which it
would cost many others much to unveil ; but as we have not
hitherto feared ridicule, we will say all we know; it is the duty
of every man who loves science and truth. There are few
magnetizers, engaged in treasure-finding, who have not experi-
enced very great deceptions, which can be occasioned only by
three causes : 1. The clairvoyante may be too weak in his lu-
cidity, and suffer himself to be influenced by spiritual images,
which will lead him into error. 2. He may still see the treas-
ure in the spot where it was deposited, though it may have
been removed since that time. It must be the same with
treasures as with objects set in any place, and whose image re-
mains in the same place, as I have said in my first volume.
This fact can not be called in question. I have obtained con-
vincing proofs of this, and here is one of them. One day a
somnambulist, named Victor Dumez, then in great repute in

Paris, told the abbe M that he perceived in a certain house
a hidden treasure, and recommended this gentleman to pur-
chase the house, which was then to be sold. The abbe paid
down forty thousand francs (about $7,500) made researches on
the spot where the clairvoyante assured him he beheld the
treasure, but found nothing. The somnambulist was so con-
vinced of what he saw, that he proposed being at half the ex-
pense in the search. The gentleman, encouraged anew, made
fresh researches, without any further result. One day he came
to ray house to consult Adele on the subject. She summoned
the person who had concealed the treasure, and learned, through
this person, that he had withdrawn it before his death ; that it
was useless troubling ourselves about it. He furnished Adele
with particulars as to what the hidden box contained, which
details fully corresponded with what Victor had seen. The abbe
was now enabled to make sure of the truth of this assertion, as the
treasure had been hidden under the floor. All was raised, but
nothing found. The image of the treasure had, therefore, re-
mained in the place where it had been deposited. Adele be-
held it like the other clairvoyante, and had it not been for the
information given her by the spirit, she would possibly have
made the same mistake.

Not, indeed, in the present times is it that men believe that
spirits, who have, during their materialization on earth, hidden
treasures, still enjoy them after their departure from the earth,
and fascinate the sight of those who attempt to discover them.
Although these material treasures, as I have observed in the
preceding sitting, are no longer of any use to the spirit disen-
gaged from matter, they, nevertheless, remain the property of
such spirit. There is no doubting it ; if it is possible f )r an
earthly man to say this piece of land, this house, or this furni-
ture, &c., belongs to me, that constitutes a deed of property,
as very justly observed to me my friend Binet ; a spirit that
has earned this gold, which he can hide more easily than a
house or any other object, may surely, at his pleasure, make of
it a deed of property which he has a mind no one should enjoy;
the act of removing such a treasure is a positive theft — a bad
action. He has a right to hallucinate you, the only means left
him to defend this property, which he has honestly acquired.
If we admit in them a series of terrestrial affections we can
not refuse them this one any more than the rest, and the obser-
vation of my fi'iend is strictly logical.

As to fascinations, there is no doubt of their existence,
though they be not followed by more marked and dangerous
effects. We may read on this head the * Demonomania" of
Bodin, 1558, where we shall find certain facts fully correspond-
ing with these. I know a person who has passed through such
deceptions and been unable to discover the treasure revealed
to him by half-a-score of clairvoyantes. Three of them under-
went hallucinations, which could not be recounted in this age
without exposing one's self to ridicule. Every one has heard,
speak of the diggings at Mount Jalut, conducted by so many
clairvoyantes of the first order and at different times ; one be-
held in one place, another in another, and all the shareholders
in these diggings perceived that they expended therein their
fortune to no purpose. I know a gentleman at Niort who
found himself in the same conditions, and under the same influ-
ences. What he then experienced is still so fresh in his
memory that his liair stands on end wl)enever he speaks of it.
He was very near losing an excellent clairvoyante on this occa-
sion. He could not wholly recall her to life till several hours
after. He himself was, as well as two other persons who ac-
companied him, subjected to moral tortures impossible to
describe. I am unwilling to be thought to accept tales which
appear at first sight ridiculous ; but I beg of maenetizers each
to say of them as much as I, and the ridicule will be less over-
whelming than on one alone. I will conclude this article by
observing that out of a hundred indicated treasures, not more
than two or three are discovered. There is, therefore, some
cause for this, residing in hallucination. If it be possible for
magnetizers to subject clairvoyantes to hallucination, all may be
explained by this property which spirits disengaged from mat-
ter must possess, as well as those that are still confined to it.

132. Madame G. C desires the apparition of M. E. C.
C . Adele says she sees a tall slender man, with auburn
hair, splendid forehead, fine, well-formed eyes, long lashes, w^ell-
formed nose but rather wide at the bottom, large mouth, chin
rather long, air severe ; he is not very old, he wears a black
dress, a white cravat. I perceive that he has a frill or a little
lace on his shirt cj'ossing his waistcoat, which is rather open ; he
suffered much from oppression in the chest, from palpitation of
the heart; his moral sufferings were also great and of long con-
tinuance. During the latter part of his illness he was very weak
in his legs ; he did not complain in proportion with his suffer-
ings ; he was very courageous and well-informed. Though
severe, he was affectionate, frank, pure, strong-minded ; he
loved above all what is good ; he died in the conviction thai
his soul would survive his body. He says that he is very happy
now ; he is occupied in spiritual sciences, the conformation of
the place he dwells in, and above all in the study of men. He
had travelled, a great deal on earth, and still delights in doing
so in heaven. He tells me that it was not at the moment of
dying that he suffered most, for his soul was already detached
from his body. He will not be perfectly happy, however, till
those whom he loved on earth are reunited to him. I am
much pleased with him, for he is a good and highly-educated
man.

This lady, of high condition and elevated mind, acknowledges
the exactitude of all these details : she begs Adele to ask for a
second person, so happy does she seem to be in the sphere of
those spirits invisible to the eyes of our material body, but very
sensible to persons whose hearts are open to their influence.

We ask for M. W B , who forthwith appears. Adele
says : " This man is older than the last one ; his hair is almost
white, and he has a bald place on the crown of his head ; his
forehead is not very high ; he has fine eyes, rather hollow, and
a benevolent look; flat mouth, rather long face — altogether a
good-looking old man. He seems to me very cheerful and
amiable. He must have been strong ; he is corpulent enough ;
he had an asthma, and suffered shooting pains (from the gout) ;
he was not long ill. He wears a riding-coat, rather long, and
I see a stick in his hand. He tells me that he is fond of walk-
ing ; his intelligence was of a less elevated kind than that of the
preceding gentleman ; he loved life also more than the latter,
consequently he has some difliculty in comprehending the spir-
itual world ; he tells me, however, that our life is not to be com-
pared with his, which alone is life in perfection. I am much
pleased with this man, on account of his amiable manners."

I ought to observe that some persons, holding a distinguished
position in the world, beg of me not to publish their names, for
fear of the ridicule that certain individuals, too well informed to
descend to such beliefs, would not fail throwing on experiments
of this kind; but I. take care to make all persons who solicit
these perceptions sign testimonials, observing to them that I
shall hold them at the disposition of all my readers demanding
such communication. Thus the abridged names are given in
full length, with their address, in the said testimonials. If I
make this concession to such timorous persons, it is only on the
above condition ; for I de.^ire the truth, and nothing but the
ti'uth. If I do not fear ridicule, I wish to be able to prove that
I am not deserving of it. I might have dispensed, some read-
ers will say, with all these descriptive details, which are not
very agreeable to read. I will answer that there vi^ould be
nothing left me to say, and that these details j^resent each in
their individuality certain shades more and more persuasive.
As in these last two perceptions, if we are disposed to find any-
thing insignificant, we are forced to acknowledge that the hald,
head of the old Tnan, his stick, his long riding-coat, his tastes,
are persuasive details ; so persons to whom merely one of these
particularities is revealed, experience at each of the others a
very decided movement of astonishment, which instantaneously
overcomes their doubts, and gives rise to the exclamation —
** 'Tis incredible ! 'tis miraculous !" I say, with them : " Yes,
it is miraculous ; draw from it consoling conclusions, and death
will no longer be to you a cause of anguish ; on the contrary, it
is the jailer who comes to restore you to liberty."

133. The lady who solicited the foregoing sitting (an Eng-
lishwoman by birth), after recounting what she had heard to
one of her compatriots, brought him to me the following day.
I shall retrench naught from this sitting, which demonstrates
how far the eccentricity of this good people can go. The lady
asks for Mr. John Wilson. Adele perceives two gentlemen
together, one an old man, the other younger. The old man
has gray hair, is tall and thin, and wears spectacles ; he has
hollow eyes, a long, pinched-up nose, wide mouth, large dry
hands ; the general appearance of the countenance is serious.
The youngest may be about forty-fiive to fifty years of age : he
is of the ordinary stature, corpulent, and broad-chested ; he has
black hair, a prominent forehead, what we call an intellectual
forehead; thick eyebrows, and this gives him a stern look;
nose well formed, complexion clear, middling-size mouth, chin
rather prominent and round, neck short ; he wears a coarse
blue coat. He died of an apoplexy. He was a very good man,
of an enlightened mind ; he seems to me even an extraordinary
man, having very elevated thoughts. He suffered much from
not being able to do all the good he desired. He must have
been beloved ; he vi^ould wish to be reunited to a person who
is very dear to him.

This lady observes that she believes she can call to mind the
old man, from the details she has heard, but she is not sure of
it; it was the second. one she asked for, who must have been
the old man's grandson. She also observes that this man was
ten years older than Adele supposes him to have been, and that
his complexion was not what is termed in England a clear com-
plexion. For what concerns the elevated thoughts, she thinks
the phrase might be rendered better thus : " He had good com-
mon sense, and elevated sentiments." All the other details are
very exact. She refused to sign, for fear of compromising her
name in the learned world ; but I have the names of two per-
sons accompanying her, who if necessary would affirm the truth
of this perception, and the exactitude of the details acknowl-
edged by the lady, to whom I observed that, if I had forgotten
to acquaint her with this condition, indivspensable to my sittings,
I trusted she would have the goodness to inform those persons
of it she was to send to me ; for I make it a great point, in the
interest of truth and science, to support my citations with the
testimony of those who acknowledge their exactitude. It re-
mains for me to observe what distinction may be drawn be-
tween what we call a clear complexion, and what the English,
who have a superior color to us, call a clear complexion. We
appear to them very dark, and a dark Englishman with them
would appear to us of a fine carnation: this makes me think
that the difference in the eyes of Adele and this lady was but a
matter of taste. Her second observation, as to the meaning of
elevated thoughts, is sufficient to prove to us that we can attach
no importance to the first one, because this man was not of
illustrious birth, nor had he received a liberal education. He
could have had but good common sense and elevated sentiments,
although this lady assured us that he was habitually consulted
by all the inhabitants of the town in which he resided in innu-
merable matters connected with art, mechanics, taste, and jus-
tice. Adele having made the observation to her that he was
not in her sphere, she replied : " No ; he hacl no wit — received
no education." I know not whether wit be included in educa-
tion, or whether the latter does but give it the form; and whellier
elevated thoughts are aught else than elevated sentiments. I
leave this question to be decided by those who have wit and
education.

134. Madame C. C , already mentioned, at sitting 128,
desires another apparition. She begs Adele to ask for Mad-
ame A. D . Adele perceives a lady about thirty years of
age, with dark hair, white, smooth forehead, fine dark eyes,
lono^ lashes, rather largre nose, middlings-size mouth, an ac^ree-
able smile, and white teeth. I see an empty space at top, on
the left side, and this makes me presume that she has lost a
tooth on that side. Neck short, chest broad, graceful air and
manners, easy carriage. This lady must have suffered at the
heart. She died of an ulcer in the womb, not rightly treated ;
she was strong in the chest, but must have suffered from cramp
in the stomach. She has not long been dead. She speaks to
me of a child she was very fond of, though not her own. She
would wish to be reunited to several persons whom she was
very partial to. Her husband must still be on earth. No
doubt she was beloved, as she herself was loving, good, and
virtuous. I don't know whether she used to like flowers, but
at this moment she is passionately fond of them."

At the request of Madame C. C , Adele follows the ap-
parition to heaven — a period when ecstasy is at its height —
for ten minutes. I call her back to earlh. She then gives us
the following account : " I followed this lady up, very high up.
She was dressed in while, her hair in ringlets, a wreath of
orange-flowers round her head. Oh, good heavens, how beau-
tiful she was ! why are we so ugly on earth ? How gi'aceful
and pretty she was ! Shall I one day be as beautiful as she?
No matter what idea we form of heaven, we shall always come
far short of the reality. If you did but behold the beautiful
group of dark, fair, fresh-looking women, with white and trans-
parent skins, modest looks, all crowned with flowers ; one with
white or red roses, another with jasmine, another with orange-
flowers, each according to her affection ! Some play music,
others draw, others study; those singing, these promenading.
Whv, goodness me ! what is this earth in comparison with
heaven 1 a sink beside a palace ! Fancy to yourself the Palais-
Royal with its countless streams of gas, and a dark cave — it is
still less than that. What light dresses they had ! with what
simplicity, what grace they wear them ! When we compare
our tanned, dark, wrinkled skins, our irregular features, our
sorry looks, all our deformities, with these celestial bodies — O
filthiness, O disgust ! and we pity those who are dead — those
who died at the barricades : why, my God, let the rest be shot !
Why should I go to ask pardon for them 1 That they may
live ! that they may suffer ! Oh, no ! death is preferable to
what you term life." Adele is in a state of inconceivable ex-
altation. I make the observation to her that all these unfortu-
nate creatures have wives and children, who stand in need of
them. She replies : " What worse (according to us) can hap-
pen to them, in their turn, than death ? Well, they will be
happy : the sooner they die, the better for them. Those poor,
misled creatures who fought, killed each other — only consider
what was their surprise at meeting each other in heaven, with-
out hatred, without vengeance, really alive, and satisfied of their
earthly error! There, and there only, is the true reign of fra-
ternity. O human weakness, pride, error ! why can I not pre-
serve the courage I at this moment possess 1 I would mount
with them the barricades, and hearten them on to death ! For
death is happiness !

I succeeded with, difficulty in proving to Adele that she was
wandering, and that she ought to return to sentiments, if not
more true, at least more in consonance with our existence.

At this sitting it will be found that Adele fails in her usual
morality, by preaching up, in a manner, suicide. The obser-
vation I made to her was to this effect. But let any human
being put himself for a moment in her place, issuing from a
state so superior, returning to this sink of pains, passions, and
saying to himself: '^ Theve, life, Jiappiness ; here, annihilation
and tears : there, liberty, immortality ; here, slavery and death ;
I must descend again into this pitcher called the body, there to
undergo for years the pangs of what is termed existence, and
quit places where I feel myself so happy ; is it not excusable in
the galley-slave to curse his chains before garlands of flowers —
in the old man, his wrinkles in the presence of youth — in the
blind, the darkness before the light ? O my God ! Adele is
more virtuous than I. Were I but once, like her, to leave my
body, I should never return to it, for I know nothing worse
than it and the earth it inhabits !"

135. Madame Osborn asks for Madame Elizabeth Osbom,
her grandmother. Adele says: "I see a woman of about
fifty years of age (she was older), of the ordinary size, broad-
chested, figure pretty slender, hair gray, forehead prominent
and open, dark hollow eyes, nose rather long than short, mouth
rather large than small, chin somewhat long, and her hand,
which must have been very beautiful, is long. This lady surely
found it a difficult matter to keep on her legs during the latter
pai't of her illness. She suffered from stoppages, and a pain
in one leg ; this, however, did not prevent her from being very
alert. Though of a good heart, she was severe, open-minded,
and possessed of much wit ; she appears to me smiling, and very
elevated in the spiritual world. She is surrounded by a bril-
liant light, and this, no doubt, contributed toward my taking
her for a younger woman than she was on earth. She tells
me that she is with her son, to whom she was very indulgent
on earth ; she loved him, and still loves him dearly. She was
more indifferent about a daughter she had, and whose heart
she can now better appreciate, as she has inwardly studied it.
Consequently, she will be perfectly happy when she has re-
joined her. She says that she lost one son, who perished at
sea ; she lost another, not less painfully, in battle, where he
was killed by a cannon-ball. Adele inquired the kind of death
this gentleman met with only at the request of Madame Osborn.
Consequently, she experiences an inexplicable shock at hear-
ing the report of the canDon, and seeing the unfortunate man
mortally wounded. She perceives the battle raging, and turns
away her eyes, to look no longer, as she says, on so frightful
a picture. She recommends Madame Osborn, on the part of
her grandmother, to take care of her health, for she has often
pains in the stomach, and a very great oppression all over her,
occasioned by the disordered state of the blood. She predicts
that, in a short time from this, one of her granddaughters pres-
ent will give birth to a little boy.

Observations. — At the apparition of Madame Osborn we
have heard this lady give a few details, not devoid of interest,
as to the children she had lost. Scarcely had Madame Osborn,
her grandmother, said to Adele, " See to what kind of death
my uncle was a victim," than the latter, instead of asking this
of the grandmother, desires to see this man at the moment of
his death, and does see him struck by a cannon-ball in battle.
This scene appears to her full of activity ; she hears the cannon
growling, as if let off that very instant. Still, as Madame
Osborn says, many years have passed away since then. This
fact confirms what we have already said in the first volume (at
sitting 93). The questions of time, produced by the state in
which we find ourselves, alone engender the intervals separa-
ting the events. But in somnambulism all is in the present.
We are conscious, however short a time we dwell on this propo-
sition, and inconceivable as it may appear, that it can not be in
the world of causes as in the world of efiects. In the first,
forms are eternal, and unalterable to the clairvoyante who is
in direct communication with this world. When he desires to
see a certain thing, it forthwith presents itself to his view as a
certain volume presents itself to ours on a shelf of our library.
It is impossible for us, in taking this volume to say : It lias
heen, since it is whenever we think of it and desire to handle
it. It is the same in the world of causes. A certain cause
always is ; it is only the material effect which such cause en-
genders whose action or form disappears from our sio^lit, and
fetters our judgment, that is to say — that has been, is, and
will be. But, in a state where these thino^s can not chano-e
their forms, they are ever in the present. Thus, an action
consists not in the assemblage of several forms and the move-
ment impressed on them. This movement itself is an action,
a cause that ever vibrates to the clairvoyante, easy for him to
comprehend, but quite negative for our state, which can assign
it no form. It is the same with all the sensations of sounds
and attractions ; because we can not represent them ourselves
by forms that catch our material eye, they, nevertheless, exist,
since they so far touch us as to produce sensation. In meta-
physics, as in physics, we can feel and see only what touches ;
therefore, sensations of any kind, or attraction, must be from
bodies, since they make themselves felt by bodies ; if they can
not be proved by a view of their forms, they are proved by a
sensation of their touch. Without losing our way in metaphys-
ical figures, which would not be out of place in this work, we
will say that this battle is represented in the world of causes
by a living picture of a life present, not passed, nor to come.
The existence of this book is what I have taken as a point of
comparison, which is, and has not been. We will treat moie
amply of these questions in the work already mentioned,
wherein we will point out the means by which a perscm may
enter of himself into a particular state, independent of mag-
netism, and wherein this truth will be comprehended by a
view of the solutions desired.

136. M. Roustan, a magnetizer, and member of the Magnet-
ological Society of Paris, asks for M. Fran9ois Xavier Rous-
tan, Adele perceives '' a man with gray hair, about your size,"
says she to M. Roustan, " open forehead, pretty large eyes, but
hollow, nose thick at the bottom, broad shoulders, back rather
crooked. He died of an apoplectic stroke. He was a good-
looking man, lively, and very agreeable, and of a mild disposi-
tion. — He tells me that he thinks of you. You have already
had him asked for by other clairvoyantes, and have seen him
yourself. He inspires you, but for some time past you have not
received the signs that he was in the habit of making you, be-
cause you are too absorbed in worldly affairs. You are very
light in your thoughts and actions; then, again, there are per-
sons about you who contest your opinions ; you find yourself
influenced by them because you are naturally fickle ; your ideas
are not matured. He tells that you had a twin-brother. He
had something to enjoin on you, when dying; but matters
having changed, he is no longer permitted to apprize you of
it." M. Roustan puts a question to his father relative to Louis
XVI. ; he receives for answer that he still retains the same
opinions respecting him as he did when on earth. Adele says
that this man is in the second radius.

137. Madame Vedeaux, for fifteen years a student of mag-
netism, finding herself momentarily at Paris, desires to avail
herself of this opportunity of paying a visit to several clair-
voyant subjects. She took a sitting at a young person's,
whose clairvoyance she had been previously enabled to judge
of. To a question put by this lady, the clairvoyante replied :
*' I know but one somnambulist in Paris who can give you a
solution to the question you ask : go to No. 17 Rue Tiquetonne ;
you will find there a subject surrounded by angels and departed
spirits that direct her, so that she is much more elevated than
I am." Acting upon this advice, the lady came and asked me
for a distant-view sitting. I did not promise her a clairvoy-
ance of the first order, such views not being Adele's speciality,
and not having for the moment any subject at my disposition.
Agreeably to the wishes of my fair visiter, I begged Adele to
look over this lady's property, and tell us whether there was
any hidden treasure there. She replied thus : *' I see some
water, apparently, to me, in a cistern ; it is dark ; then a tur-
ret, not unlike a dove-cot. It is contiguous to a house that
stands by itself, and surrounded with fields. There is a room
on the ground-floor with two windows ; on the first floor there
is a room which also has two windows. This house is three
stories high ; the main building has two wings, with which
there is a communication by the staircases and corridors where
the turret stands; it is quite a small room, in which I see a
spirit wandering : it is a person who was murdered there a very-
long time ago." Adele shrinks back in affright : I quiet her^
and she says that she is dragged toward a small store-room on
the ground-floor, in which she can scarcely stand upright ; she
sees there some wine, and declares that under this spot has
been hidden a treasure contained in a small strong box, in which
she perceives jewels, silver, and plate. She goes on giving
descriptions, superfluous for the reader to know, but very
agreeable for this lady to hear. The day after this sitting, the
lady returned to acquaint me that she had. been again to see
her somnambulist, who held with her, as near as may be, this
discourse : " You ought to be satisfied with the clairvoyante I
made you acquainted w^ith. 1 fear but one thing, which is,
that her lucidity should deprive me of your kind visits, for I
am very much attached to you ; it was to give you a proof of
this that I feared not making you acquainted with another clair-
voyante more powerful than myself. I perceive that she spoke
to you of a spirit that w^andered. about the property she vis-
ited, the result of a murder : that is very true ; I see it also.
It is a pity that this clairvoyante should be too reserved and
too much afraid of telling us all she sees ; there would be mo-
ments wherein she would confound the most incredulous. She
is too fearful of committing mistakes ; her magnetizer ought to
know that." I replied to this lady, that it was true that if
Adele was a little less afraid of committing mistakes, she would
be capable of greater things. It is her reserve that proves her
lucidity ; she is aware how pictures which present themselves
to the eye may lead to error, seeing that they represent the
past, present, and future, as present, although in the world of
causes, wherein are perceived the various states of their mani-
festation, there can be no errors: however, they are possible in
their material efl*ects, which are or are not manifested. If man
studied with great attention this somnambulic or spiritual state,
which he yet knows but imperfectly, he would not be so ready
to inveigli against errors, especially if unable to verify the rev-
elations of the clairvoyantes. I have spoken of this curious
sitting merely to have an opportunity of repeating what I have
already said in the first volume, that it was not necessary to
guide clairvoyantes, step by step, toward the object we desire
to have visited by them ; for Adele, at this sitting, formed no
communication with the lady : she asked for the chateau, and
it forthwith appeared. What has made me thus act, is, that
knowino- a clairvoyante able to find out the traces of an object
stolen or lost, of a person missing, &c., in these researches, he
can be guided by no human thought ; the desired object, there-
fore, must present itself at the call of the clairvoyante, or the
latter must proceed toward it without any itinerary. It may
then, I say to myself, be the sam.e with all views at a distance ;
of this I have obtained proof a hundred times. Even yester-
day, a doctor of high repute, who believes in magnetism because
he is so under my influence that I force him to confess it (when-
ever he seems disposed to deviate from the truth) that he can
offer no opposition to my closing his eyes, for instance, if I will
it, until he begs of me to open them for him (and he does not
sleep) — he was in the same disposition of mind with regard to
somnambulism and views at a distance, when yesterday, as I
was saying, I somnambulized my little Emile, and intrusted
him to the doctor to question him at his ease. Out of more
than forty answers, he raised doubts only on two or three made
by a spirit whom he caused to be questioned at a distance.
His surprise was not less great when I assured him that the
really living person whose spirit responded to that of my little
clairvoyante, of twelve years of age, knew nothing of this little
secret intriguing and those confidences, in which, however, he
would have taken good care not to compromise himself by
answers injurious to him. The doctor, before taking the hand
of the clairvoyante, had already a description of the house into
which he had sent him. On this simple invitation from me to
the child : " The doctor desires that you should see a house
into which he wishes you to enter." " I see it," forthwith said
the child, " it is a new house," &c. This method of proceed-
ing would not bo admissible unless it succeeded as well as
the other; but is it not demonstrated by the aforementioned
experiment for researches, thefts, &c., so common in our days 1
What makes me more attached to these experiments is, that I
wish to prove, that if an object unknown to the clairvoyante pre-
sents itself to his view, agreeably to his wishes — if actions passed
like those attending all the circumstances of a theft, or the jour-
ney of a person whose trace has been lost, present themselves to
him — I say, the person who has done or produced these actions,
must exist equally as well as those actions which appear to our
material eyes completely dead ; and the soul which has produced
such thinffs can no more refuse to come, at the call of the clair-
voyante, than these scenes refuse appearing. I wish also to ob-
serve, that the clairvoyante who addressed Madame Devaux has
not the least knowledge of Adele in her watchful state, and the
same may be said of Adele with regard to her. I will say, more-
over, that in the view at distance Adele took, it must be observed
that she declares it impossible for her to stand upright in the
store-room, which really is, as this lady has said, too small to
admit of her doing so materially. It is, therefore, not the view
alone that goes toward that spot — it is the whole spiritual indi-
vidual, as I have already remarked at the commencement of
this volume, in my answer to magnetizers who believe that
apparitions are a transmission of thoughts, and as I have proved
in the view Adele took of Mexico, in which she received a
coup-de-soleil (though it was rainy v/eather). It can not be for
a moment doubted but that the clairvoyante is wholly in the
places he visits at a distance, although answering our questions
by the organs of his material body, as if still within it. If, per-
chance, it should be arg-ued that he sees these thing-s in the
thought of the questioner, although the contrary is mathemati-
cally proved by the details present, which he gives you of
places you have not seen for many years, and the changes that
have taken place since your departure ; these details can not
be in your thoughts, since you are not acquainted with them,
and ulterior information only proves to you their reality. This
is a logical proof, admitting of no reply ; but, as there are per-
sons who have a reply for all, and who, prejudiced in their
belief of the transmission of thoughts, see but it, I beg them to
tell me how a clairvoyante can walk about in the least of their
thoucrhts, which represents a place capable of containing thou-
sands of spirits similar to the one visiting them. If I ask a
solution of this from these savans, it is less to combat the truth
of it than to fix for an instant their vast conception on this
explanation, by which they believe they have nothing more to
reply. I will tell them that it deserves a little more atten-
tion, and can not, though really existing, answer the ques-
tion I address to them. Does the clairvoyante see only what
you have seen or thought? Certainly not ; since every day
you obtain proofs of the contrary. In that case, then, where
does he see these things 1 Where they are, no doubt. And
they are, where we suppose them materially to be, far from us.
If they are far from us, and the spirit goes to visit them, in
body and not in sight — as it is easy for you to make sure
of— who can convey it to these places, the doors being shut,
and the walls well cemented ? Answer, I say to you. Is it
the places that come to your clairvoyante 1 Who brings these
places into your room ? I puzzle you a little more than I
shall be puzzled, in answering you that the soul, disengaged
from matter, has no more difficulties to encounter in coming at
your request than the clairvoyante experiences in going unseen
by your material eyes to those remote places, or than those
places have in coming to you.

Madame Devaux, as a studious woman, whose position is as
honorable as honored, desired, in order to complete her mag-
netic studies, to witness an apparition, in the second visit she
paid me ; we asked for M. Antoine Simon (her father). Adele
says : " I see a man, with gray hair not quite so tali as madame,
pretty corpulent, neck short, fine open forehead ; lively eyes,
expressive and mild; countenance fresh ; nose rather large at
the bottom, middling-size ; smiling mouth ; chin round : alto-
gether a good-looking old man. His death must have been
caused by the state of his blood, as I perceive it is black, thick,
and circulating with difficulty. He was subject to stoppages ;
he was treated for an aneurism, but it was not one ; his medi-
cal adviser ought rather to have diverted the course of the blood.
He must have experienced a sort of weight in the lower part
of the body, and lassitude in the limbs ; also a pain in his left
leg. I see him in a dark- colored riding-coat, light-colored
waistcoat, coarse blue pantaloons ; he wore shoes, and not
boots ; for his size as a man, his hand was not large. He had
a look commanding respect, was good and just. In his last mo-
ments, he was easily provoked. He was not fond of showing
off his kind feelings, preferring to keep them pent up within
himself; this caused him to be looked upon as very cold, though
he was not so. His domestic happiness was often disturbed,
his wife's character not being in sympathy with his own. He
tells me that your son is intended for the bar, that he will be an
advocate. He often comes to inspire you with good thoughts.
He has appeared to you in dreams ; your position will be
changed in two years' time, and you will reside in Paris." This
lady is greatly surprised at the minuteness and truth of these
details, especially those concerning her son ; from the earliest
age of the latter, the grandfather used to say, " My little grand-
son shall be a little advocate."

138. M. Dejean asks for M. Joseph Noel Dejean, of Cade-
rousse. Adele perceives a bald-pated old man, with a few gray
hairs. ** He appears to me," said she, " rather taller than the
gentleman here present : broad across the shoulders, high fore-
head, more prominent than flat, light blue eyes, lively and ex-
pressive, nose rather crooked, and slightly turned up at the tip,
ruddy complexion, chin round, neck thick. He must have suf-
fered in his respiration, and in the right arm, up to his shoul-
der, and also from weakness in the legs. I see that his chest
and heart are affected, though not with any mortal disease ; he
was afflicted with an inflammation of the bladder and the lower
part of his body ; he limps on his left leg and leans on a walk-
ing-stick ; this proceeds from a fall he once- had. In the other
hand he has a spectacle-case, which I took at first for a pipe. I
believe that he has been a sailor. He used to wear a riding-
coat folded across the chest, and longer than they are now worn ;
it appears to me of a coarse blue cloth : I see him in shoes, not
boots, and dark pantaloons. He was very fond of walking ; a
quiet life was most agreeable to him ; he was good, severe, but
upright and just. He is not communicative with me. I be-
lieve that he suffered great losses ; this made him taciturn. He
lost also many objects of his affection ; he says that he was
wronged, deceived, absolutely cheated; he underwent many
catastrophes ; he must have had a large fortune. He was sep-
arated from some one, and this gave him much pain. At last he
took to writing; he had a good head and a sound judgment. His
advice was often asked. He tells me that this gentleman is his
son. You have a share in some enterprise ; you do not reside
in Paris ; he advises you to be cautious, as some losses threaten
you ; he recommends you to leave Paris as soon as possible, as
grave events are about to take place there. He says that he is
very happy ; he has progressed; he has been long dead."

At every sitting I recommend persons before signing the tes-
timonial to make mention of whatever in the given details does
not appear to them exact; for I seek the truth with my whole
heart, and always experience fresh joy whenever I give others
satisfaction. The following are the observations of this gentle-
man : —

I " The nose was not turned up, but large and aquiline ; the
cheeks were not ruddy, but pale ; the neck was not long but
short, and rather small than large. I never knew him to suffer
in his respiration, in his right arm, or bladder. He had never
been a sailor. All the rest is very exact.

There are persons who, when called upon to sign a testimo-
nial, make it a case of conscience, and are unwilling to pledge
themselves to the truth of a thing respecting which they have
any doubts. Under the influence of this thought was it that M.
Dejean made the foregoitig observations. Adele told him that
the nose was crooked, which meant aquiline, but she maintains
that it turns up slightly at the tip ; she likewise sees the cheeks
ruddy, and the neck thick (a short neck always seems thicker
than any other), and as this gentleman had left his father many
years before his death, at which he was not present, he could
not be acquainted with his sufferings, or know whether the blood
had not flown up to his head in his last moments. Adele does
not aflirm that this person was a sailor, she says : ** I think that
he has been a navigator," because she perceives that his thoughts
take a nautical direction. At last, his son observes to us that it
was he himself who had been to sea, and that his doingr so had
caused his father much uneasiness. This explains to us why
Adele perceives his thoughts turned toward navigation. These
five little observations remain therefore worthless, and prove
that if these apparitions were transmission of thoughts they
would not exist. We find in this apparition fully forty details
acknowledged as true. I think that it ought to be received as
one of the best.

139. M. Fandar, usher to the tribunals at Troyes, wrote to
me about the beginning of August, to beg me to send him two
copies of the first volume of the " Secrets," expressing, at the
same time, a wish that I would cause his father, M. Nicolas
Fandar, to appear, telling me that if I could give a description
of liim he should experience from it the greatest pleasure. I
summoned the deceased. Adele said to me : " I have but little
liking for sucb apparitions, because the spirits themselves, con-
scious that none of their own friends are with me, come with
more difficulty and answer my questions with constraint." I
did not wish to refuse such consolation to this gentleman, whom
we had not the pleasure of knowing ; I desired, at the same time,
to convince all that we may, by the mere assistance of a name,
obtain apparitions as exact as if the persons were present; this
does away with all idea of communication of thought, as may
be seen in the following perception : Adele says, " I see a man
with gray hair, full ruddy countenance, large nose, stern look,
smiling mouth, and this betokens a lively and good disposition;
short neck, and breathing with difficulty. I perceive pimples
caused by heat of the blood on his face. He is pretty corpu-
lent, and of middling stature. I should say that he suffered in
l]is legs. He wears a brown vest, and I think, coarse, gray pan-
taloons. He is happy, and reunited to his wife, whom he dear-
ly loved on earth, and who was, as he says, very kind to him."

I forwarded this description to M. Fandar, who sent me the
following letter : —

" My Dear Monsieur : The indications given by our som-
nambulist are very exact ; two years before death snatched him
from me, my father suffered at intervals from oppressions,
which so increased that the fatal day rapidly approached ; his
legs became so swollen that he was unable to stir a single step.
My father usually wore a biown-colored vest, and coarse, gray
woollen pantaloons ; as he was of a very sanguine temperament,
it often happened that he had large pimples on his face. He
was very hasty, so that I am not surprised at your clairvoy-
ante's having looked upon his countenance as stern ; but his
passion over, he was one of the best of men. You perceive,
monsieur, that the indications of your clairvoyante are con-
formable to the truth. I authorize you to make such use of
this letter as you shall deem fit.

I shall make no reflection on this letter. I thank the gentle-
man for his frankness : may it contribute toward convincing
the adversaries of these apparitions ! I beg the reader will
pardon me my repetitions on this head ; but having only one
objection to combat — that of the transmission of thoughts, I
am bound to set forth whatsoever each apparition contains con-
trary to this foolish argument, in order to disarm for ever the
person more foolish still, who would wish to make use of it
against so positive a truth.

140. M. Blesson asks for M. Pierre Blesson, his father.
Adele sees in tliis gentleman " a person about the same size as
his son ;" he appears to her *' scarcely fifty years old ; his hair
is darker than yours," said she to his son ; " he has a splendid
countenance, fine forehead, soft, lively, and affable eyes ; he
wears a dark brown riding-coat with pockets at the sides, dark
blue or black pantaloons ; he surely died of the cholera, as I
think I recognise the symptoms of that disease. He was buried
in the common grave. His son inquires whether it really was
his body which he caused to be exhumed and buried in a grave
apart 1 He replied yes, and assures him that he is highly
pleased with his regret, and also with his kind attention toward
his mother. He tells him that he will succeed in his affairs, but
not without some trouble, and gives him advice on this head.
He assures him that he will be satisfied with his children when
they are grown up. He often wanders near his wife, whom
he loved and still loves very much. He awaits the happy mo-
ment of their being reunited to have no longer aught more to
desire.

This gentleman, after the perusal of the first volume of the
" Secrets," and an apparition I had already given him, experi-
mented himself on his somnambulists and obtained the same
results. He handed to me a note of certain facts which will be
found at the close of these sittings.

141. M. Dejean de la Bastie, already mentioned at sitting
138, desires a fresh apparition ; he asks for M. Marie Joseph
Theodore de Guigne. Adele perceives " a man about flirty
years of age, pretty tall, and with dark hair." M. Dejean here
interrupted Adele, telling her that this is not the portrait of the
person he requires. We see that this gentleman wishes for
particulars admitting of no doubt. At the words : " He is
pretty tall and dark," he says to us : " He was tall but not
dark." Adele replies that the person she was describing to
him must certainly have borne his name and belonged to his
family, that she is conscious of it. But he asks again for this
gentleman and a second personage appears, the first, however,
still remaining. "This one," said she, "is about thirty years
of age, tall and thin, with dark flaxen hair, pale countenance,
dark blue eyes of a tolerably mild expression, nose long, mouth
rather large than small, chin long; I see him in a sort of great
coat, such as persons no longer wear, it is devoid of grace, and
not unlike a dressing-gown ; it is of a dark blue or black
color ; this costume denotes to me a man in oflice, a priest, or
other functionary; he has an austere look ; he must have suf-
fered in the chest, I see that his lungs are gorged with blood.
He suffered a long time. He was very v^^eak. I believe that
privations were the cause of his illness and rendered his chest
so weak. I do not, however, see in him the seeds of any
mortal malady, and this induces me to believe that he died a
violent death, accidentally and unexpectedly. His hand is
large and thin. I see a medal on his breast, about as large as
the hollow of one's hand ; he wears open shoes, such as are no
longer worn. He is unwilling to speak to me, and this makes
me presume that he did not speak French."

The following are the observations that precede the signature
of M. Dejean : ** This person had a position more remarkable
for mildness and goodness than severity ; he died of a violent
fever, accompanied with a delirium that lasted several days,
and attributed by the physician to the want of a vigorous con-
stitution, worn out by absolute abstinence.

I pledged myself to making mention of the sittings just as I
should obtain them, in the interest of truth, which I love
and seek with a laudable intention ; but, if I do so, and en-
gage persons to make such observations as they deem fit pre-
vious to signing, I ought also to give notice that I have to fear
intelligences little prepared for such revelations, and, on the
part of my clairvoyante, moments more or less lucid ; then,
again, erroi's which spirits wandering continually around lis
strive to make clairvoyantes commit, as their whole affection
consists in misleading, and we are their victim?. However, we
have no reason to complain of tlie preceding apparition ; on the
contrary, we ought to think that, if this gentleman accepts it in
all its details, the observations that he adds do not destroy what
Adele has said — far from this being the case, they strengthen
it ; she pei'ceives no germ of any malady ; a violent fever that
takes off a man in a few days, is, indeed, as she says, an unex-
pected, accidental death.

This gentleman observes that the physician accuses the absti-
nence, which the deceased imposed on himself, as being the
cause of the destruction of his constitution, and havin or brought
on death.

Adele says : " He must have suffered in the chest, been very
weak for a long time ; 1 believe that privations are the cause
of this." For ray part, I see no difference between the word
privation and abstinence ; what we abstain from, we deprive
ourselves of.

Adele does not say that this man is wanting in kindness ; on
the contrary, she says that he has a mild look, but that, taken alto-
gether, he seems to have an austere air. I will observe, in
respect to this, that the gentleman was a priest, and so devoted
to religious ideas that he constantly wore a hair cloth. Judge
whether such a man should have a smiling air; thus, in the ob-
servation of M. Dejean, I see nothing that can cause us to
suspect any reservation.

This gentleman asks for a second apparition, in the person
-of Olympe Pascale. Adele says: "I see a little old woman
of sixty." The gentleman forthwith wishes to stop Adele,
saying to me : " The person I asked for was but twenty-seven."
T encourage Adele, however, to continue, seeing that she seems
vexed that persons unasked for should present themselves.
She observes to this gentleman, that their appearing is to be
attributed to his wishing for a multitude of persons at once.
The mere thinkincr of one of them is sufficient for its instanta-
neous appearance in our sphere; hence it is that she sees them
present themselves to her almost before their name is pro-
nounced. She is certain that the first one who presented him-
self was a relative, of the same name as tlie person asked for,
of whom, no doubt, the gentleman had been thinking. M.
Dejean acknowledges, with me, the justness of Adele's obser-
vation by saying: "True; all this is so surprising that a
person would wish to summon all his friends to acquire the
certitude of their all being really alive ; and I do, indeed, de-
sire to ask for many of them. It does not appear to me aston-
ishing, when I think of a relative, that he should be near me,
as he is near your clairvoyante, who is less acquainted with
him than I. If the mere wish suffices, I ought to have a pretty
good number around me." Adele's observation refers to that
which we have read in the apparition of M. Fandar, namely,
" that spirits come with less pleasure when there is no one
with the clairvoyante." We beg of her to continue her de-
scription : " She has gray hair," resumed she; " she was very
lively, quick in her movements, well proportioned. I see a
cap on her head ; she has three small ringlets hanging down
the sides in front ; gray, hollow eyes ; I believe she was a fair
woman, and that her eyes were of a light blue ; nose rather
sharp, mouth somewhat sunken, and back rather round. She
wears a dark striped robe, in the form of a peignoir, fastening
in front ; I see, too, that she wears a high collar."

We have already made an observation to the effect that some
persons may possibly experience a sort of weariness at read-
ing this mass of testimonials ; but if they have the good in-
spiration to remark that each apparition has quite a peculiar
type, .they will the better know how to appreciate the chain
and ensemhle they are called upon to form, to establish in them
a firm belief, which should bring them sweet consolation and
hope.

142. Tliis is the extract of a sitting, written down by a third
per. on, who wrs witness to it, which will give a more exact
idea of my not having amplified or omitted aught in the pre-
ceding sittings as to the futility of the details comprised in them,
and as to the facility which Adele possesses in expounding
them.

Madame de Longueville, who has great doubts as to the
possibility of spirits appearing to somnambulists, begs Madame
Adele to ask for her son and daughter, who had been dead
some time. Mademoiselle Noemie appeared, as having died
first; the clairvoyante thus describes her : " She appears to me
taller than her mother : she has auburn hair, a fine forehead,
beautiful eyebrows, expressive eyes, lively, intelligent, and
steady ; mouth small, chin round, slight rosy-colored cheeks,
beautiful hands, roseate nails ; she appears to be about two-
and-twenty years of age ; she suffered from an affection of
the heart ; she had a slight dry cough, and was troubled with
pain in the back ; the blood rushed to her chest, and caused
an inflammation ; she was also frequently troubled with a sore
throat, and pains in the head ; she wears a dark-colored dress."

Madame de Longueville acknowledges the exactitude of the
description, and the morbid symptoms ; there is but one par-
ticular inexact, that is the color of the hair, which was, as this
lady expressed herself, of a mahogany color. Adele replies
that no doubt this young lady used a good deal of pomatum,
thus making her hair look rather darker.

Not waiting to be asked for appears M. Emile de Longue-
ville, whom the clairvoyante thus describes : " He has flaxen
hair, very fine eyes shaded with long lashes ; forehead not so
high as his sister's ; he is thinner than she, and. yet he has a
plump white hand like a woman's ; he has a small mouth in
the form of a heart, nose well formed, but not of the same
shape as his sister's ; chin rather longer than hers ; he was
melancholy and suffered in the chest ; the cerebrum was too
small to lodge all the great ideas that he would have enter-
tained. He was unfortunate from his childhood, very good,
much given to reflection, and this no doubt considerably ener-
vated him."

Madame de Longueville acknowledges not only the exacti-
tude of the physical, moral, and intellectual portrait of her
child, but also the disease of the lungs of which he died.

The clairvoyante then sees what she never before saw : a
ray of thread of a thousand colors, pi'oceeding from the hearts
of the two children, drawing them together and meeting in the
heart of the mother ; the two children say that they are con-
stantly around their mother; it was them who gave her the
streno-th to undergo all the trials she had passed through. The
mother desires them to be asked whether she has any precau-
tions to take in the political events which may endanger her
life ; their answer is to the effect that they could never think
of warning her of obstacles that would prevent her from re-
joining them. They are very happy, but they desire her to be
with them. A lady present, who was acquainted with the two
spirits in the time of their terrestrial incarnation, knowing that
both, being pTiaJansterians, believed in the renewed incarnation
of souls upon earth, desires that Emile should be asked whether
the soul is incarnated anew on earth ; he replies, " No, the
soul does not return into a material body, it is sufficient to have
entered it once."

The clairvoyante says that the brother and sister are to-
gether in a beautiful light, more brilliant than that of many
persons who died before them. She desires to see Mademoi-
selle Noemie in her celestial costume. Her hair is in ringlets,
ornamented with a wreath of white roses ; she is dressed in
while. The clairvoyante accompanies her when the latter
returns to heaven. She enters into the ecstatic state ; her mag-
netizer brings her back to the earth. " You are insupportable,"
said she, " I should not have stayed very long. All is so beau-
tiful there and she played such delightful music." ** On earth,
too, much is beautiful," replies M. Cahagnet. " Anything
beautiful on earth ] — what horror !" exclaims the clairvoyante.
The apparition sitting terminates. She then visits (spiritually)
Madame de Longueville and another lady present, whom she
tells with great accuracy what they suffer. Left alone with one
lady, she repeats to her exactly what the clairvoyante of this
lady had told her a few days previously, discloses things it
was impossible for her to have known, and gives her advice
on matters this lady little expected, but which are perfectly
true.

143. M. Delaage, a skilful and conscientious magnetizer, the
author of the " Initiations into the Mysteries of Magnetism,"
the " Classes Disinherited," &c., a grandson of the great Chap-
tal, a young man passionately fond of the study of the occult
sciences, and better enabled than any other, from his profound
knowled,g;-e of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin languages, to
make researches in the sacred sanctuary of mysticism, came
one day to ask of me an apparition-sitting, desiring to con-
verse, as he said, through the medium of Adele with the soli-
taire D'Orval, whose prophecies he had commented upon in
the " Almanach de la Science du Diable," of which he is tho
editor, and in which he was so obliging as to insert my cabalistic
calculation as to the probable duration of the republic in
France. I hasten to gratify his wish. Scarcely was Adele
asleep than we summoned the recluse by the title of: The
author of the D^Orval Prophecy. This man forthwith ap-
peared. I resolved to drive him away in the name of God, if
he were not the person we asked for ; despite this command he
remained assuring us that he was the very man. Adele says to
us : "I am certain that he is the man. He appears to me en-
dowed with singular goodness. He bears the stamp of gentle-
ness on each feature of his physiognomy. He is not stout, far
from it, he is very thin ; he has very hollow eyes, a prominent
forehead, sallow complexion, as if he had been subject to pri-
vations, or fatigued by deep study. He is surrounded by a
very beautiful light. He tells me that he made his exit from
the earth more than two hundred years ago. But you are not
aware," observes Adele, " that time being with them no more,
it is very difficult for them to mark it." — " Does he still believe
in the fulfilment of his prophecies, concerning France and the
destruction of Paris V " Yes, but he says with M. Mallet that
there will be much less mischief done than he predicted.'*
— " Was he mistaken as to the dates 1" " He thinks not ;
but possibly he might ; at any rate these dates will be odd
numbers, 5, 7, or 9." — " Who according to him, will succeed
the republic ?" " The young prince in question." — ** I believe
that this solitaire is mistaken. In short what means this cock
and this lion spoken of in his prophecy V* " It is an alliance
that he will contract with a friendly power, representing force
by the lion and purity by the lily."- — " Does he think that war
between those who have and those who have not will exist V
" It already exists : it is those who have who make war on
those who have not." — " But those who have not will they
make war on those who have V " Certainly, and they will
prevail." — " What then will happen 1 Will the republic reign V*
" not more than it reigns at present ; it will be ter-
ror, such as now r (reigns) ; you will have wished it to
r (reign), you will have given the example." — " Who then
will be the chiefs ?" " They will emerge from obscurity.
They will awaken like spectres. Oh ! blood ! blood ! there
will be oceans of blood I" Adele is very much agitated. I
beg of M. Delaage not to question her any more on this sub-
ject. She exclaims : " I see a 3. I know not whether it
means three months or three years ! ! ! Poor people, thus to
butcher each other for one man ! ! Oh ! grief; oh ! civilization."
M. Delaage desires that his grandfather M. J. B. Chaptal
should appear. Adele forthwith sees him. " He has," said
she, '* gray hair ; lively, intelligent eyes, magnificent forehead,
smooth and not wrinkled as old men's usually are : there is a
small protuberance on each side, complexion clear and rosy,
nose well formed, but rather long, middling-sized mouth, thick
lips, chin rather long, fine corpulence. He wears a great coat,
such as we no longer see now-a-days, with large pockets at the
sides, and trimmings to his sleeves of a very dark color; 'tis
like hair, or, at least, it seems to me so. He was a meditative
man, having very elevated ideas. Oh ! how learned he was.

He devoted himself much to science, and believed in the im-
mortality of the soul. This man wrote a great deal." M. De-
laage causes several questions to be put to him concerning his
future prospects. The gentleman advises his grandson to con-
tinue his researches in the occult sciences, and terminate the
great philosophical work he is about. He promises him com-
plete success. After several questions, quite personal to him-
self, M. Delaage thanks Adele, and assures her that all the
details he has heard are very exact. I was about to awaken
her, wheu she exclaims : " Ah ! M. D'Orval is still there. I no
longer noticed him. This honest man appears to me so good
that I repent not having bid him good-by." — " Since he is still
present, ask him where he might find a copy of his prophecies ?"
*' He answers that there are several of them with different per-
sons, who would be unwilling to part with them. There is one
copy in the possession of an old woman at Verdun." M. De-
laage says that scarcely a week ago he heard what the solitaire
has just stated — that an old woman at Verdun actually does
possess a copy of the prophecies. The solitaire retires, and
Adele continues answering psychological questions put to her
by M. Delaage, and also M. Roustan, who was present at this
sitting. The latter desires to know whether we are born more
than once on earth 1 Adele says, " No," and strives to per-
suade him of this truth by arguments as ingenious as they are
sensible. She loses her time, becomes fatigued, and I rouse
her. M. Delaage shares not in the opinion of narrow-minded
magnetizers. He is far from believing in the transmission of
thoughts, and congratulates Adele on the happy doctrine she
has been called upon to teach men, by affording them the
means of so easily verifying, through somnambuhsm, the im-
mortal and individualized existence of the soul.

OBSERVATIONS.

As I have said in the first volume, this work is far from pr^~
senting the interest of romance by its necessarily broken and
abrupt style. Hence it will be found belter suited to the a ma
teurs of science than to readers passionately fond of the poet?,
cal descriptions in our romances of the day. I have sought t'>
render the style as clear as possible by stripping it of that
entourage of questions and scenes foreign to revelations of thi;»
kind. I hold less to writing well than to persuading thorough-
ly. Had I made my clairvoy antes speak like the actors in the
*' Thousand-and-One Nights," it might have been thought, and
with reason, that I presented a sequel to it. No, I have re-
mained within the limits of austere truth, acting the part of an
impartial historian, presenting to the philosophy of the day facts
in all their nudity, but also in all their sincerity. I have followed
up each apparition with observations independent of any sys-
tems ; connecting, in order, each fact with the ensemble of the
facts pre-cited, in order to assist the reader in drawing from the
whole the consequences he deems fit. I have not thought it
necessary to ofier him a greater number of testimonials, think-
ing that, if he admits but one, the rest are superfluous, and
would appear to him wearisome. I have not omitted the ad-
dress of the persons who signed them, and I hold the originals
at the disposition of those who may think proper to see them.
I believe I now ought to present the facts which have been
communicated to me by magnetizers, and other estimable per-
sons who have, like me, made a sacrifice of their name to
truth, for they are aware of the appellation reserved for them.
I beg the reader to peruse them calmly, and not reject the
marvellous which some of them contain. If I give publicity to
them, it is because I believe that I shall have it in my power
to demonstrate the possibility of them in the work on occult
philosophy I am about. Since I announced myself as willing
to replace faith by experiment, it would be ridiculous enough
in me to announce facts which could be accepted only through
faith. To be consistent with what T advance, and not to be
deserving- of the name of a madman, which might then be
rightly decreed me if I no longer kept in the path I traced out
for myself, 1 ought to give a receivable explanation of what I
take leave to publish, and I will keep my word.

The aforementioned facts are about to be preceded by two
scenes of departure from this globe, which are not devoid of a
certain interest for the science in which we are engaged.


LAST MOMENTS OF ELIZA.

We were devoting all our care to a young woman, named
Eliza, of whom mention is made in the first volume of this
work. She was about twenty-four years of age, and dying
slowly of consumption. Adele followed the progress of the
disease, without being able to arrest it. She knew what dread
this frail creature had of death, and perceived the unheard-of
efforts she made to cling to life. Oh, what a life was hers ! for
a thousand others it would have been a dreadful torture. This
unfortunate came every day to receive the consolations of our
good clairvoyante, who tried to persuade her that in less than
a month she would be radically cured ; to me, however, she
would say : ** In a month she will be no longer among us."
How painful was it to see this poor woman ascend one by one
our stairs, take rest by sitting down on the last stair of each
floor, in order to come and hear her friend say that she would
not die ; with what an outpouring of the heart did she press
her hands when she gave her this consolation ! She would go
away with renewed strength, to purchase a few drugs to make
an emollient optisan, and go to bed ; it was one day more passed
in this so cherished an existence. At length, one evening, a
message was brought, begging us to visit her at a distance,
inasmuch as she could no longer leave her bed. Adele said :
" She has not twenty-four hours to be among us." We were
soon with her to assure her that she was in a salutary crisis,
the issue of which would be a most happy one. O' May God
hear you !" replied she. We watched over her all night, ar;d
gathered the following words, which she addressed to each
of us : —

To her husband : *' Why do you weep since Adele says that
I am not consumptive, and that there is no danger 1 Still, I
spit a good deal ; how thick and disgusting are my expectora-
tions ! Oh ! she is deceived ; she sees me dying and strives to
console me — 'tis quite natural — 'tis humane. Thanks, my
good Adele, thanks ! But I — I too am a seer : heaven and
eternity are open lo me. I know what my complaint is now."

To me : " Alphonse, why are you so sad 1 Do you fear
seeing me happy 1" " No." replied I, " but I suffer at seeing
you suffer." — " You deceive me. I read in the thoughts, and
you are not sufficiently strong in your beliefs to see your
friends pass into the future existence. It is needless any longer
concealing from me my position. I see beside me this poor
corpse in which I suffer so much, and which still makes me
suffer so much in quitting it. Ah ! could you but see within
it; 'tis like a butchery in ruins, every morsel in which is
spoiled; the heart is dead like the rest ; and to think that I
was and am able to depart only when I shall have turned out
all this ! Ah ! there is enough yet for some hours. Do not
grow out of patience — it must be so ; I cling to it by its very
rottenness. Oh, my father! you are happy — you — what!
you expect me 1 and you, little angel ! you that hold out to me
your arms — pretty creature that I bore in my bosom. I am
about, then, to be reunited to you, never more to part. A whole
eternity you shall be with me. How foolish I was to fear
death ! I long now to be dead. I feel, on the contrary, that I
am being born. What beautiful things the heavens contain !
Ah, God of goodness ! forgive me. Friends, pray for me —
but no ! it is I that will pray for you. I have no longer but a
small morsel, about as big as the thumb, to spit out, but it still
clings fast. My God, rid me of it ! Alphonse, believe in
another life ; the only regret I have, is nof seeing you reduced
to my state. Adele said that we had the same disease : she
was inistakeii. You have yet a long time to suflfer ; you — I
am bappy — I go. Believe in the Divine goodness. Fare-
well !"

Thus ended this young woman, who so dearly cherished
existence — who used to laugh whenever I spoke to her of the
life to come, while admiring her beautiful black hair and say-
ing : " It is better to stand still than run. I do n't say nay, but
I have no wish to assure myself of it."

For twenty-four hours she was in a continual ecstasy, de-
scribing her disease, just as Adele had seen it ; knowing our
thoughts like ourselves ; .-speaking of death with the irony pro-
duced by a contrary conviction ; praising the beauties of heaven
with that admiration of which all beings detached from the
earth, and returning to the places of their first childhood, are
susceptible. I wept ; I know not whether it was from regret
at losing her, or vexation at not being able to accompany hei-.
Laugh, men of the age ! the scene invites laughter : you will
pass, like us all, through this last trial, which you can not shun.
To prepare yourselves for it, be present at the last moments
of the dying : they are almost all seers at this solemn hour.
They will make you comprehend that between you and the
grave there is but one step ; and that between your incredulity
and the truth there is an abyss, that you will never be able to
clear, if you remain under the empire of your satirical judg-
ment. Close not, therefore, your hearts and ears against men
more humble than yourself — men who desire to cure you of
the fear of death ; for at this supreme moment you will be in
fear, when you behold that lugubrious piece of furniture, com-
posed of five planks, awaiting this dearly-loved body, which
forms the ornament of your civilization : what ! it must be
thrown into this hole, where a multitude of worms await it to
make off of it a splendid feast. What is it then to be the ob-
ject of such abandonment and such contempt 1 What it was —
nothing ! It is because I know that you already tremble at the
thought of this sad ceremony, that I write these lines, to teach
you how to die — to calm the fear that gains upon you. If I
succeed in gaining this victory by the experiments I recom-
mend you to make, you will not treat me as a madman ; you
will believe in God — in a better life; and you will know how
to prepare for this departure with calm and courage — ay,
more — with joy !



THE LAST MOMENTS OF MY FATHER.

The 2d of April, 1848, I was devoting all my care to my
dearly-beloved father, formerly a long-course captain in the
commercial navy ; a man possessed of a disposition far from
credulous, and a soul thoroughly steeped in the effluvia of a
materialism, admitting only what matter sees and touches. He
was eighty years old, and greatly dreaded death ; constantly
repeating: "I well know where I am, but I don't know
whither I am going. I cast anchor on this globe, and may
God hold it here as long as possible."

I had rejoiced at the time of the printing of the " Secrets,"
thinking that I should dispose his heart, by their perusal, to
beliefs more cheering as to the future than those taught by the
philosophy of the day ; he contented himself with a toss of
the head, and said to me : " I like better to believe it than
going there to see it ; I believe, however, in the immortality of
the soul, but am not sure of its individuality, though I am dis-
posed to admit it, from the magnetic, somnambulic, and ecstatic
experiments of which you have rendered me witness. Were I
twenty years younger, I would study, with all my heart, to
modify my belief in this respect; but now it is somewhat late
to do so with success. Besides, I shall soon know what to
make of it !"

In such a frame of mind was it that he fell ill, and remained
eight days a prey to the acute sufferings of a suffocating asth-
ma ; the doctor could afford him no relief; several persons
magnetized him as well as myself, each in his turn. His de-
lirious state admitted not of his thinking himself so near to
attaining this solution of the individuality of the soul, but, at
the moment supreme, reason appeared to m.ake a last effort,
and tame the disorder of bis ideas. He said to us : " What
the doctor has hitherto prescribed has produced naught and
will produce naught, because I am going ! My body has
already been dead for some hours. I am still bound to it by a
few fibres that you can aid me to burst by magnetizing me to the
tips of my toes. Give me but magnetized water, that's all I
want for the moment." *' Why speak to me of death 1 — why
think of it ? You are much better than you were yesterday,
and, in a few days, you will be re-established." — " You are
right, I shall shortly be better ; my agony will be long, because
the soul can not quit the body before casting out all that is
destined to come out, and facilitate its passage. Hence it is
that there still remains for me a great deal to spit out. The
magnetized water loosens all this, give me some pretty often."
— *' Do not be thus cast down," replied I ; " your condition is
not so hopeless as you imagine." *' My condition is not un-
known to me : I see my body stretched out on this bed, it is
really dead, and you will have it buried to-morrow ; I am no
longer within it, I merely cling to it by a few threads, the hour
is not yet come. You will calm this crisis — but I shall have
another, which will be the last. They expect me up above —
patience, patience — I shall eoon be with you." A few hours
bad scarcely elapsed, and this departure had taken place !

During this long agony I searched with my look and my
thought on the edge of those lips through which the last breath
was to pass, that breath named the soul, because it is the life
of it ! I looked by the bedside, saying to myself: " He says
that his soul is there — and still causes his body to act ! Oh !
problem insoluble ! speech, doubtless dragged from the soul
to the body by a current, a sym.pathizing thread, which this
half-disorganized matter still breathes, forms an echo in its
interior, as we obtain an echo in places adapted to produce
such effect. So long as this inappreciable breath is in ac-
tivity, the whole machine works, though it is proved to me
that the soul has issued from it through every pore ; the breath,
then, is the drop of oil which the wheels await in order to
move !

O God, infinitely great ! O departure infinitely desired,
hurry me on in thy eternal course, that I may measure with the
eye and the spirit that immensity which separates me from the
true light ; come and tear off the material bandage that covers
my eyes ! come and purify this atmosphere, which poisons my
soul with errors ; oh ! divine light descend on me !

O, my God ! couldst thou have animated me to refuse me
reason? for what we term reason is folly — what we name life
and movement is death! — is nothingnpss ! Scarcely a few
seconds agro, I had near me a father, a friend — where is he?
Has he lived eighty years to arrive at the state of a corpse ?
Oh ! no, he told me he was then departing to another world ;
at that moment supreme the word of man is sacred ; I am bound
to believe him, and hope to rejoin him. This departure is but
an infinite chain, dragging after it myriads of beings in the
stalls joined to each of its rings. He is in one, I in another,
we shall arrive at the same port, within a few days of each
other, never more to part !



CORRESPONDENCE.



" TO M. CAHAGNET, AUTHOR OP THE ' SECRETS OF THE LIFE
TO COME REVEALED *

"Monsieur: I have read your work of the 'Secrets,' and,
though believing you sincere, its perusal, nevertheless, left a
doubt, which I wished wholly to remove. Having sometimes
the facility of being in communication with a somnambulist,
whose excellent clairvoyance I am well acquainted with, I pro-
posed to myself requesting her to ask for a few apparitions.
If I succeeded, the evidence was there for me. If I failed, I
should not from this infer that you were an impostor, but I
should not be satisfied, and should have endeavored to seize
another opportunity. At my first trial, however, I was des-
tlned to be positively enlightened ; for this is what happened
to me : —

" I will say, in the first place, that this somnambulist is one
of my sisters, who resides at a distance of fifteen leagues from
Paris, and this accounts for my not being often with her. On
the 5th of February, 1848, 1 magnetize my sister, and hold
with her the following discourse : * Have you not already told
me that we could cause deceased persons to appear ^ 'Yes.'
— ' Will you try now.' ' Yes. What person do you desire to
see V ' My father.' — ' Well, let us both ask for him.' At the
lapse of a few instants she says : ' Here he is.' — ' How do you
see him V ' In striped gray pantaloons, white waistcoat, brown
riding-coat ; he has the same features as we knew him to have.'
— * Ask him if he will answer a few questions.' ' He makes
no reply.' — ' Earnestly beg him to answer you.' ' He tells
me that he is willing to do so.' — ' Ask him if he is happy.'

* Yes.' — ' Has he seen God V ' Not yet ; but he is in hopes
of seeing him shortly.' — 'Has he seen our grandmother 1'

* No.' — ' How is that V ' Because she is not with him.' —
' Does he think that you can see her V * Yes,' — ' What means
employ]' 'The same as for him.' — My father disappeared.
This apparition is indeed real, I am convinced of it now ; but
I feared lest it should be the image of ray father present itself
to my sister's memory. Two days after I asked for another;
this time it was my wife's brother, whom I never saw, and my
sister has not the least knowledge of; he died eight years ago.
All I know of him is his name ; I asked for him. She says to
me : * Here he is.' — ' On what side does he appear to you V
' On my right.' — ' Give me a description of him.' * He is
rather light, has dark blue eyes, long face ; wears blue trowsers,
dark brown waistcoat, dress-coat.' — ' Has he already appeared
to his sister ]' * Yes, once only.' — ' Is he happy ]' ' Yes.' — •

* Where is he V * In heaven.' — ' Are there several heavens ]'
' Yes.' — ' How many V ' Three.' — 'Has he seen God V ' Yes.'
— ' Has he always seen him V ' No.' — ' Since when has he
seen him V ' Since his appearing to his sister.' — ' In what
form does he see God V ' God is a spirit.' — ' Could he tell me
Vv'hether God has any form V ' He sees him only in the form
of a sun.' — ' Can it be the sun that enlightens us V ' Yes.
But stop, he tells me that I am mistaken, that he did not say
that ; this sun can not be visible to us.' — ' Is it true that we
have each beside us a good angel and an evil spirit ? I can't
believe it.' * It is true, however.' — * Is there a hell wherein
we are everlastingly burned V ' No.' — * Then what is the
punishment allotted to those who have done evil V ' They are
deprived of the sight of God for a time more or less long,' —

* The Jews, Mahometans, &:c., do they, equally with the catho-
lics, enjoy the sight of God V * Oh ! yes, certainly.' — ' Ask
him if you can see your good angel V * Yes.' — ' What must
be done to effect this ]' ' We must pray to God to grant us
this favor.' — My brother-in-law disappears. We both put up
prayers to the Almighty to permit his angel to appear ; at the
lapse of an instant, she says : 'Here he is.' — 'Where is he V
' On my right.' — ' How does he appear V 'In white ; he has
flaxen hair and wings.' — ' What is his name ?' ' Gabriel.' —

* Has he lived on earth V ' Yes.' — ' When deceased persons
aprjear, is it the body in which we have known them on earth
that appears V ' No.' — ' Then why are they so much alike,
and dressed as they were among us V ' Because, otherwise,
it would be impossible to recognise them.' — ' What form, then,
has this soul when separated from its material body V ' It
resembles the body in form.' — -' Do we live in heaven as on
earth 1' * It is not the same existence.' — ' What do we do
there 1 — have we desires, and can we gratify them V ' Yes.*
— ' Do we see again the persons we loved on earth V * Yes,
there comes a time when we meet again.' — 'Are there houses,
gardens V ' It is a garden.' — ' Could he conduct you to heav-
en V ' Yes, by-and-by.' — He disappears.

" On my return to Paris, I hastened to make my wife ac-
quainted with the description of her brother. She was quite
astonished, and acknowledged the whole as very exact. What
seemed to her most extraordinary was the apparition she had
once seen just as my sister had said, and her brother wore the
dress described by my clairvoyante, a dress precisely the same
as what lie used to put on every Sunday. My wife added:
* A^Hiat is most singular is, that I never dreamed of my brother
but this once I now speak of, till last night, when he ao^ain
appeared to me just as before.'

" Thus, monsieur, as to the questions I addressed to her, as
well as to my sister's angel, it was simply to see how far their
answers would correspond with those you recount in your
work. I have seen with pleasure that they were almost in all
points alike.

" Since then I have obtained three more apparitions, which
have succeeded perfectly well. I had but one error, in a date
of thirty years instead of thirty-four, and I am surprised that
the persons who appear thus do not make mistakes oftener;
for all that has taken place on earth becoming quite worthless
to them in the state they are, and no longer setting any value
on earthly things, I can not conceive how they can answer with
so much precision.

" Thus, monsieur, I have obtained five apparitions quite real
in my mind. Three of the personages who appeared were
wholly unknown to me, as well as to my clairvoyante. I can,
therefore, no longer entertain the least doubt ; and whatever
be the opinion of simple or titled persons, who should attempt,
from the Christian pulpit or the academic chair, to deny the
truth of these perceptions, it would be impossible for them to
shake my faith in this respect; and I say more — I do myself
an honor in sharing the name they will give you, even were it
that of impostor. We are now a great body of sincere mag-
netizers, who would say to them, ' We are in the truth, and you
in the darkness 1'

I will not take the liberty of making any observation on the
sitting we have just read, wishing to leave the reader sole judge
in this grave question, and subject him to no influence. How-
ever, I begged M. Lecocq, when he should have an opportu-
nity of seeing his sister again, to submit to her the following
questions. This he did v/ith an obliging eagerness, and sent
me the answer we are about to read : —

*' I caused to appear a spirit that has enjoyed for some time
the presence of God. I suppose him in a fit state to answer
your questions, the result of which I communicate to you. I
caused this spirit to be asked —
" * 1. On leaving its material body, whither goes the soul ?
" ' In the first place, the soul goes straight up to its Creator,
to be judged according to its works; then finds itself placed in
a state correspondent with its actions. In this state we find
ourselves in heaven.'
*' ' 2. What does it do in those places ?
" * It ends with enjoying celestial happiness, perfect joy. It
can no longer desire anything better.'
*' ' 3. What is there in those places ?
*' ' Whatsoever we desire to see there.'
*' ' 4. How long a time does it remain in those places ?
" ' It remains there for ever.'
" * 5. But, however, if it again inhabits material bodies, how
can that be ?
" * Since it remains in heaven for ever, it does not inhabit
again other material bodies. Grod has said, " Whosoever dwells
in the heavens with me, dwells in them for ever !" '
** * 6. Does every one finally dwell in heaven, or only a few ?
" ' Every one finally dwells there : only there are some who
are a very long time before being in this state.'
" * 7. How does the soul know that it is asked for on earth `?
** * That depends in the first place on God, who permits men to
be convinced, by these apparitions, of the immortality of the soul.'
** * 8. How does it manage to appear thus in all the details
of its material body, and in the dress it wore on earth ?
'•' * It is an image imprinted on it.'
*' ' 9. At times there is something wanted in its features, or
the ensemble of its costume : what is the cause of this ?
" * That can not and ought not to exist, but there may be
causes which I am unable to apprehend.'

If I caused these questions to be put by M. Lecocq to his
clairvoyante, it was in order to obtain a clear solution on them
as a whole, foreseeing that his sister was of an order sufficiently
elevated to answer them.

To the eight questions she replies that the features and dress
in which spirits appear are imprinted on them. Such is Adele's
explanation, and this accounts for the mistakes (very rare, it is
true) which clairvoyantes may make in the descriptions they give
us of these spirits. Each dress worn during the life of the in-
dividual being imprinted on his spiritual body, as each point of
view or exterior image is imprinted in the domain of his mem-
ory, better named imagination, it is not therefore astonishing
that if the spirit asked for wore a blue dress-coat at the age of
thirty (for instance), and a surtout at fifty, the clairvoyante's eye,
according as it is more or less piercing, will be able to traverse
three or four similar impresses, which can not, as we may sup-
pose, be very deep, and then commit involuntary errors, the
cause of which, being unknown, would give rise to the suppo-
sition of a real error or a false apparition. Let the reader con-
sult on this head what Adele has said at sitting 101. I have
deemed these observations necessary for persons who study this
kind of perceptions, and warn them not to reject every appari-
tion the details of which they may not recognise as very exact.
The clairvoyance of the subject may be of great weight in the
goodness of the perception.

" Monsieur : Allow me to discourse with you a moment on
the extraordinary things I have read in your ' Secrets.' I
thought myself knowing in magnetism before reading your
work, but now I find myself like a man who springs out of
nothingness, and only commences his birth. What obligation
am I not under to you, monsieur, for having enlightened me
on matters which I suspected, and left me tuesfins: in a torrent
of doubts ! I required a little aid, and I have found it in your
book. I return you my most sincere thanks for it, and beg
you to thank in my name Madame Adele, the earthly angel
who has been so kind as to initiate us into the holy mysteries
of the Divine pov/er. Hovv' happy I deem her whom God has
made use of as an instrument to reveal to men truths which had
been hitherto almost hidden from or doubtful to their intelli-
gence ! I beg the Almighty to be pleased to continue his work,
trusting, by his divine support, that all men will become less
proud on earth, and learn that they are but atoms compared
with the great Ruler of the universe. I venture to hope that
the harmony which oxight to reign among those infinitely petty
beings is not, doubtless, far from its dawn I do not
pretend to have a wish to refute anything -in your excellent
work ; on the contrary, my feeble mind is assuredly unable to
comment on revelations so sublime !

" Still, reflections innumerable have come to puzzle my
brains when I read in many passages that we eat in heaven. I
knew not what to make of this word eat, which was no longer
in harmony with all that is so beautiful in the descriptions of
your terrestrial angel. Most fortunately, I am somewhat of a
somnambulist. I begged of my brother to be so kind as to
send me to sleep, that I might clear up this expression, which
offered me some doubts. When I was in a crisis, and after a
short time given to reflection, I began to laugh. My brother
asked me the cause of my doing so, and I said to him : * Hark
ye, my friend, I am about to make clear to you what just now
engaged my thoughts. The expression eat is a terrestrial word
which the spirit could not render otherwise to be understood
of men; in many circumstances it is obliged to proceed thus —
otherwise it would be beset with questions which, by being
recapitulated, tend to fatigue it ; for oftentimes a questioner
reverts, unwittingly, half a score times, to the same subject,
and the celestial spirit must be endowed with singular goodness
if it does not move off and leave such catechiser unanswered.'
To return to the word eat : it is correct enough, but it is un-
derstood in two different ways. The first is terrestrial eating
which relates to matter ; the second spiritual eating which
relates to the Divine essence. The last is a problem difficult
enough to solve, especially by men, seeing that in heaven all
is ideal, and performed only through emanation. No matter
what you desire to see or have, it presents itself to your eyes.

Thus I desire to eat a peach ; it presents itself forthwith to my
view, and then I can satisfy myself. But take care, earthly
men, and consider that this peach is but a celestial emanation,
and that the spirit desiring it can taste only its emanations :
this fully satisfies him, without being any the more for that
subjected to earthly functions. For instance, a person asleep
dreams that he is eating a peach : certainly he savors in his
state all its deliciousness — still he has not one; this prevents
him not from having had the same enjoyment as if it had been
a real peach. This spirit, disengaged from matter, has placed
him on a level with the celestial essence, where he will be after
his departure from this globe.

The observations we have just read are not those of a feeble
somnambulist, as this gentleman has the humility to say. I
ought to add thai (now at the age of sixty) for thirty years lie
has been a magnetizer and occasionally a clairvoyante, and that
the definition he gives us is not in contradiction with good sense,
but quite the contrary, as it maintains what Binet, A dele, and
all good clairvoyantes, affirm in this respect. The celestial state
is a kind of eternal creation. I say a kind, because God alone
has created all from all eternity ; but the facility which spirits
possess of obtaining desired objects would make believe that
they themselves create these very objects, had we not proof to
the contrary. Let the sittings of Binet on this subject in our
first volume be read over ag^ain.

As I have already said, for fear of rendering this work wea-
risome to read, I have not thought fit to continue giving an
account of all the apparition-sittings I obtain : hence it is that I
have made no mention of one which M. Lemoine solicited from
Adele, to assure himself whether she perceived his father as he
himself perceived him in his dreams. This gentleman had taken
a note of this sitting, and forwarded an account of it to me a
few days after, with a request that I would insert it just as he
had written it. This I hasten to do, as much to comply with
his just request, as to give the reader one proof more, if he still
needs it : —

"SITTING OF THE IOtH OF AUGUST, 1848, GIVEN BY MADAME
ADELE, THE ESCTATIC OF M. CAHAGNET.

*' I had been to M. Cahagnet's, to beg of Madade Adele to
suffer herself to be sent to sleep, in order to visit anew my
body, which had been ailing for a long time. I had benefited
by her former prescriptions, and this sitting has only confirmed
the advice which she recommended me to follow about a fort-
night ago. Finding myself much stronger and in better health,
I am heartily glad that I availed myself of her speciality.

" I had long desired that she should summon my father, who
died in 1824, at the age of sixty-six, in order to be more con-
vinced, if that could be possible, than by what I am able to
see myself when asleep, inasmuch as I have no recollection of
it on awaking. It was no longer a doubt on my part — it was
a want. Madame Adele had never known my father; she
kindly consented to ask for him. At the lapse of an instant, I
saw her make a pretty decided movement which announced
to me his arrival. In fact, it was my father. The ecstatic
said to me, ' T see a man whose hair is quite white, with a
pigtail and sides.' (This is true; my father preserved to the
day of his death his old-fashioned head-dress.) * He is a man
of lofty stature,' said she, ' having several scars on his face.' —
(My father was above six feet, and had been ill-used by the
small-pox.) * His nose is broken and broad at the tip ; he is
very corpulent and round-shouldered.' — (All this is true.) ' He
was afltlicted with rheumatism in the arms, and particularly in
the lower part of the loins. He died of this rheumatism, which
flew up into his chest. He must have suffered very much; he
used also to suffer pretty often from a cough, which was occa-
sioned by a prickling he felt in the throat.' — (All this is true.)
She says that my father ' is very happy, in a state he would not
change to come back upon earth. He was,' continues she, * of
a pretty cheerful disposition ; possessed a good and feeling
heart ; and was, in short, a thoroughly honest man. I like him
very mucli,' says she, * and have great pleasure in seeing him;
I hope this will not be the last time.'

" I requested her to ask my father whether I should do right to
go and settle in Touraine, in the commtme of F . 'As you
will not go,' said he to me, * I have no details to give you on
the matter.' * I perceive,' says the ecstatic, * that you would be
exposed there to vengeance, and that some misfortune might
befall you ; the persons you would have to do with are treach-
erous and wicked, and withal, not over-scrupulous.' As I had
read the first volume of the ' Secrets* of M. Cahagnet, where
similar sittings are found in great numbers, I was less astonished
than any other person would liave been. However, the presence
of my father who had been dead so long a time, the pleasure of
knowing that he was by my side penetrated me with a holy re-
spect difficult to describe ; the idea of knowing that he was
happy : the hope of a future which would reunite me to him,
made such an impression on me that my soul could at this mo-
ment have embraced death as a sovereign good.

I ought to add that M. Lemoine afterward made inquiries re-
specting the place offered him as a steward of a castle. He
knew that the persons who had hitherto filled this place had
been very severe with the people round about ; this had ren-
dered the latter disaffected toward the castle, and the person
who should succeed the late steward might indeed suffer for
liim, seeing that the inhabitants of this part of the country are,
as he was told, vicious and vindictive. He refused the place
for this reason and others that remain unknown to me ; the pre-
diction of his father thus became verified.

" Monsieur : From the appeal you make in your first volume
of the ' Secrets of the Life to Come Revealed,' to persons who
may have any facts to communicate to you for insertion in the
second volume you intend publishing, I beg to respond to this
invitation in the interest, be it understood, of the occult sciences ;
and, in order to prove to you that I have been in nowise aston-
ished at the contents of your book, which I have read with great
pleasure. Formerly a theatrical artiste, I devoted myself pas-
sionately to the study of cabalism, as offering, by its studious
meditations, a counterpoise to the lighter studies of the theatre.
I made acquaintance with a society (of madmen, the world.
says ; of savans^ I reply), into which I was admitted, not with-
out some difficulty. To tell you all that took place in this so-
ciety, all the time I was a member of it, would be to undertake
a work in three volumes. I will cite one fact, out of a thou-
sand similar ones, which corresponds with what your somnam-
bulist Binet says relative to the strength and power of spirits.
The chief of our circle possessed a small, strong box, about a
foot long, ten inches wide, and six in depth, in which he secured
very valuable articles. One day it was stolen from him ; he
was in great distress, when he sent to sleep a young man whom
we ordinarily employed at our sittings. He questionod him as
to the disappearance of the box, and begged him to find it. He
went further, he ordered the spirit, who habitually came at our
call, to bring back to him the box. The somnambulist v\^as ly-
ing on the bed, which was at the farther end of the apartment,
in a complete state of catalepsy ; I was in the middle of the
room with this gentleman, and two other gentlemen, of the name
of Revole, father and son. The clairvoyante issued a command,
told us to open the window, which I did instantly, and M. Pic-
olet beheld arriving the precious box, which he received in his
hands at the moment I was going to take it myself. We saw
nothing else ; and were no more surprised at this conveyance
than we were at all that took place daily before our eyes. Yes,
monsieur, a spirit can convey objects. Write this in my name
— say, moreover, that I am seventy-eight years old, and that I
should not wish, at such an age, to be a madman, or to impose
on my fellow- men.

Shall I annex any observations to such a relation ? I should
not want for them, if I had a mind to seek for them in the libra-
ry of supeinutural facts, which would prove the possibihty of
them. It would be to enter upon a series of arguments on both
sides, not suited to the limits of this work. I ought to say
that I have studied this venerable old man, for the sole purpose
of assuring myself of his moral condition ; and I confess that I
should wish to possess his excellent lucidity and superior infor-
mation. He must be a man of veracity, since he is of sound
mind, and calls Heaven to testify to the truth of his assertions.
For my part, I never obtained any spiritual conveyance. One
of my clairvoyantes once showed me one that he had received
over night. I studied the fact, deemed it possible ; but not
having seen it with my own eyes, I made no mention of it. I
set forth only what I have seen ; however, I believe in such con-
veyances, and wnll demonstrate the possibility of them by laws
wholly physical. I will treat of this proposition in the philo-
sophical work I have already spoken of If we ougiit to admit
nothing without mature examination, let us, in like manner,
deny nothing without mature examination.

We borrow from the journal Lta Repuhlique, of the 3d Feb-
ruary, 1849, a recital of this nature, extracted from the Gazette
des Trihunaux. This fact is not the only one of which we have
a knowledge ; studious men will judge it with the impartiality
necessary to examinations of this kind, and will not conclude, I
am certain, as would the savans, who deny when they can not
explain : —

*' One of the most singular facts, a fact reproducing itself ev-
ery night for the last three weeks, and baffling all imaginable
plans that have been adopted to discover the cause of it, sets in
commotion the whole of the populous quarter of the Montagne-
Sainte-Genevieve, the Sorbonne, and the Place Saint-Michel.
The double inquiry, judicial and administrative, which has been
going on for some days past, verifies, in accord with public
clamor, the following statement : —

" In the work of demolition commenced for the opening of
a new street which is to join the Sorbonne to the Pantheon, and
the Ecole de Droit, traversing the Rue des Gres up to the old
church which has successively been used as a school and bar-
racks, at the extremity of a piece of ground w^here once stood
a public ballroom, is a vv^ood and charcoal yard, bounded by a
dwelling-house one story high, with lofts. It is this house, stand-
ing at a certain distance from the street, and separated from the
adjoining buildings now in course of demolition, by the large
excavations of the old enclosure wall of Paris, constructed un-
der Philippe Auguste, laid open by the works, which every
evening and all night is assailed by a shower of projectiles,
which, from their size, and the violence with which they are
hurled, produce such havoc that the windows are smashed, the
doors broken open, altogether presenting the appearance of a
place that has been attacked by the catapulta or grape-shot.

"Whence come these projectiles, consisting of paving-stones,
fragments of ruins, huge blocks, which, considering their weight
and the distance they come from, evidently could not be hurled
by the hand of man ? This is what it has been hitherto impos-
sible to find out. In vain has been exercised, under the per-
sonal direction of the commissary of police, and able agents, a
surveillance by day and night; in vain have been let loose every
night in the surrounding enclosures, watch-dogs ; nothing has
been able to explain the phenomenon which, in their credulity,
the people attribute to mysterious causes ; the projectiles have
continued showering down with a crash on the house, hurled at
a great height above the heads of those placed on the lookout,
even on the roofs of the neighboring houses, apparently coming
from a great distance, and reaching their object with a precision
in some sort mathematical, not one appearing to deviate in its
parabolic course from the object invariably aimed at.

" We will not go into more ample details respecting this fact,
which, no doubt — thanks to the solicitude it has awakened —
will soon be accounted for. Already the inquiry extends over
whatsoever could attach, in this object, to the explanation of
the adage, Cui p?'odest is auctor. Nevertheless, we will remark
that in circumstances somewhat analogous, and which equally
created a certain sensation in Paris, when, for instance, a
shower of small pieces of money attracted, every eveninp-, the
simpletons of Paris to the Rue de Montesquieu ; or, when all
the bells of a house in the Rue de Make were set going by an
invisible hand, it was impossible to succeed in any discovery,
find an explanation, a first cause, whatever it might be. Let
us hope that this time we shall arrive at a more precise result."

The Repuhlicjue, of the 4th Febi'uary, continues: —

*' The Gazette des Tribunaux still speaks of the famous war-
machine, so formidable, and above all so mysterious, which sets
in commotion the inhabitants of the quarter Saint Jacques.
To-day this paper says : —

" ' The singular fact of the throw of projectiles against the
house of a dealer in wood and charcoal, Rue Neuve-de-Cluny,
near the Place du Pantheon, has continued being reproduced
up to this very day, despite the incessant surveillance exercised
on the very spot.

*' * At eleven o'clock, although agents were stationed at all
the adjacent points, an enormous stone struck against the door
(barricaded) of the house. At three o'clock, the chief, ad
interim, of the safety-service, and five or six of his principal
subordinates, being busily engaged in making inquiries, con-
cerning different circumstances, of the occupiers of the house,
an immense rough stone fell shivering at their feet, like the
bursting of a bomb.

*' * We are lost in conjectures. The doors, the windows, are
replaced by planks nailed up inside, to prevent the inmates of
the house from being struck, as their furniture, and even their
beds, have been smashed by the projectiles.' "

We possess a great number of similar accounts, which we
shall not attempt to relate. We assure the police, that but one
thing is wanted to discover the authors of this devastation, that
is the somnambulic view. We will revert to this affair in our
journal, the " Magnetiseur Spiritualiste."

" MoNSEiUR AND Friend : The impression made on me by
a perusal of your book is ; That you seem to me a man who
seeks after the truth, and that your desire has led you to raise
a corner of the veil which concealed from mankind the future
life — a life to me as certain as the present one. In your first
volume, you ask magnetizers for facts similar to those you
therein treat of; to comply w^ith this request, I supply you
with one which affected me personally. For the sake of truth,
I will do my best to recount it to you. This extraordinary
fact happened to me one night in the month of April, 1839. I
woke up, about two o'clock in the morning, in a frightful state
of moral suffering. I felt myself overcome by a secret power,
that held me down, as if crucified on my bed, by the side of
my wife, who was asleep, and whom the power that thus over-
came me had prevented me from waking. All my moral force
seemed to me concentrated in my heart. I retained my pres-
ence of mind, and, although it was impossible for me to move
my body, I possessed my whole power of observation, I felt
my heart full of a fluid, which made me suffer as if silken
threads had been drawn through it. But, despite the power
that thus grasped me, my resistance was in a ratio with my
great confidence in God, and I doubted not being extricated
from this miserable state. When my eyes opened, I perceived
the moon reflecting her light into my room ; and when I closed
them, I found myself in conversation with a being I had known
when he was alive, on earth. In the first place, he drew near
and asked me for something ; he was dressed in a sorry black
riding-coat, and his shirt w^as very dirty ; in short, his appear-
ance bespoke the most profound misery : he concluded by
ordering me to pray for him ; but, as I hate constraint, I refused
doing so, braving the consequences. I then felt his breath
enter into my nostrils, and poison me with an insupportable
and infernal odor ; but, thanks to God, I made an effort on
myself, despite those he made to prevent me. I roused my
wife, and begged her to push me out of bed, which she did. I
walked barefooted in my room ; but I was still battling with
this man by my interior senses. I drank a glass of fresh water,
handed me by my wife, and begged her to kneel down with
me and pray to God for my deliverance. We prayed fer-
vently. I found myself better ; there no longer remained in me
but those pangs of the heart, from the force of the bonds in
which it seemed to me grasped.

*' Tn the morning, by way of diverting my thoughts, I walked
to the exhibition of the products of industry, and this greatly
alleviated me.

'* I durst not speak of my singular adventure to any one,
knowinof how if^norant and incredulous the world is in such
matters,

" Oh, monsieur, if, at that period, I had had the happiness
of knowing a man as I now know you, your heart, I love to
think so, would have become the refage of mine ; but poor
and without support, against this world of wicked spirits, I
remained in my painful condition for several months. The
pain at my heart never left me ; my physical faculties were not,
however, disordered : God, I was sure of it, would, sooner or
later, raise up for me a means of relief, and throw a light on
this mystery of the human soul. However, I had given a hint
of my adventure to our worthy friend, M. Pirlot. I perceive
that my letter might become wearisome ; but from the love I
know you have for the truth, joined to that I have of rendering
homage to Divine Providence, I beg permission to relate how
I recovered my tranquillity. Now, it happened, one day, that
the wife of M. Pirlot was indisposed, and Madame Pirou was
sent for — a somnambulist whom I did not know, notwithstand-
ing her high reputation for clairvoyance. As M. Pirlot knew
"vyhat a wretched state of obsession I was in, he told me to come
to the consultation that was to be held. I repaired thither,
with the desire of getting myself visited by this lady. Colonel
R was the person who sent her to sleep. I asked, in my
turn, the favor of presenting my hand to the clairvoyante, that
she might have the kindness to examine me. Scarcely had she
touched me than she uttered a cry of alarm as to my condition,
saying that I was beset by a spirit she saw, in a hideous form,
coiled under my nose, and enveloped in a most disgusting
atmosphere. The most infectious odors surrounded it ; and
she was not at all surprised at my unfortunate situation. She
invited all present to join with her in supplicating the angels
to intercede with God for me. A few days after this cere-
mony, I was wholly relieved.

The fact narrated here by M. Binet has naught of ridiculous
in it for me who was, through the effect of my own will, beset
for three years, and saw infinitely more than this estimable
and intelligent citizen, who had acquired, in his quarter, wherein
he has lived full forty years, a claim to the esteem of all his
neighbors, who occasionally find, in his wise counsels, hints
that are not within the jurisdiction of a man laboring under
the influence of hallucination.

'* My Dear Friend : Your work, of the * Secrets of the
Life to Come Revealed,' is the most curious and instructive
book that can possibly be read. I congratulate you on the
courage you have displayed by publishing it; for, sooner or
later, it will produce beneficial effects.

" I do not expect that men in general will adopt the con-
soling truths you publish, and the practice of which you recom-
mend, by employing the same means as you have employed in
order to discover the mysteries of celestial happiness. I so
much the less expect it, as I feel, on the contrary, rising up
against the principles so true of the immortality of the soul,
and the joys eternally in store for it, the cortege of materialists
and skeptics, whose mind is fed only with ideas stamped with
errors, prejudices, and religious superstitions; — people who
believe only what they touch and see by their material eyes,
rejecting as dangerous all that they have learned at the schools ;
and yet, if one and the other would but read your book, they
would see that all that takes place in heaven among souls, is
the most complete condemnation of the state of society on our
earth. On the latter, man struggles incessantly against the
storm of free-will — words ill understood. What victims fall
into the abyss of evil. In heaven, the definition of good and
evil is unknown ; the latter never existed there ! I pass on to
the object of my letter. Initiated into, and familiarized for
long years with, tlie world of spirits, I will not say that your
w-ork has taught me nothing; I should deceive you. You
mention therein : —

'* 1. That spirits can see, touch, and carry, in certain cir-
cumstances, material objects.

" 2. That a spirit can visit us on earth in a material form.

" 3. That man material may render himself invisible. Your
book is deficient in facts, in support of these assertions. Allow
me, therefore (as you suspect neither my good faith nor my
conscientiousness, and as I detest falsehood), to offer you some
real facts on what you announce.

*' The following are the initials of the persons who were
present at what I am about to recount to you : 1st, M. Pi — ;
2d, M. Bar—; 3d, M. Bou— ; 4th, M. Rev—; 5th, M. A.
Rev — , junior; 6th, Ad — , the somnambulist, and 7th, myself.

" FIRST FACT.

" M, Rev — , senior, and myself, were taking a walk on the
high road of a town in Brittany. On entering the hotel, M.
Rev — perceived that he had lost his gold seal, which was of
great value. After dinner, he sent Ad — to sleep, saying to
her : " Call such a spirit, beg him, and order him, if need be,
to go and look for my seal among a heap of stones by the sea-
side, at a league's distance from here.' The command was
scarcely given, when the spirit delivered the seal to Ad — , who
said to M. Rev — , * Thank the spirit and dismiss him.'

'* SECOND FACT.

" On our return to Nantes, whence we had first set out,
Ad — , being sent to sleep, said to M. Rev — , sen. : * The colonel
is not wholly recovered from his illness ; to cure him we must
ask for a few drops of medicine, prepare a glass of sugar and
water, and cut a piece of white paper in the form of a triangle.

Describe a circle on the floor, place the triangle in the middle
of the circle, set down the glass of sugar and water on the tri-
angle, and let the vertical angle look toward the east.' All
these dispositions made, Ad — said to M. Rev — : ' Call the
angel of the Lord, and beg him to pour into the glass of sugar
and water the number of drops sufficient to cure the colonel.'
"While M. Rev — was commencing the invocation, Ad — stopped
him, tellinsf him that the trianorle was not due east. As at this
moment my eyes were directed toward the glass, I beheld with
the greatest astonishment the paper triangle and the glass turn
of themselves toward the east. After the invocation, and when
the sugar-and-water was drunk up, God and the angel were
thanked by us. Needless to say that, in less than an hour,
I was wholly relieved. This took place in the month of April,
1827.

t( j\propos of the facts, I ought to observe that the seal was
brought back by a spii'it of an inferior order, whom Ad —
qualified as an elementary spirit of the earth, and whose name
was Milknas ; this was invariably the spirit we employed for
sending or receiving material objects. As to the drops put into
the glass of sugar and water, they were introduced into it by
an angel of high degree.

" These observations are indispensable, to enable you to dis-
tinguish, in the divers facts I purpose revealing to you, by
what order of spirits these facts were accomplished. Neverthe-
less, I believe that, when it concerns them to lend their aid to
the man who fears and loves God, the spirits that he invokes
are always good ; for the bad, far from serving him, seek only
to injure him, and excite him to evil by the most seducing and
even the most atrocious temptations, when they perceive that
the man yields to their attacks without the intention of having
recourse to God. Allow me this reflection, which is rather a
sudden inspiration than the result of long experience.

" THIRD FACT.

" Before returning to Paris, and while I was still residing at
Nantes, those who received me at a later period into the bosom
of their society, which was presided over by M. Pi — , a gentle-
man of great merit and extraordinary scientific attainments (it
was he who magnetized Ad — ), assembled one evening at M.
Pi — 's, to take part in a ceremony relative to occult pursuits.
M. Pi — sent Ad — to sleep, and each member sat down in a
chair, placed for him within a large circle drawn on the floor,
each having at his feet, aiid right in front of him, a lamp, the
wick of which was burnins^ in alcohol. M. Pi — having- fiist
called down the blessing of God on those present, the cere-
mony commenced. Scarcely, however, had it begun, than
shrill cries, immoderate laughter, and horrible hissing, resound-
ed in the room ; the lamps were quickly extinguished, and on
all sides fell pieces of old iron, bars of iron, &c. ; but all the.^e
projectiles lodged on the edge of the circle, without striking
any one. Forthwith, M. Pi — , armed with his talisman, drove
out, in the name of God, these evil spirits, who decamped,
leaving us their projectiles.

" This third fact responds in the affirmative to the questions
you addressed to Swedenborg, to inquire whether evil spirits
could create disorder in a room by displacing and upsetting the
furniture. Swedenborg affirmed that they could do so, and I
have just given you a proof of the truth of his assertion.

** I pause ; my bad sight and trembling hand prevent me
from continuing. Soon you shall have the sequel ; in the
meanwhile, believe me, &c., &c.

*' Colonel Roger,
" 4 Rue Neuve de VTJniversite, "Parish

Well, my lords of science, we grow amusing, we take our
patent as madmen, which we present to you to sign ! What
think you of it % We could have ventured to hope for absolu-
tion at the commencement of this work ; but toward its close,
we fall into the absurd. The absurd ! be it so ; I accept your
definition, on condition that you will read us to the end, were
it only to your children, by way of recalling to tkeir memory
their old ghost-tales. Thus you perceive that we are not very
exacting; we know you to be infinitely learned, and that we
do but excite your pity ; consequently are we sure of success.

But you, men of good faith, we do rot address ourselves to you
to laugh at your expense or to make you laugh at ours ; we
certify to you that we will mathematically prove to you the
possibility of these marvels ; what we now present to you is but
a sketch ; we leave aside facts which will serve us by-and-by to
regain your confidence should we lose it now. We assure
you that we have frequented the company of Colonel Roger
for these two years past, loiili the sole view of studying Jiim.
For we too have our share of doubts ; we have caused him to
be magnetically visited, and in his presence, by our best clair-
voyantes ; we have gone so far as to make inquiries as to cer-
tain acts (without his knowledge), and have obtained the assur-
ance that he was in the full enjoyment of a sound mind, and
that the facts recounted by him were true ; eye-witnesses have
affirmed this to us. It is from notions so positive that we give
publicity to the three facts that have been read, out of twenty
others which remain in my portfolio. But let us continue, all
madmen are not yet at Charenton (Bedlam) : —

" Monsieur : Having read with pleasure your first volume
of the * Secrets of the Life to Come Revealed,' and desiring to
acquire by myself proofs of the facility which, as you announce,
all good clairvoyantes possess of communicating with the souls
of deceased persons, I actively busied myself in provoking
such apparitions, and had the happiness to succeed more easily
than by the aid of the magic mirror ; the visions are much bet-
ter delineated, make a greater impression on the clairvoyante,
and offer him the twofold advantage of conversing with those
blessed souls ! As in your first volume you beg all magneti-
zers who may possess facts similar to those you publish to com-
municate them to you, I send you the following, taken from
among many others, and authorize you to make such use of
them as you deem fit.

" For a long time I have been in the habit of magnetizing a
person whoM I have known from my childhood, and who for
some months was very ill and given over by the physicians ; I
had the happiness to restore her to health. From the first days
of her treatment, she gave me proofs of singular clairvoyance,
of which I took advantage to put her in correspondence with
several deceased relatives and friends. I addressed to her
questions similar to yours ; all her answers were similar, in a
leligious and psychological point of view.. Yesterday, I asked,
for a little sister of mine, whom I never saw and who died at
the age of eight months. She forthwith exclaimed : * T see a
pretiy little girl ! oh ! good heavens ! how beautiful she is !
But she'll fall, don't you see her 1 Hold out your arms to her.'
I reassured her by telling her that a spirit could not fall. She
resumed : ' The fact is that the clouds she is upon are so light !
so transparent! that I can't understand how they can support
this beautiful child.' 'Make her draw near,' said I. She
keeps at a distance and smiles on me, but how pretty she is !
Never before did I see such an angelic countenance.' * What
age may she be V ' From about two and a half to three years
of age.' ' How is she dressed V ' She is quite bare.' * What
is the color of her hair V * Her hair is of a flaxen color and
curly. But how beautiful she is !' 1 could not rouse this lady
out of the admiration in which she was absorbed. Then, sud-
denly, she appears very much surprised, and exclaims : ' She
is going away! — she is going away ! Oh ! I am wrong, she
is going to meet her good mother. In fact, my mother was
coming up stairs at this instant, for she entered almost imme-
diately after. I was so much the more surprised as my clair-
voyante does not see material persons at hand. I could not,
therefore, doubt but that it was as she said. She resumed :

* Ah ! how pleased she is at seeing her mother, she smiles on
her with such a beautiful expression ! Why can not her
mother herself see her?' At this instant, she stretched out
her arms and caught her ? I told her to embrace her, but she
replied : ' No, I should not dare. I am not worthy of doing
so.' — ' Do you really feel the weight of this child's body you
hold in your arms, as if it were material V * Certainly, how
can you doubt it?' — '1 am far from doubting it,' replied I;

* for at this moment I feel something extraordinary passing
within me ; the influence of this little angel must surely be the
cause of it. This would suflice to remove all my doubts had I
any remaining.' I then inquired of ray mother whether this
child had flaxen hair, and whether she was as beautiful as my
clairvoyante described her. She replied : ' All this is very
true ; the neighbors.used to say that they never beheld such a
beaijtiful little creature.'

" Only think, monsieur, what was my joy and whether 1
could still doubt the truth of such apparitions. I recognised
in this one what your clairvoyantes affirm relative to children
that die before the age of three years, that they seem not to
exceed that age. Were it otherwise, it would be next to im-
possible to recognise them.

" I never knew this little sister of mine, as she died before
I was born ; my clairvoyante could not, therefore, perceive the
image of her in my thought. Such supposition is as absurd as
if it were said that a clairvoyante jDerceives in the thought
places and persons that one has never seen one's self, as does
Alexis and a thousand others, every day.

" I here give the result of the questions you begged me to
address to my clairvoyante : —

*' 1. Whither goes the soul after leaving our material body ?

" It ascends and traverses several radii, hears the voice of
God who judges it, and consigns it to a place suited to its
affections.

" 2. What does it see in those places ?

" Spiiils like itself, open countries, gardens : in short, what-
ever it desires to see.

" 3. What does it do in those places ?

" Whatsoever it finds agreeable to do.

" 4. What length of time does it remain in those places ?

" It remains in them for a longer or shorter period of time ;
then passes into other places and remains there eternally.

" 5. Does it return to take again a material body on this
earth ?

" Never.

" 6. How does it know that it is asked for on earth ?

*' It is an effect of sensation. Our thought joins its thought
in an instant, and it is with us.

" 7. The dress which it wears when it comes to see us, is it
that whicli it wears in heaven ?

*' No, it wears there much lighter dresses, a sort of gauze
of different colors.

*' 8. Where does it procure the dress in which it appears
to us ?

" It is an effect of its thought ; it can present itself in any
form, assume all the costumes it has worn; it desires to appear
to us in this or that one, and it presents itself thus.

*' 9. At times something is wanted in this attire, or in its
personal appearance ; how is this ?

" It is to be accounted for in this way — in its haste to appear
to us, it forgets something ; for no longer having the same
countenance, or the same dress, it may make a mistake. But
on its second appearance, this can no longer exist, it suffices to
have a sing;^le doubt.

*' 10. We can perceive even the maladies it has had in the
course of its earthly life, how is that ?

" It desires to appear to us in such conditions ; it is its
thought, or, more correctly speaking, its desire, which sup-
plies all ; for, in heaven, there are neither maladies nor infir-
mities."

As may be seen, if 1 had it in my power to address the
same questions to all the clairvoyantes in the world, I should
do so in the interest of truth, and in order to avoid hearing-
say that it is an effect of influence on my part ; it might be
objected that M. Blesson having read the first volume of these
" Secrets," drew therefrom answers which his influence over
his clairvoyante might possibly reproduce ; I will observe,
that there are in the latter questions which are not to be found
in the first volume ; that they are to be met with only at the
commencement of this, which M. Lecocq and M. Blesson have
not read ; their answers are in conformity with those of Adele ;
there is no influence in the case.

" I can not resist," continues M. Blesson, ** the desire of
relating to you a fact for which I can not account : — One day I
had just sent my wife, who is a somnambulist, to sleep; I
begged her to ask for my father, who has been dead these
sixteen years. Forthwith presented himself an individual, of
whom she gave such a description as corresponded exactly
with that of my father, with this exception, he appeared to her
very stern ; my father, on the contrary, was very affable. I
entertained the notion that this might be an evil spirit, and, as
you recommend, I ordered him away in the name of God, if
he were not my father. My wife beheld him move off and
replaced by an old woman of a hideous countenance, who
caused her so much fear that she begged me to wake her,
which I forthwith did, as she seemed to me very much agitated.
Having no recollection of what she had seen in her dream,
she set to work picking legumes to cook them for dinner; she
lighted a large charcoal fire (-for she was behind hand), set
over it a pot of water, and was not a little surprised, after
having used a scuttle full of charcoal in keeping up a large
fire, at being unable to make the water boil. We were as-
tounded, as well as the persons present, at this phenomenon, to
me till then unknown.

" A fortnight after this, the weather was very stormy, my
wife was close to me, and, as before, prejDaring legumes for
dinner. She fell asleep, oppressed with the heavy atmosphere
which prevailed this day. I took advantage of her sleep to
magnetize her, and plunge her into the somnambulic sleep ; I
succeeded in doing so in a very short time. I asked for the
apparition of a friend ; an owl presented itself to her eyes, and
so frightened her that I was obliged to wake her as before.
She then put her water on the fire, this time in a copper vessel
(the other was an earthenware one) ; the same phenomenon
was reproduced, the water did not boil till after a lapse of six
hours, and then not before I had addressed a prayer to God to
disenchant our pot, in case there was a spell upon it. We
were then able to cook our legumes.

" I know not whether there be aught ridiculous in these
facts, but I do know that, being unable to account for them by
ihe ordinary laws of nature, I am obliged to class them among
the extraordinary ones. ' It was an evil spirit that played us
that trick,' since said to me my wife when again in a somnam-
bulic sleep. Believe me, most respectfully, &c.,

*' Monsieur : The following I can vouch for as a fact, as it
took place in my presence, at Lyons, in 1815 : —

" Three females of my acquaintance, wishing to take tickets
in the lottery which then existed, fancied that a death's head
might be of service to them by indicating to them the numbers
which would insure success. I will make no reflections as to
the value of such a belief; it suffices me to say that such was
the case.

" It was, therefore, settled that one of them should go to
the cemetery of in search of a death's-head, and bring it
home. The head was brought into the presence of the three
women and another female who was lying ill in the room where
the four persons were thus assembled. A discussion took place
as to the sex to which this head belonged ; one saying it was
that of a man, another thinking it the contrary. At this
moment there was a knock at the door ; embarrassment and
fear were manifested ; the ladies resolved not to open ; but the
knocks redoubled, it was necessary to yield. In haste they
placed the head under the pillow of the sick woman and then
opened the door. A few minutes elapsed, when suddenly the
woman who was in bed uttered a piercing shriek, drawing her
arm out of bed. The persons present asked her the cause of
her crying out, and what was the general astonishment when
she declared that she had been bitten with great violence. Of
this they convinced themselves by looking at her arm, on which
were the marks of five teeth with the blood ready to gush out;
the pain must have been acute. I will not say what passed
at this moment ; it may naturally be supposed that they got out
of the scrape as well as possible, and that when once free they
quickly carried back the head to the place whence they had
taken it.

' This fact, which had no echo beyond the spot where it took
place, was never, be it understood, made public. I can vouch
for the truth of it, as I was a witness to it ; I heard the shriek
at the moment the pain was felt, and saw the marks of the teeth.
Moreover, I certify that the woman had her arm in the bed at
the moment she uttered the cry. So much is certain, and I
guaranty the truth of it with all the force of my conscience. I
affirm and set my signature to this statement, regardless of the
ridicule with which some persons may treat it.

This kind of facts is not more incredible than those marks
which have been seen at all times on the bodies of the pos-
sessed, or the clairvoy antes and ecstatics of our times. To ad-
mit the possibility of them, is to confirm that of conveyances.
What can thus break into matter, can very well raise it ; one is
a consequence of the other. We have still at this moment the
stigmatized of the Tyrol, &c., who have wounds out of which
the blood is seen to run. There is no dearth of similar facts
which it would be curious to verify, and there is a means of
eliciting them. We will revert to the subject in our work on
philosophy, under the head of "Magnetism," as we hold it a
matter of greater importance to be true and frank rather than
enthusiastic.

" Monsieur : To comply with the request made in your ' Se-
crets,' I transmit you a fact which happened to me in the month
of May, 1818 :—

" I had gone with my wife and young child to Vetheuil, a
village situated near Mantes, to the house of my late parents,
and which then belonged to one of my sisters. The ground-
floor of this house was composed of a room at the entrance, in
which we slept, and of another next to it, in which my sister
slept.

" One night we were all in bed — I, my wife, and the child
between us (in the same bed, be it understood) — when, at about
eleven o'clock, my child, then about two and a quarter years
old, was taken up from between us and conveyed to the foot
of the chimney, which was about ten paces distant from our bed.

My wife, alarmed, uttered a cry that woke up my sister, who
inquired into the cause of this noise. After being told, she
replied: * Oh ! don't be surprised at that, it is Louis Metro
playing off some of his tricks.' This reply was not of a nature
to make us easy ; but, however, I got up and went for the child,
which, at the moment I picked it up, was accompanied by a
strong light. I will not deny it — although an old soldier, I was
frightened. I once more laid down the child in the same posi-
tion ; that is to say, between us two. Ten minutes had not
elapsed, when it was again raised up, but only to the height of
a foot, and then let down again in the same place.

•' Now, here you have not a tale that was told me, but a
reality that happened to me — an old soldier, living in the coun-
try, and following my old trade of a cooper. Moreover, there
w^ere with me at the time two witnesses, who can vouch for
the truth of my statement. I am not an educated man, and
consequently I am unable to account for it. I merely relate
what happened to me.

Who could have removed this child 1 Those that convey
objects. — Who convey objects 1 Those that have the power
of doing so. — " You decidedly wish, then, my poor, senseless
fellow," will those say to me who are rich in sense, " to make
us believe that the spirit can act on matter!" To regain the
esteem of those sensible persons, I will answer : " No, it is
matter that bears the spirit ; a spirit is air, and air can not bear
matter. We perceive this by our globe, which is supported on
the shoulders of Hercules, and the moon which is in the lap of
Venus. What an error to think that a light body can support
a heavy one !" Reasoning thus, the dose of physic which was
being prepared for me will be diminished, and I shall not be
sorry for it : long live the reasoning of our days !

We are about to pass on to an author well known by his
feuilletons in the Populaire and other highly-esteemed works,
who has had the kindness to communicate to me the paper we
are about to read. An esteemed author is, however, a being
recognised as superior by our savans to this good and honest
soldier whose narrative we have just perused — a narrative as
simple as it is full of truthfulness. After reading this one, they
will be tempted to cry out, " Hallucination !" But there is no
lack of hallucinated individuals of this kind : the satirical Bal-
zac, the astounding Alexandre Dumas, the austere patriot Al-
phonse Esquiros, the piquant Alphonse Karr, the philanthropic
Eugene Sue, &c., &c., all believe in magnetism and its marvels.
It was to those well-taught men that it appertained to handle the
subject which I have ventured to treat upon very superficially.
What success would it not have obtained, set forth by those
pens, as elegant as they are witty ! In short, since I have
opened the march, let us proceed ; and you, readers, be indul-
gent : —

" Monsieur : Having perused your ' Secrets,' I am induced
to relate to you a few facts from which you may possibly derive
some information. As it seems necessary to me to make a few
prefatory remarks in order to fix the amount of confidence that
may be accorded me, I will do so, but in a few words.

" My natural tendencies are spiritualist ones ; my aspirations
are directed toward the world of causes ; but three motives
paralyzed my tendencies and my aspirations : the philosophy
of our days, with which I was classically impregnated ; my
pride, which made me consider as weakness of mind the least
faith in whatsoever departs from physical and chemical possi-
bilities ; in short, the fear of being a dupe, even to my own
illusions — therefore laughed I disdainfully at the recitals of
supernatural things. * Your father,' once said my mother to
me, * was not a weak-minded man, and yet he affirmed having
seen on two occasions, in the course of his life, two human
forms clad in white : in one he perfectly well recognised his
betrothed, in the other his aunt. In fact, these two persons
were dying, far away from him, when he saw them.' At this
affirmation I gave an incredulous shake of the head. * Your
grandmother, at the moment her father took to his death-bed,
beheld him distinctly, wrapped up in a sheet, and seated on
their garden-wall.' * A mere illusion,' replied I ; * childish
fright.' — * For several years we had not seen my father's broth-
er : one night we were all aroused by his voice, which, from the
yard, was calling my father. We ran out to welcome our
uncle ; no one was there, and we were all thoroughly convinced
of the fact, since your grandfather' had been thrice named.'

* Hallucination of the hearing,' replied I ; * a spirit can not
speak.' — ' When he whom I loved died,' added my mother,

* several blows were struck on a small spinning-wheel hanging
from the wall, and it commenced rapidly turning round. Weep-
ing, I conveyed the spinning-wheel to the bedside of my father,
who laughed at me ; and the fact was renewed in the presence
of a score of persons, who felt the agitation of the air under
the invisible wand, and beheld, not only the wheel turn, but a
cloud of dust gather around it.' — 'It was probably some sorry
trick of legerdemain that was played you,' replied I. ' When
my sister died,' resumed my godmother, ' I did not even know
that she had been ill. I woke up during the night; the moon
threw its light into my room, and I disti»ctly beheld my sister
walking. When my husband died, far away from me, I felt
myself raised thrice in my bed.' — * These are illusions, my dear
godmother,' replied I, 'for such things can't be ; the spirit has
no form ; the spirit has no action over the matter it animates,
and acts physically only through the medium of organs.' My
incredulity on such matters was so great, that I would not be-
lieve that three violent rings given at our door, while we were
on the landing-place, were a sign of farewell sent by a female
friend of my mother, although the hour of her death coincided
with that of the three pulls at the bell. I preferred believing
that a mouse had run along the bell-wire ; and when my sister,
at that time in Scotland, inquired of us by letter whether Mad-
ame O , of whose illness we had not sent her word, had not

died on such a day, at such an hour, because she had heard her-
self thrice called by the voice of that lady, although the coinci-
dence was exact, my incredulity remained unshaken. * Some
such thing will happen to yourself,' said my mother, ' and then
you will believe.' — ' I will search into it,' said I, * and find out,
be you assured, some physical cause for it.'

" I was in this disposition at the age of eighteen, when,
working at my thesis on the Divine presence and human free
will, I heard a knocking over my head. The noise became so
fatiguing by its monotonous continuance, that I went up to the
room whence it proceeded : no one was there. I thought that
it was some effect of acoustics. T was about to descend, when
the same noise was renewed over my head in a garret. I went
up to it. No one again. I explored the garret, and the rooms
under it, looked out of the window : no physical cause within,
no noise without that could possibly be repercussed. I once
more took up my pen ; but scarcely was I seated, than the same
uniform knocks were again heard, and forthwith a thought took
possession of my mind. Fritz is ill, and will not recover ! This
young man was my betrothed, and loved me with infinite sin-
cerity and tenderness. I hastened to recount to my mother
what had passed, apprize her of my intention, and beg her to
accompany me to the abode of the parents of Fritz, who, in
fact, was ill in bed.» He told me that for several hours his
wishes had been calling for me. Ten days after, he was very
bad. My mother, at that time ailing, and my sister falling al-
most every night into horrible convulsions, I had made up my
mind, in order to watch over these two objects of my affections,
to sleep with the former, and make the other sleep in our room.
On the night of the tenth day of Fritz's illness, a violent shock
was given the bed occupied by me and my mother. Thinking
that this shock had been imprinted by a kick from my mother,
I did not trouble myself about it, but placed my hand softly on
her leg, and assured myself, when the second shock arrived,
that it did not proceed from my mother. The third was so
violent, that my mother woke up in a fright, asking me what I
was doing. After hearing my reply, she said to me : * Fritz
is dying, my child ! he is come to bid us farewell.' I get up
gently, light the candle, explore the room and the adjoining
ones ; then resume my place. Almost immediately after, at the
foot of the bed, we hear the sound of two fists falling alternately
on the bedstead, uninterruptedly and regularly. My sister, in
her turn, wakes up in her fright, exclaiming, ' Good God ! what
noise, pray, are you making ?' I speak to her, strive to reas-
sure her : useless pains ; she dares not remain in her bed. My
mother goes to take her place, and she comes to occupy her
mother's. The regular strokes pass along the side I lay on ;
the shocks made the candle flare. I commenced reading aloud
to divert the attention of my sister, and the noise does not cease
for several hours. In fact, my betrothed was dead ! From
that day my incredulity fell.

" Among facts of the same order, here are two which I have
from persons worthy of belief. One of these persons, a grave
and profoundly studious man, related that while he was a pro-
fessor at the college of Aix, something quite inexplicable took
place there. One evening, when the professors were assembled
in the common hall, the laundress entered looking quite scared,
and pretending that she durst not return home, because, no
sooner did she set foot on the threshold of her room, than she
heard blows struck on her furniture, and a great noise of
broken dishes and plates. The professors, pupils of Voltaire
and the EncyclopcBdia, burst out in chorus into a wild laugh ;
but, as the laundress persisted in her tale, one of them accom-
panied her home, and was thus enabled to make sure of the
truth of her statement. Then he returned for his colleagues,
who made the same trial, which was attended by the same re-
sult. The room was visited, every hole and corner explored,
but nothing discovered that could be assigned as a cause for
this strange noise. The following day the laundress heard that
her father, a wagoner, had been crushed to death at the very
hour all seemed as if beincf smashed at her abode.

" A lady recounted to me the following fact : Her niece
fell ill at Paris. The aunt, who lived at Granville, is aware of
her niece's illness, but makes no mention of the circumstance to
her sister, the mother of the young woman. A few days after,
the two sisters met ; it was at dusk. The mother of the patient
goes out of the apartment on the ground-floor, then returns to
it in great alarm. All hasten to her — ask her what is the mat-
ter with her. ' Therese is dead ! my child is dead !' exclaims
she as soon as she could speak. 'I just now saw her standing
under the peristyle ; I recognised her full well, although she
was clad in white !' In fact, young Madame B died that
very day, at that very hour.

" Other facts, no less extraordinary, have happened to per-
&ons of my acquaintance ; they have a different bearing, arising
from the same order of things.

" One of m.y intimate friends, a woman scarcely believing in
God, and not at all in the devil, related to me that, having
passed the evening with a widower, and induced him to marry
again, even offering to find him a wife, a very astonishing vis-
ion happened to her. She was in the habit of reading in bed :
she held in her hand one of Paul de Kock's novels, and was
laughing to herself at the countless comicalities of the author,
when she thought she perceived something white. She raises
her head ; the widower's wife was befoi'e her, clad in a white
robe ; her thick, black head of hair, spread over her shoulders,
enveloped her like a veil. She gesticulated warmly — her lips
quivered. The spectatress of this apparition comprehended
that she was entreated not to advise her husband to marry
again. This lady, getting the better of her fear, and wishing
to bring such a visit to a speedy termination, said to her :
* Make yourself easy — I will never speak again of matrimony
to your husband.' The phantom disappeared, and never re-
turned !

** A lady of Coutances had, for forty years, a sort of imp at-
tached to her house. Two persons assured me that they had
been victims to its malicious tricks. It used to snatch from
them their cards, dice, or dominoes, while they were playing ;
knock at the doors ; seat itself on the heels of the servants when
at prayers ; operate noises of broken dishes and plates. The
lady to whom it thus clung, being at first very much alarmed,
performed numerous acts of devotion, &c., but all to no pur-
pose. Her house was exorcised, but the imp would not budge.
She saw nothing but twice in her life : the first time a frightful
man, the second a hideous woman. All her friends were so
habituated to the malicious tricks of the imp, that they took no
further notice of it than by giving vent to their laughter, and
the lady herself philosophically made up her mind to tolerate the
nuisance.

"A captain of the navy, who, from his triple capacity as a
sailor, an Englishman, and a heretic [!], could not be accused
of superstitious credulity, related, one day, to a friend of mine
the following fact : He arrived at Lisbon with his wife and ser-
vants, and was unable to procure a lodging, except in a palace,
which was forsaken on account,' as it was said, of being haunted
by ghosts. Our captain at first laughed, but so many details
were given him that he came to the conclusion that it might
possibly be a haunt for brigands or false coiners. He orders
his servants to make up a bed for themselves alongside the doors
of his room, leaves his candle burning, and lays a brace of pis-
tols on his night table ; then awaits, fully resolved to supply the
place of the Portuguese executioner. All was sleep and silence
in the city, when at midnight, the doors of his room appeared
to open violently, and an impetuous wind forces its passage in,
a noise of chains dragging along makes the floor groan. The
captain, however, sees nothing, his doors had not been opened ;
he fires off" his pistols, the light is put out, and all noise ceases ;
he jumps out of bed, gropes along all over the room, but can
find nothing. He wakes up the servants, who had seen nothing,
heard nothing — not even the report of the pistols. He explores
the walls, the partitions ; all attests that there is no vacant space.
The next day he so stations himself that he may perceive the
secret door, of the existence of which he has not a doubt, but
no issue is disclosed, and the noise is absolutely the same, and
the sleep of the domestics as sound. The third day, same phe-
nomenon, and the cool Englishman would, nevertheless, have
obstinately continued in his abode amid spirits, had his wife con-
sented to so doing ; but, pretending that she should be fright-
ened to death, they quitted the haunted palace.

" A lady of my society, residing in a small town, hears that
her cure is ill ; she goes to see him, inquires into the cause of
his illness, and is very much surprised when he tells her a tale,
the substance of which I am about to recount to you : Three
days, or rather three nights before, the sacristan starts out of his
sleep, and perceives a light in the church. Thinking that
thieves are there, he jumps out of bed, and cautiously advances
toward the point lighted up ; w^hat was his fright, his terror on
beholding at the altar, ready to say mass, a priest who had died
some weeks previously ; his hair stands on end, a cold sweat
inundates his body, he runs off, and goes to wake up a priest
who had been a friend of the defunct. Both return to the
church, but nothing now was to be seen. The following night
the church is again lighted up ; the priest, no sooner informed,
proceeds to make sure of the fact, but he is overtaken with the
same fear as the sacristan, and dares not proceed. He gives
an account of the apparition to his cure, a resolute man, who
bavin o- had some triflingr differences with the deceased, made up
his mind to render him the service he solicited, and charged the
sacristan to let him know whether the church was illuminated
ao-ain. That very night it was once more lighted up. The
cure advanced with a firm step. * Do you desire that I should
serve you by saying mass?' said he to the defunct. 'Yes,' re-
plied the latter, and mass commenced. When it was over, the
dead man turned round, and said to the cure, in a voice of
emotion : * I thank you.' Then all disappeared, the lights were
extinguished, and the cure groped his way back to the vestry.
But this half hour's tete-a-tete with a dead man made such an
impression on him that he took to his bed, and three months af-
ter this narrative, the lady, who recounted it to me, attended the
funeral obsequies of the good cure !

" This fact, the truth of which I can not doubt, would suffi-
ciently prove to me what you say, that man loses neither his
beliefs nor his habits, on quitting the terrestrial life, and, indeed,
the grand law of analogy demands that there should be progres-
sion and shades in the various states of man, as there are shades
in nature. After all these apparitions, shall I speak to you of
dreams'? Are they not of the domain of the most clairvoyante
somnambulism ] Was not Mahomet right in saying that * when
man sleeps, his soul is with Grod — is no longer in his body V Be
that as it may, I have never been incredulous on this point, be-
cause my mother was a true Pythoness. Never did a relative, a
friend die, without her being warned of it in a dream. She
foretold the death of my father a year before it happened ; on
that occasion, she said to a friend, ' I shall fall ill, very ill, but
I shall not die ; my husband will die first, and my sister-in-law
will soon follow him ;' and all took place as she had predicted.
Oftentimes would she say to me, * So-and-so is happening to so-
and-so ; I am going to receive a letter, &c.,' and never was she
mistaken. The eve of her death, she said to us, * Prepare your-
selves, my children, my mother has come for me, I depart to-mor-
row with her.' She had several crises previous to final disso-
lution. After the last but one, she calmly said to us, * One more,
and all will be over with me in this world ;' as she said to us,
before the others, * Not yet ; it is not the last !'

*' This somnambulic faculty is in me for certain grand things ;
thus, on the eve of the fatal ordonnances of July, being a very
young girl, and never hearing talk of politics, I dreamed that I
beheld Christ in the clouds ; in his left hand he held a number of
tri-colored favors, which he waved in the eyes of the people, on
whom he smiled while saluting them ; and, in his right hand,
he had a thunderbolt. I beheld his eyebrows knit when he fixed
his looks on the royal family ; then he hurled his thunderbolt.
A few days after, the dynasty took the road to Cherbourg.

" ' A prince will soon die,' said I to my brother, on the 13th
of July, 1841 ; * for I saw, last night, a magnificent hearse, pre-
ceded and followed by troops of all arms.' And, in the after-
noon, the duke of* Orleans was killed.

" ' Has nothing been heard say of the king V asked I, another
day, of my brother. * No, why V — * Because I have had a
dream, which signifies that an attempt will be made on his life.'
Next morning Lecomte was arrested. On the eve of new-year's
day, I ask of God to reveal to me the most important events
that would happen to me in the course of the year. I behold,
in a dream, a hearse ; and my mother died on the 20th March.
At the moment she met with the fall that caused her death I
dreamed that we were removing, and that my molher was car-
ried away. I was started out of my sleep by the cries of my
sister. We placed our mother on a bed. Three weeks after,
she returned to the bosom of her God.

" I was dreaming, one night, that I was in another world, with
my father and godfather ; the latter wished to detain me, but
my father objected to this, saying : ' No, no, let her go, it would
cause her mother too much grief,' At this time I was in very
good health ; two days after, I had so violent au attack of brain
fever that it was near taking me off.

" What conclusion draw from all these facts, and many others
I could cite ? Is it not this, that the intellectual world is repre-
sented by zero in our philosophy, which is no less than what
say our sages of the day 1 May we not ask ourselves whether
the soul remains not in communication of love, of sympathy,
of recollection, with those it leaves on earth 1 whether the
communion of souls is not universal, and independent of the
accidents of matter ? whether time and space exist for the
pure spirit ? whether the soul is really in need of the organs
of the body to operate physical effects 1 and whether it can
not act on all matter, even foreign to that which constitutes its
envelope 1 We may ask ourselves whether the spirit is not,
or has not, an immortal form, an interior mould, as it were, of
the body 1 whether, in short, it would not be possible to find
out a law which might direct and regulate the clairvoyant som-
nambulism of magnetic and of natural sleep ] Here is a pretty
number of questions : their solution, I am certain of it, v/ill
destroy our philosophy, our metaphysics, considerably modify
physics and chemistry. But what matters destroying a scaf-
folding raised on false hypotheses 1 Far preferable doubt
than error ; far preferable a truth painfully acquire'd than a
system perfectly logical, but remote from the truth. Human-
ity marches : let us hope that a ray of the eternal sun will en-
lighten its intelligence, and that finally it will enter the road of
truth. *' F. Lamb,

"17 Rue Tiquefonne"

1 will not take the liberty of making any observation on the
interesting facts that have been just read ; the person who
relates them is worthy of all my confidence, and I recommend
the reader to accord her his. I will merely take leave to reply-
to the questions of this lady with these words : Yes, you may
address these questions to science and the savans, but beware
of believing in the solution which will be given you by their
mighty conceit ; beware, at the same time, of communicating
to them that which your judgment shall intuitively dictate ;
theirs would be the work of pride in your eyes, and yours
would be in theirs that of a lunatic ; ay, a lunatic, you hear,
because you would indubitably conclude that there is an act-
ive, intelligent being seated in our material body, causing its
springs to work, communicating to it all forces, thoughts, move-
ment. Oh ! utter not that word movement, for what internally
moves a body may externally move it ; they will grant you the
one, but refuse you the other. You will answer, perhaps, by
asking them whether it is the earth, the other globes and their
kingdoms, that move of themselves or are moved ; if they move
of themselves, they are the life ; if moved, they are death. As
life is in all and throughout all — for our savans neither will
nor can admit death, or nothingness, which is the same thing —
they will wish to extricate themselves from the difficulty in
which you place them, by replying, by way of criterion :
Globes and reigns have their point of attraction. You will
answer, what they attract is no more dead than they them-
selves ; otherwise, attraction becomes impossible ; life can not
attract death, therefore the particles attracted have a positive
individuality, forming one with the mass, but forming, likewise,
one in the mass. They will reply to you : " Yes ;" then, since
this particle, attracting and attracted, forms one with the mass,
and one again in the mass, its individuality is thus found guar-
antied, and the immortality of the soul, as an individual or par-
ticle of the mass, is found proved; that which is not so is the
action of the particle on the whole. Thus the soul, which is
but a particle of the human material body, can not dominate,
raise at its will that mass a thousand times heavier than it ; this
is contrary to simple physical notions. Yes, in appearance;
but have you discovered where the active force is ? Can you
say whether it is in the whole or in the particle ] If you
answer that it is in the whole, the material body could move
without the assistance of the particle soul ; if, on the contrary,
it is the particle that possesses the active force, the more it is
disengaged from similar aggregations, the more powerful it must
be. See you not a proof of this in homoeopathy ? is it the part
or the whole that operates ? It is the part, there is not a doubt
of it. By this fine discovery you obtain the material proof of
the sublime axiom, all is in all and througJiout all. The part,
therefore, contains the force of the whole.; containing the force,
it contains all. You represent to yourselves force by the vol-
ume of the thing; that is, retreating, recoiling before the con-
trary demonstration of gunpowder, steam, galvanism, magnet-
ism : — only study the last-named science, and you will see
whether force is represented in it by volume.

Excuse me ; this sorceress, Metaphysics, hurries me away
despite myself: I had promised, however, that I would not
touch upon this point in the present work. But if I made
mention of all these extraordinary facts without offering the
least observation, it would be said : This poor spiritualist is
barely spirituel ; let him hold his peace, or support his fantas-
tical tales with some admissible considerations. It is because
I hear the stern voice of the savans thus accusing me, that I
throw out at random a few observations, which will be found
more demonstrative in the aforementioned work.

So, my dear lady, content yourself with listening to what
will be said to you respecting the tricks which are of the do-
main of physics ; above all, make up your mind to hear this
fine objection, that by a thread-conductor, cleverly concealed
in certain places, we may turn topsy-turvy plate, furniture,
men, and animals : ask them, then, whether this spark so pow-
erful, accorded to the metallic kingdom, ought and can be
refused to the soul, the masterpiece (say they) of the Divinity.
The masterpiece ought, at least, to possess the property of
the inferior part, if not more.

They will speak to you, also, of the havoc occasioned by the
effects of the thunder-bolt, the grandest juggler in the universe.
This fluid recoils not before conveyances j it would not dare
compromise its liigb reputation by conveying' a box, a letter, a
seal, to such or such a place, for shame. Tell it, on the con-
trary, to tear out all the nails in the wooden shoes of those
good villagers, w^ho pray to God to preserve them for them,
and it v\all acquit itself admirably. It will convey this rock to
a distance of more than thirty feet; reduce this tree into finer
lathes than man could ; unshoe this horse without killing him ;
disarm this cavalier before he is aware of it ; break all these
windows; demolish this chimney ; clear this table — and what
more ? This is not, however, the masterpiece of the creation,
since you spit it with your pikes touched with loadstone. Oh,
poor mortals! you believe and see these things — you know
that it is an electric spark attacking, indistinctly, each king-
dom — and yet you would refuse the divine spark, named, the
soul, the power of operating such things. Yes, you ai'e pro-
found.

"Monsieur: The prospectus of your work — 'Secrets of
the Life to Come Revealed' — having excited my curiosity, I
hastened to subscribe to it ; and after a perusal, which has
made a deep impression on me, I was bound, before pronoun-
cing on the value of the revelations it contains, to follow the
advice you give to all magnetizers, viz., to experiment. You
trace a route ; I ventured to proceed in it, though fearful of
missing my aim. At length I obtained a conviction of the
reality of those apparitions, and. surprising answers have been
made me. Having called on you for information on this sub-
ject, the apparition that you had the kindness to procure for
me, had already convinced me. Still, in consequence of what
may be termed a remnant of doubt, I assured myself of the
truth of this phenomenon by experiments of my own. I will
not, however, tell you that all the clairvoyantes to whom I ap-
plied possess this faculty in a like degree. I don't think it
necessary to give you the particulars of my experiments : I
merely consider it a duty to render homage to this singular and
useful truth in the common interest of men ; thanking you, at
the same time, for having received from you this key, which
served me in finding out another phenomenon, well worthy,
also, of fixing the attention of psychologists, and especially of
spiritualists.

"This is the fact: T7ie mere Christian name of a person
who is ill, no matter where, suffices a clairvoyante whom I
magnetize, to inoculate herself sympathetically with the mal-
ady, to any degree, whatever be its nature ; above all, know
that the thought has nothing whatever to do with it, since nei-
ther I nor my clairvoyante knows aught else but the name
which, despite its infinite repetition in the material world, rep-
resents to us instantaneously all the details of the malady of
the person who is suffering it. This sort of appeal, which I
make in the world of spirits still on earth, confirms that which
you make in the spiritual world with so much facility.

The success which M. Duteil obtains in experiments of this
kind confirms what we have said in our first volume, that it
was losing precious time to make clairvoyantes travel step by
step toward the place we w4sh them to explore. I ask for the
place which I know not any more than my clairvoyante, and
the place forthwith appears. If it is possible for the place
which is devoid (no doubt) of a soul, to present itself thus at
the mere call of its name, it ought to be as easy for a spirit to
do so. It remains only to comprehend how Jean, who is, per-
haps, the ten thousandth of this name in France, should present
himself rather than another Jean ] It may be replied to this
question that there is a communion between souls in general ;
that the isolated scene which we play during the day is the re-
sult of a fact secretly determined on by our soul, which leaves
its material body in ignorance of the cause and object of its
decisions, and its relations with other souls : this would not
prove the free will of the material body, far from it.

Here are two facts, one of which took place at my house
while I was penning this reflection. Three ladies came to ask
me for a view at distance. Having no subjects present for this
speciality, I asked Emile, who happened at that moment to pay
me a visit, to suffer himself to be sent to sleep ; after demur-
ring a short time he consented. I asked these ladies what they
desired; one of them, Madame Bimont, an Icarian, told me
that she was very uneasy respecting her brother, who had been
among the first to set out with his brethren for Icaria. I .in-
quired of her his name and summoned the man. Emile gave
an exact description of him. I told him to see where this man
was. " Oh !" immediately replied the child, "the road is not
a good one to get there. I see, also, a very fine field — a pretty
farm — a small pond — a well that looks like a new one —
horses that are very vicious ; I have no mind to mount them.
They are white. The trees have droll kind of leaves ; they
are large and notched," &c., &c. — " Ask the gentleman why
he does not write to his sister." '' He has written to her." —
** When ?" *' About the end of August. He is displeased
with her for not having answered him." After several more
questions of a like nature, I woke the child, and this lady (who
was not en rapport with him) said to me : " So far as regards
the description of my brother and the places, it seems to me
to have an air of truth ; but with respect to the letter said to
have been written, it must be an error, otherwise I should have
received it." Two days after this lady received the very letter,
dated from the 25th August ; she had the goodness to come
and inform me of it. The child had therefore really conversed
with the spirit of this man, while the latter was not aware of it.
The second fact is quite personal to myself. A respectable
female neighbor of mine whom I had taught to magnetize, pos-
sesses a clairvoyante that promises being very powerful. She
said to me : '* Last night my clairvoyante declared that she be-
held you taking the place of her good guide ; she was quite
surprised at it, she exclaimed : ' Ah ! there's M. Cahagnet with
his arms crossed over his breast, looking kindly on me.' —
* Ask him what he wants with you V " Then ensued a conver-
sation between my spirit and this clairvoyante, which it is need-
less to mention ; but what I can affirm before God is that this
lady told me my inmost thoughts, which I had communicated to
no one, and much less still, I am persuaded, to a clairvoyante
whose influence I in nowise felt. At this moment when I was
reading aloud, I had entertained these thoughts for the first
time that day. What an abyss for our reason !

'^My dear Friend: Since its first appearance you have
been aware of the opinion I entertain of your book : scarcely
had I read it than I tried experiments of the same kind myself,
and succeeded beyond my expectations. I will not recount to
you here any of the sittings I had, you have so many similar
ones, and more curious still, that it seems to me needless.

" However, I declare to you here, and publicly, that I have
been fully, convicted of the existence of a future life, by the
perusal of your work. I believe that all those who make them-
selves acquainted with its contents, will think as I do, and will
have no reason to complain of having read it.

*' In one word, the opinion I come to respecting your * Se-
crets' is that they are called to bestow happiness on humanity.

" Make my letter, my dear friend, as public as possible, and
receive the assurance of my fraternal friendship.

** You would already have received, monsieur, my letter of
thanks, had I not first wished to read your excellent work.
Any one may clearly perceive that you have been inspired by
very lucid somnambulists ; as almost all the definitions are in
accord with the works of the ancient sages. For my part,
monsieur, I come to testify to you my gratitude for the disin-
terested obligingness with which you entertained my request of
putting me in communication with your good clairvoyante. I
herein bear witness to the truth ; she perfectly saw and des-
cribed the deceased person I desired, and every circumstance
of the said person's relations with me. It can not be said that
she saw all this in my imagination ; for God is my witness, that
I was in ignorance of many circumstances, which, however,
turn out to be true.

*' Monsieur : Whatsoever I had read up to this day only
tended to plunge me into the most desponding atheism ; and,
in moments of trouble, I had ever, to put an end to all, but one
thought — that of self-destruction.

*' I have read your ' Secrets of the Life to Come Revealed.'
This book has given me a belief in God, toleration toward my
brethren, happiness in my family, and sufficient moral force to
support with fortitude all the misfortunes which previously
caused my torments.

" Such happiness I prefer to any that the most splendid for-
tune could have procured me.

" I have no doubt, monsieur, that were it not for the political
events which absorb all minds, these revelations would ah-eady
have conveyed hope to the very bottom of a great number
of hearts so much in need of it.

" Be assured, monsieur, of my high consideration. *

" Constant Flichy,
'* 19, Rue Vincent, Belleville"

"My dear Monsieur Cahagnet : Pursuant to the good
counsels you were so kind as to give me relative to the appari-
tion of spirits, I have convinced myself, by experiments, of thdl^
reality of such apparitions, and the non-communication of
thought with somnambulists.

" Penetrated wilh this firm conviction, I authorize you to give
publicity to my testimony ; and I assure men that the soul
exists in the future life, in the form of its material body, and
having recollection of its individuality.

" My dear Monsieur Cahagnet : In support of the spirit-
ualist doctrines which you seek to propagate with a zeal that
does you honor, and prepares for you, at a future period, tri-
umph and gratitude, you may subjoin the two following facts : —

*' One night, about fifteen years ago, I was quietly sleeping,
when all at once I felt myself struck on the shoulder, and sud-
denly waking, I beheld before me one of my uncles who lived
at Chatellerault. He said to me in a strong and perfectly ac-
cented voice, * Ninive is destroyed.' The trouble and emotion
caused me by this apparition and these words were so great
that my wife was suddenly roused, and quickly inquired what
was the matter with me. *Ah!' said I to her, in a voice of
emotion ; * my uncle is dead : he was here just now, I saw him
perfectly well ; for he woke me up, and said to me in his voice
of Stentor, 'Ninive is destroyed;' now, Ninive was he him-
self, he who had spent his fortune in leading the life of a Per-
sian satrap.

" My wife, despite the trouble which had just been commu-
nicated to her, tried to calm me, endeavoring to persuade me
that it was but an effect of my imagination or a deceitful
dream ; but all her reasoning could not drive out of my head
the idea that my uncle was really dead, and that he had come
to announce his death to me. I went to sleep again, but in the
morning, on awaking, my first thought came and retraced to
me this singular apparition ; all day long I heard these ener-
getic words — * Ninive is destroyed !' A few days after a letter
came and announced to us the death of my uncle Fortin, my
mother's brother. He had died a day or two before the fact
which I have related took place.

" Second Fact. — During the winter of 1843, I was having
some work done on my lands, which are about half a league
from Niort. I had, by the means of somnambulism, discovered
a spring of water at the top of a very high hillock ; as water is
a very useful commodity in the country, and spreads a great
charm on all around it, I was insatiable, and often questioned
the oracle which had already so fortunately directed me. One
day from Niort, where I reside, a stream of water was signal-
ized to me which was supposed to run under a large rock,
which was scarcely visible on the surface of the soil. * Have
it removed,' said the oracle, * and under its base you will have
another pretty little fountain.' After having searched for and
discovered this mysterious rock, I gave orders to Master Gri-
seau, my gardener, to have it removed, and to look for the
spring that was said to be beneath it; but Griseau, who was
not fully convinced of the phenomena of somnambulism, repre-
sented to me that it was folly to go to such an expense in order
to arrive at a discovery wholly improbable ; in fact, how expect
to find water almost at the crest of a hillock which looks over
the river almost perpendicularly to a height of forty or fifty
feet. These reasons appeared to me peremptory ; but I wanted
water, as, also, a proof more of the magnetic clairvoyance ; so
I rejected the advice, however just it appeared to me, and
reiterated my orders, which were crowned with complete

SUCCOwSS.

" This fact, so far as regards the clairvoyance of certain
somnambulists, did but confirm proofs already long before ac-
quired ; but the one which is about to follow cast into my soul
new thoughts, which by-and-by, with God's help, were to be
for me incontestable truths. No ; man is not isolated on this
earth, he is surrounded by benign spirits who protect him
against evil ; every being has his good genius, but unfortunately
few listen to him. What mysteries surround us, and how ig-
norant we are ! Somnambulism is a property that will, I am
certain of it, reveal them to us sooner or later ; for I am of
the number of those to whom it is permitted to raise a comer
of the veil which conceals tliem from our eyes. What truths
must there be to alarm vice and console virtue ! Pardon me
this digression ; I return to the fact.

" The rock, stripped at its base, remained half suspended,
awaiting the brick-work Vv'hich was to secure it firmly; the
operations, interrupted by the bad weather, were about to be
resumed, and I repaired to the spot over night. It was a
Sunday, the keeper was absent, and I found myself absolutely
alone. It was three o'clock in the afternoon ; I took a gar-
dening tool, animated as I was with the desire of finding water
in greater quantity. I set to work, and dug up the earth with
a courageous hope. I was wholly absorbed in this thought,
when, suddenly, a voice struck my ears with these words, said
in an abrupt and a hasty tone : * Go away !' I made a bound
backward, and precipitately withdrew from the spot where I
was, leaving there one of the wooden shoes I had had on my
feet. I then looked upward, to find out who it was that
could have thus spoken to me, but I perceived no one. I was
quite certain of being alone, so I intuitively perceived that
some danger threatened me, inasmuch as the rock had only
clayey earth as a base. Wholly absorbed, then, in my own
preservation, I cautiously drew back my wooden shoe, and
made all haste to get away. At a few paces hence, I asked
myself what voice this possibly could be which had just struck
my ear in so forcible a manner ; it was sonorous, and its
sounds still vibrated in my mind. It was, therefore, a warning
from heaven, sent to snatch me from some great danger. But
a few minutes more at this work, and I should have been killed.
Being killed was not the worst that might have happened to
me ; but, hurled down by the mass, I might have been caught
by an arm or a leg under this enormous burden. ' Oh ! my
God, my God ! I thank thee,' cried I, raising my hands to
heaven and falling on my knees, * thou hast saved me, and I
return thee my thanks.' I know not what passed within me
for the few seconds I remained on my knees, but on rising, I
found myself bathed in tears. After recovering from the
emotion I had just experienced, I went and cast a last glance
on my rock ; it was still silently suspended. I moved away,
turning round more than once with terror. It was five o'clock
when I lost sight of it ; at half-past five, the hour of the
keeper's return, this superb mass had fallen in ; falling at first
on itself, it made a turn half round to precipitate itself side-
wise, when it was stopped in its course by an accident of the
soil. At the present time (1849) it is majestically seated
under an enormous grotto, vv^hicli I raised on the very spot
where it once was. There, still proud and haughty, it pi'e-
serves its threatening air ; but pass, fearlessly pass, only bow
before the words of my good angel, inscribed on its front :
* Go away^ " J. B, Borreau,

Oar worthy friend, M. Borreau, has kindly granted us per-
mission to give publicity to this communication ; requesting
us, however, at the same time, to defer to a later period an-
other statement concerning facts, still more mysterious, apply-
ing personally to himself. We feel indebted to our friend,
honorably known to the magnetic notabilities, for his generous
confidence. He has comprehended, that a spiritualist is not
an egotist, keeping to himself this divine revelation of a
moral world, which may convey the sweetest consolations
to those who believe that nothingness is the apogeum of the
creation.

Were it possible for us to make mention of all the persons
who have come to submit to us similar facts, or acquaint us
with their success in the experiments we have taught them to
make, we should be obliged to go on with a third volume.
We will nov/ proceed to the questions we submitted to the
venerable Almignana, for the purpose of knowing whether
these apparitions are approved or condemned by the church.

*' Monsieur : I herein reply to your letter of the 10th inst.,
in which you express to me the wish of knowing whether the
belief in the apparitions «f spirits individually, and in human
forms, is contrary to the catholic faith.

" After God, a pure spirit, and the father of spirits, as says
the gospel, theology admits two sorts of spirits dependent on
God : these are the angels, — for the demons are fallen angels,
— and the souls of men.

** I have looked over the Holy Scriptures, and it supplies me
with different instances of apparitions of these two sorts of
spirits, individually, and in human forms.

*' Angels. — Those are three angels who, in the form of
men, appear to Abraham, and even converse with him. (Gen-
e?.Is, xviii.)

* It is an angel, also, who, in the human form, appears to
Jacob, and wrestles with the holy patriarch to give him to un-
derstand that the weakest men may do much, with the assist-
ance of heaven. (Genesis, xxxii.)

" It is also an angel, who, in the form of a man, appears to
the young Tobias, and accompanies him on his journey into
the country of the Medes. (Tobit, v., vi. vii.)

" In short, after the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ,
It was an angel who, in the form of a young man, appears to
Mary Magdalene and the other Mary. (St. Matt., xxviii.)

*' Souls of deceased men. — Samuel, after descending to
the grave, appears to Saul in the same form as he had on earth,
through the means of the witch of Endor, of whom God makes
use to execute his holy designs with regard to the Hebrew
king. (1 Samuel, xxviii.)

" Moses, many ages after having rendered up his spirit on
Mount Nebo, and Elias, long years after having quitted the
earth, appear in human forms, though surrounded with glory,
on the Tabor, a high mountain, to John and James, the day of
the transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ. (St.Matt. xvii. ;
St. Mark, ix.)

" The ' Lives of the Saints' furnishes us with instances of
similar apparitions, and especially the * Life of St. Theresa.'

" M. Chardel, formerly a counsellor of the court of Cassa-
tion, and deputy of the Seine, whose learning and good faith
can not be questioned, does he not recount to us, in his * Essay
on Physiological Psychology,' various apparitions of deceased
persons, who, in their earthly forms, appeared to members of
their family, asking them to discharge certain works of piety,
such as masses and pilgrimages, promised by the deceased, but
remaining unperformed at the time of their death ?

" But what comes to confirm what we have just said, is the
honorable testimony of a man as learned as orthodox, such as
the abbe Duclos, who, in his reply to the sarcasms of Voltaire
against chapter xxxii. of Genesis, relative to the angel who, in
the form of a man, appears to Jacob in order to wrestle with
him, when he sets forth his opinion, with respect to the appa-
rition of spirits, says to us : —

" 1. That God is surely the Master of appearing whenever
he pleases, and in whatever manner he pleases.

" 2. That the good or wicked angels and the souls of men
may appear, but only at the order and by the permission of
God.

" 3. That God sometimes gives such order and such per-
mission.

" 4. That this occurred more frequently in the early ages of
the world, for reasons deserving of it.

*' 5. That this may again occur, even now, because God is
still as powerful as he was at first.

** In short, that the apparitions of angels and the dead con-
tain not more difficulties than the apparitions of God himself.

" From what I have just quoted, I believe it may be rightly
concluded that the belief in the apparitions of spirits, in human
forms and individuality, is very far from being contrary to the
catholic faith, the more so as the church has not yet pronounced
against the apparitions of which you speak to me.

" As to me, monsieur, with this conviction was it, and not
otherwise, that I permitted myself to wait upon you to witness
a few apparitions, which, while surprising me, have become
for me a fresh proof of what we read in the holy books with
respect to the apparitions of spirits in human forms ; and I
shall never cease, while I live, returning thanks to God for
having deigned to grant me a favor so great as that of knowing
physically by myself the immortality of the soul.

" As to you, monsieur, allow me to congratulate you in this,
that, in the midst of your humble position in the eyes of the
world, God has made use of you and your modest somnambu-
list to confound the presumptuous savans of the earth, and,
above all, the proud materialists, the scourge of religion and
real plague-sore of society.

" Yes, monsieur, it is thus that I view the grand magnetic
phenomena which engage our attention ; and I am persuaded
that it was in allusion to certain apparitions of deceased per-
sons, seen by some somnambulist as privileged as our good
Adele, that the Rev. Father Lacordaire, in spite of the acade-
micians and skeptics, proclaimed from the sacred tribune, in
the month of March, 1847, that magnetism was a Divine prep-
aration to humble the pride of materialists. For it is certain
that among the arguments made use of by theologians to
prove the immortality of the soul, that taken from the appa-
rition of Samuel, of which I have just spoken, is one of the
strongest.

*' But, monsieur, if you and your modest somnambulist have
a privilege so great, do not, however, glorify in it, seeing that
it is from Grod alone that you have received it ; for, as very
wisely says the abbe Duclos, the angels, good or wicked,
can appear only at the order of Grod or by his permission ;
and you yourself acknowledge this truth, since I have perceived
that all your operations are invariably preceded by prayer,
imploring the favors of Heaven.

" Thus, my good monsieur, far from being puffed up with
your works, say with St. Paul : * Non ego, sed gratia Dei me-
cum^ ('Yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me.')
It is not we who work these wonders, but the grace of the
Lord, the Divine goodness, the omnipotence of the Eternal,
who has been pleased to make use of us, beings weak and
imperceptible in the eyes of the world, in order to confound
the mighty, and the pretended philosophers of the earth. * In-
jirma mundi elegit Deus ut confundat fortia.^ (' And God
hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty,') It is St, Paul who speaks.

"We are most happy at being enabled to publish the testi-
mony of a priest so honorable as M. Almignana. It will tend
to reassure a few timorous consciences, who fancied they be-
held in the first part of the " Secrets" the work of the evil one.
If the church acknowledges that no apparition can take place
without the order and permission of God, we are, in this case,
his most humble and obedient servant.

Thus, for want of space, we terminate a part of our corre-
spondence, which we had no desire to keep secret, thinking it
would be acceptable to a few readers who might wish to see
new personages brought on the stage. It was to gratify this
just wish, that we have published this extract of the most cu-
rious facts and particulars which have been communicated to
us, and that we are now about to rummage in the history of
the beliefs of different nations in the immortality of the soul, in
order to prove, moreover — if possible — that we have been
actuated by a desire to accomplish something useful, and at the
same time show that we have been preceded, in all places and
times, by hallucinated individuals of our species.



ON THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL:

OPINIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS FROM ANTIQUITY TO OUR DAYS.

Indies. — The belief in the immortality of the soul is inherent
in the existence of man, from his first to his last thought. In
fact, if we reascend the scale of ages in India, what do we find
among those nations that reckon not 5,848 years of existence,
as we pretend, but 131,400,007,205,000 years from the birth
of Brama down to our days. In these countries — little known,
badly explored, still worse described — we shall possibly find
psychological science more advanced than among us. No :
if we consult their sacred books, the true source of all earthly
sects and superstitions, we shall find therein the belief in the
immortality of the soul established from the most remote times,
in the form of a polytheism which we seem unable, from the
revelations of our " Secrets," to admit, but which we might
possibly deduce from them were we to devote ourselves more
positively to the detailed study of a multitude of propositions
into which they lead us.

Unwilling, at any price, to fall again into metaphysical quo-
tations, as so doing would destroy all the charm of this part, we
accept, on the whole, our revelations, reserving to ourselves,
for another work, propositions wherein the beliefs in the me-
tempsychosis will find a place in certain acceptations only.
We will restrict ourselves, for the moment, to quoting a passage
from a learned work, entitled : " A Picturesque Voyage Round
the World," published under the direction of the unfortunate
Dumont-Durville, presuming that we shall find in this work
information stripped of the marvellous things related by the
old voyagers. We find, in page 140, vol. i. : —

Such is a sketch of the Indian polytheism.
As to the dogmas connected with it, a notion of them may be
summed up in a universal metempsychosis ; a certain quantity
of spirit and matter, each imperishable, is found, according to
them, in a perpetual state of transmigration. The punishment
of spirits consists of a falling off in their material envelope.
Thus, from the body of man they descend into that of the beast,
following the progression of animals more or less noble, so as
to run the risk of dwelling even in stones. In this commina-
tory part of their dogmas, the Brarains have never entertained
the thought of threatening men with a perpetual hell ; when
we speak to them of such a place, they say that it is an
insult to the Almighty, setting bounds to his right of mercy,
prejudging his justice, and giving him hateful passions which
are incompatible with his essence. * However great be a
crime,' add they, ' the Divine goodness is still greater.'

** This belief in the metempsychosis also serves them to
explain the contrast of human conditions and the inequality of
our destinies. With them compensation exists not altogether
in another world, it is in this transitory world. That if, des-
tined to the most humble lot, a mortal ends a meritorious and
pious life, his reward consists in being born again rich, hon-
ored, amid all the enjoyments of luxury and comfort. Thus
the Indian metempsychosis is somewhat mixed up with pre-
destination and fatalism ; free-will can not go so far as to efface
a word of what Brama has written in the head of a man, but
certain practices, certain expiations, can be set down to his
account in the balancing of his good or bad works."

What logic Brama writes in the head of such man : Thou
shalt do such a thing, and thou shalt ask pardon of me for hav-
ing done what I commanded thee to do ! Do we not recognise
in this moral our sublime maxim : " Nothing happens in the
world without the permission and order of Godl" — therefore,
you ought to ask pardon of him for having obeyed him !

China. — If we extend our researches as far as China, we
are assured of finding there this belief established from time
immemorial, but under philosophical forms, or allegories,
adapted to the wants and usages of the country. It is still
the same encouragement to good actions, under penalty of
being punished by a transmigration in the scale of beings,
kingdoms, and elements, corresponding, by their life or state,
with the actions of which man has been guilty, all this invaria-
bly ending in an eternity of happiness. God is still sufficiently
respected among these people to have a confidence in his di-
vine goodness and the hope of a better life. Eternal punish-
ment forms no part of their creed.

OcEANjCA. — If we come back among younger and less civ-
ilized nations (Oceanica), we find ourselves face to face with
this polytheism, this transmigration of souls into such or such
body, corresponding with its past affections, good or bad, and
arriving in globes where the felicity is as sweet as our earthly
sufferings have been painful. What is remarkable in the be-
liefs of all these countries, is, that our earthly globe is found to
be the intermediate between a number, more or less consider-
able, of globes. Able only to progress or fall back in quitting
it, man, in this mixed state, fills pretty nearly the role described
in our first volume — a role that subjects him to trials of
sensations, impressions, comparisons, hitherto unknown to him.
Apart, the more or less admissible fictions of these doctrines,
there results from them one fact — a belief in the individual-
ized immortality of the soul, on quitting this globe, and its
eternal felicity : this is more encouraging than the nothingness
of our materialists.

Since we are in these countries, let us see what is thouo-h'
there of ecstasy. We find in the occult sciences of the ^ort-
ahle Encyclopedia — a small work, written with great impar-
tiality, and displaying much scientific knowledge — the follow-
ing passage (page 203) : —

" Without wishing to anticipate the discussions that will arise
on this important question [ecstasy], we will nevertheless ob-
serve, in order to add a few facts to facts already known, that
one of our friends who resided for fourteen years in the East
Indies, has frequently seen Hindus fall at will into ecstasy, and
become, in this state, an object of fear or veneration to their
fellow-countrymen. The North and South Americans who are
wrongfully classed among nations called savage, and who pre-
sent in their customs and language the remains of an ancient
civilization, have traditional reminiscences which deliver them
up to a state of ecstasy, during which they believe themselves
to be in communication with spirits. The phenomena of ecsta-
sy are found in the most remarkable manner among the
Kamtschatdales, the Yakoutes, and many other tribes of the
north, where the soothsayers sometimes inflict on themselves
horrible wounds, without apparently, and in reality, not suffer-
ing- from them. The ecstatic state is also to be met with at
Otaheite, at the Sandwich isles, in Polynesia, where a new reli-
gion is imposed on the natives, and where religious persecutions
exalt the imagination of those who adhere to the old form of
worship. Mariner, that young traveller unjustly accused of
falsehood, but whose truthfulness is now acknowledged, during
his residence at Tonga-Tabou, the metropolis of the neighbor-
ing isles, was a witness to extraordinary facts, proving in a pos-
itive manner the good faith of those who, among savage as
among barbarous nations, are given up to a religious state of
ecstasy. It is generally acknowledged at Tonga, that some
persons are favored by the gods with their inspirations ; the god
who inspires them is found then in the person of the inspired
priest who becomes capable of prophesying the future.

** Mariner so describes the ecstatic situation of the priests of
this country as to leave no doubt with respect to the symptoms
they experience, and the young traveller adds, that he has no
reason to believe that these demonstrations are the result of im-
posture ; lie even produces proofs of what he advances on this
head. Among the details he gives, there are two in particular
v^ortliy of examination, inasmuch as they above all attest the
spirit of conviction of those who undergo the phenomena of the
ecstatic state. The son of Kins: Finow was often wont to re-
peat to the incredulous European that he was inspired by tho
spirit of Toogo-Ahoo, the last king of the isles of Tonga, that
he no longer felt conscious of his own personal existence, and
that his body seemed to him animated by a soul not his own.
Having been questioned as to the nature of the spirit that dis-
turbed him, and how this spirit descended into him, the young
prince contented himself with replying, ' What a silly question ;
can I tell you how I know it ? I know it because I feel a con-
viction of it, and because a voice warns me of it,'

" We might accumulate facts of this nature, but space is re-
fused us, and we will content ourselves with reminding our read-
ers that they exist in great number in the ancient and .modern
works of voyagers of all nations."

I will add to this curious dissertation on ecstasy, that the spirit
that seizes the priests of these countries, taking possession of
their material body to prophesy through their mouth, is not un-
like the spirit that seized on Binet, the first somnambulist men-
tioned in this work, and caused him to say : " It is not I who
always answer your questions, it is the spirit that speaks through
my mouth, and I am a quiet spectator and auditor of its discus-
sions with you." We, however, are neither among savages nor
barbarians ; no, but we are among madmen and visionaries ;
that amounts to the same thing.

We will now pass into Greece, and ask Lamprias, the brother
of Plutarch, what he thought of the immortality of the soul.

GrREECE. — Plutarcli. — Treatise on the " Cessation of Oracles,
Annals of Magnetism," page 70 : —

" One of the interlocutors of the treatise in question, having
set forth that prophesying was merely the work of genii that
animated, the oracles and revealed to our souls what was pas-
sing at a distance and at a future time, Lamprias, the brother of
Plutarch, combats this system, and thus expresses himself —
Why should we deprive souls united to bodies of this faculty
natural to the genii, of knowing and predicting the future? It
is not at all likely that souls after their separation from the body
acquire any properties they did not previously possess ; they
have ever the same faculties, but merely less perfect when souls
are united to the body. Of these faculties some are obscure
and hidden, others weak and languid; these grown dull and
tardy, as are our looks through clouds, they stand in need of
efficacious remedies to re-establish them in the integrity of their
nature, and deliver them from whatsoever retards their activity.
As the sun becomes not luminous on emerging from a cloud,
and as ever brilliant by his nature he appears obscured only by
reason of the cloud hiding him ; in like manner the soul ac-
quires not the faculty of j^Tedicting when it has emerged from
the hody as from a cloud ; it possesses this faculty while uni-
ted to the body, hut its intimate union with a mortal nature
deadens its activity.'' "

Who at the present day could combat the opinion pro-
nounced by Lamprias, and the fictions he employs to demon-'
strate the faculties of the soul in the material and in the spir-
itual state. It is right to admit that spirits can enlighten our
clairvoyantes, to save them the trouble of making researches
which very often fatigue them ; but it is not less just to admit,
that these clairvoyantes can dispense with their assistance, inas-
much as they possess this same property. What progress has
psychological science made since that period ? None ; as at
this day, with the demonstrative assistance of magnetism, som-
nambulism, and ecstasy, men still doubt the existence of the
soul. Oh ! reign of civilization, thy locomotives cause thy ma-
terial body to clear space ten times more swiftly than of yore,
but thy reasoning stands in great need of a spiritual locomotive
to return to Lamprias, and listen to his lessons.

Let us ask Aristotle, while we are in the classical land of
philosophy, what he thought of the immortality of the soul. In
the "Explanation of the Doctrines of Aristotle," by Cicero, the
latter makes the philosopher thus speak : —

** Souls derive not their origin from the earth. They admit
of no admixture, no concretion, no extract, or substance of ter-
restrial bodies, or that of water, air, or fire ; for, in the diverse
natures of these elements, there is nothing which is susceptible
of the faculties of the memory, the understanding, the thought ;
nothing which is capable of retaining the past, foreseeing the
future, embracing the present. All these can be but Divine
gifts, and never will it be said from whom man received them,
if not from God himself The soul is, therefore, of a singular
nature, and distinct from all other natures. So, whatsoever that
be within us which feels, thinks, desires, and animates us, it is
something celestial, divine, and, consequently, imperishable."

Since we are with Cicero, let us take advantage of it to in-
quire into his opinions on this head.

Rome. — Cicero. — Book on Old Age. — The orator puts in the
mouth of Cato these remarkable words : —

" I am persuaded that your fathers, those illustrious person-
ages whom I so much loved, have not ceased living, although
they have passed through death ; and that they are still living
that sort of life which alone deserves being called by that name ;
for so long as we are in the bonds of the body, we are like
slaves at the chain, since our soul is divine, which, from heaven,
as the place of its origin, is cast down, and, as it were, buried
in this low region of the earth, which is a place of exile and
punishment for a substance celestial and eternal by its nature.

* * * * In short, when I perceive what activity there
is in our minds, what memory of the past, what foresight of
the future ; when I take into consideration the number of arts,
sciences, and discoveries, to which they have attained, I believe,
and am fully persuaded, that a nature possessing in itself the
groundwoi'k of so many things can not be mortal." * * * *

Discourse of Cyrus, when on the point of dying, to his Chil-
dren : " Bev/are of believing, my dear children," said he to
them, " that I am no longer aught, or that I am no longer any-
where, when I have quitted you ; for, at the time I was with
you, you did not behold my spirit ; but what you saw me do
made you think that there was one within my body. Doubt
not, therefore, .that this spirit will subsist even after it has
been separated from it, although no longer perceptible by any

For my part, I have never been able to persuade myself that
our spirits live only so long as they are within our bodies ; and
that they die when they quit them, or that they remain, stripped
of intelligence and wisdom, when disengaged from a body that
has by itself neither sense nor reason ; I believe, on the con-
trary, that when the spirit, disengaged from matter, finds itself,
in all the purity and simplicity of its nature, it is then that it
possesses most light and wisdom."

In the same book, Cato exclaims : —

"For my part, I heartily long to rejoin your fathers, whom
I so dearly loved and venerated ; and not only those great
men whom I knew, but even those of whom I have heard
speak, and of whom I have read, or whose actions I myself
have written. I go, therefore, to meet them with so much joy
that it would be difficult to detain me ; and it would afford me
no pleasure to be cast over again, like Pelias, to renew me,
and enable me to recommence life. No, though some god
should wish to lead me back to childhood, and place me once
more in the cradle to recommence a new life, I should oppose
it with all my might, and from the end of the career in which
I now am, I should not wish to be replaced at its commence-
ment. ****#»*

Oh ! a happy day will be that when I shall leave this impure
and corrupt crowd to rejoin that divine and happy band of
great souls that left the earth before me. I shall find there not
only those great men of whom I have spoken, but also my dear
Cato, whom I can say was one of the best of men, of the best
of dispositions, and one of the most faithful to his duties that
has ever been seen. I placed his body on the funeral pile,
whereas he ought to have placed on it mine.. But his soul has
not left me ; and without losing sight of me, he has merely
preceded me into a country where he beheld that I should
shortly rejoin him. If I have borne the loss of such a son with
some degree of firmness, it is not that I was not touched at it
even to the quick ; but I consoled myself with the thought that
we were not separated for long."

I shall dispense with adding any reflections to so eloquent a
morccazi, I am too penetrated with admiration for these great
men and the insufficiency of any observations of mine, to make
the attempt. We will not leave the queen of the world, now
simple Italy, before addressing ourselves to Campanella, that
model of the philosophers of Christendom. We shall find him
worthy, I believe, of the forementioned great men.

Italy. — Campanella. — Madame Louise Collet's Transla-
tion. — " Poesies," page 67.

** Souls in the mask of the body present, on the theatre of
the world, to the dwellers in heaven, the spectacle of their agi-
tation.

** They perform the actions and say the things for which they
were born. They go from scene to scene, and from choir to
choir, sometimes joyous, sometimes sad, according to what is
found to be ordained in the dramatic book.

** They neither know nor can do aught else but what infinite
wisdom has inscribed therein for the good of all." (Page 142-5.)

" Death is sweet to him to whom life is bitter. He who is
born in tears should die smiling. Let us at last give up these
miserable rags to destiny that lends them to us at such a usu-
rious rate. Before taking back altogether this mortal body, it
demands of us our hearing, • ur leeth, and our eyes so dear.
Take all that belonsj-s to thee, O avaricious earth ! and where-
fore bearest thou not me myself away to the Styx. Happy he
who escapes from time !

I bear with me, o^arment of sin and grrief, weight of misery, and
labyrinth of errors, thou detainest me here below by caresses
and by fear, lest I should turn my eyes up to heaven, the good
supreme, and my true abode ; thou fearest that smitten with its
beauty, I should disdain and abandon thee — a dead coal."
thou fearest, perhaps, that I should die amid these immense
griefs ; leave terror to the vulgar, thou w^ell know^est that dying
means leaving w^hat one loves. If nothing is resolved into
nothing, never he w^ho is not dead in himself should fear aught.
He who has peace vinthin him can dread no tribulation. Let
no other reasoning prevail on thee, or thou w^ouldst be misled."

(2.)
" If a material person did not hold thee enslaved, no tyrant
could do so any more than he could enslave the unchained
winds, the angels and the stars. Thy torments are less hurtful
to thee than to those who inflict them on thee ; thy torments
deliver thee, O my soul ; they resuscitate thee and snatch thee
from thy prison and thy grave, since, for thee the body is both."

(7.)
Page 135. — " By our weak understandings and confined
movements we perceive only the material things which strike
the walls of our prison : but things powerful and divine escape
us, for they would burst our frail envelope. We are unable to
become acquainted with the secret virtues of things because
our organization presents an obstacle to our so doing. The
most learned here below possess but the semblance of truth."

(2.)
Page 138. — "O my soul! when thou shalt have once
quitted this body, which thou now fearest to abandon, thou wilt
entertain such an aversion to it, that, were God to propose re-
storing it to thee, formed of iron and glass, that it might fear
neither shocks nor obscurity, thou wouldst refuse with tears,
unless it were restored to thee wholly celestial, like that of the
Savior when he rose from the dead."

(3.)
*' On beholding the immortal world, with its heavenly de-
lights and the honors which spirits render to God, thou wilt be
astonished that he should deign to cast a look on our circum-
scribed earth, obscure and devoid of beauty — on this earth,
where resound so many blasphemies that one would say that
God has forsaken it — on this earth, inhabited by hatred, death,
war, and ignorance."

*' Thou wilt behold heaven and earth combating even as heat
and cold ; thou wilt see how, for the diversion of superior
beings, nature, with all this, forms wind, water, plants, metals,
and stones ; thou wilt perceive how pain and pleasure trans-
form being-s."

(5.)
" Thou wilt see the whole and the parts participate in the
power of intelligence and reason, and how God, making use of
destiny and harmony, ordains the universal drama, and disposes
of souls with a view to the active and uninterrupted enacting
of this drama."

Poor actor in his human comedy, who had a part so painful
to play, how many times, from the bosom of its double dun-
geon, would thy soul have quitted thy body, loaded with irons,
to draw from the heavens the courage thou knowest how to op-
pose to the executioners who tore off thy flesh with red hot
pincers for the blind pleasure of seeing thy blood run. If thy
happiness is as great as thy sufferings were acute, thou art
surely one of the happiest in the'kingdora of heaven. We are
about to quit thee and pass into Sweden, to our dearly beloved
brother Swedenborg, to demand of him some new revelations
for those who have not read his works.

Sweden. — Swedenborg. — Page 9. — In a preliminary dis-
course, to serve as a guide in the perusal of the works of Swe-
denborg, by Captain Fraiche (brochure in 8vo., 1848), we find
the following particulars respecting this celebrated ecstatico-
prophet : —

" Emmanuel Swedenborg was born at Upsal, in Sweden, the
29th January, 1688, in a distinguished class of society. He
was placed from his earliest youth in an important tribunal, and
distinguished himself there by his knowledge and integrity j
solid and numerous writings on mineralogy, physics, and astron-
omy soon made him known to the learned world. Esteemed
and beloved for his knowledge and virtue, ever useful and irre-
proachable. Swedenborg gave up, about the year 1740, tem-
poral affairs to engage only in spiritual matters. In 1743, he
received the first favors and first orders from heaven." * *

From this period up to the time of his death, which took
place in London, on the 29th of March, 1772, he published
several works, all written in Latin, on spiritual matters.

Note 5. — " Independently of the communication with heav-
en, and the inspiration with which Swedenborg was favored
the rest of his life, he astonished his fellow-citizens by several
marvellous things.' We will cite a few of the most interesting
and best attested ones : —

** 1. A demand was made on a lady of the court of Stockholm
for a debt, which she well knew her husband had discharged
previous to his decease ; but not finding the receipt, and appre-
hensive of having to pay twice over, she went to Swedenborg.
He told her, the following day, that he had spoken with her
husband, who had told him \7here the receipt was. The de-
ceased appeared also in a dream to his widow, clad in the
dressing-gown he wore before his death, and told her that the
receipt was in such a place, where she found it. She used to
relate this strange adventure, which the queen of Sweden has
since confirmed at Berlin, when on a visit to the king, her
brother.

" 2. Being at Gottenburg, sixty miles from Stockholm, he
announced, three days before the arrival of the courier, the fire
which ravaged Stockholm, and the precise hour it broke out;
and, without having received any news, he also said that his
own house had been spared by the flames.

"3. Embarking at London in the vessel of Captain Dixon,
some one asked the latter whether he had laid in plenty of pro-
visions, whereupon Swedenborg observed: * We don't want
si/ch a plenty, for in a week hence, at two o'clock, we shall he at
StocJcholm' The prediction, as Captain Dixon has attested,
was literally fulfilled."

Note 7. — "In 1758, a short time after the death of the
king of Prussia, Swedenborg went to court, whither he was
in the habit of going. Scarcely had he been seen by her
majesty than she said to him ; * Monsieur, tlie assessor, Jiave you
seen my brother V Swedenhorg made answer that he had not ;
and the queen replied, ' If you should meet him, remember me
to him.' In saying this, she meant merely to pass a joke, and
had DO thoughts of asking him for any information concerninrr
her brother. A week after, Swedenborg went again to court,
but at so early an hour that the queen had not yet left her
apartment, called the JVhite Room, where she was chatting
with her ladies of honor and other ladies of the court. Svve-
denhorg waits not for the queen's coming out ; he straightway
walks into the apartment and whispers in her ear. The queen,
struck with astonishment, faints away, and was some time be-
fore she recovered. Brought to herself again, she said to
those around her, ' Only God and my brother could have
known what he has just told me.' She confessed that he had
mentioned to her her last correspondence with that prince, the
subject of which was known only to themselves."

Note 8. — "As a religion, the doctrine of Swedenborg Is
already propagated in Sweden, Prussia, the Low Countries,
Switzerland, Grermany, and even in Russia; in England, forty-
four towns already number as many temples ; in the United
States there were seventy-two of them in 1827. Numerous
learned journals propagate this doctrine in Europe, as also in
the New World," &c., &c.

This is a slight sketch of the reputation of the man with
whom we have entertained our readers; a man worthy of the
.respect, admiration, and veneration of all spiritualists; the
greatest and truest genius of the eighteenth century.

Some would-be philosophers wish to refute his admirable
writings by arguments worthy of their knowledge.

He was a visionary, say they. This name is well worth that
of blind men, which rightly belongs to them.

He was a madman — whom, even up to this very day, they
have been unable to do without in their works at the mines.

Let us not discuss with these learned gentlemen ; we could
not raise ourselves up to them, infinitely insignificant as we
are j let us rather pass on to a few extracts from the treatise
on heaven and hell, by this maniac — with whom, however, we
should be most happy to play a game of ecarte in the spiritual
world : —

Art. 439. — " To throw more light on this truth, that man is
a spirit as to his interior, I should wish to recount, from expe-
rience, what happens when man is removed from his body, and
how, through the spirit, he is conveyed to another place.

Art. 440. — "As to what regards the first point of being
removed from his body, this is the way in which it is effected :
Man is conducted into a certain state, holding a medium between
sleep and wakefulness ; when he is in this state he can not
know auoht else but that he watches : for all his senses are so
awakened that he finds himself in the most perfect wakefulness
of the body ; the sight and hearing are perfect, and most ad-
mirable in this situation ; the touch also, which finds itself
more exquisite and distinct than it could ever be in the opera-
tions of the body, is most perfectly awakened. In this state it
is that I have seen spirits and angels — seen them ad vivum —
even heard them, and, what at first strangely surprised me,
touched them, without finding scarcely any difference in them
from the touch of a body. This state is the one wherein we
are said to be removed from our body, and not knowing
whether we are in or out of our body. I have been three or
four times transported into this state, merely that I might
become acquainted with the quality of this state, and at the
same time know that spirits and angels have the enjoyment of
all their senses, and that man, in like manner, enjoys them as
to the spirit when removed from his body."

Is it possible to describe ecstasy better ?

Art. 447. — " The spirit of man, after the separation, remains
a short time in the body, but only until the total cessation of
the heart ; this happens differently, according to the nature of
the disease of which the man dies, for the movement of the
heart in some lasts a certain time, and in others ceases at once ;
no sooner does this movement cease than man is resuscitated,
but this is brought about by the Lord alone. By resurrection,
we mean the spirit of man leaving the body, and introduced
into the spiritual world ; correctly speaking, this resurrection
should be termed the awakenincr."

Art. 452. — " I have conversed with spirits three days after
their death, and all the operations I have detailed in Nos. 449,
450, were already consummated. I have conversed with three
spirits who had been known to me in their worldly life, told
them that their obsequies were being prepared, and their
bodies being buried at the moment I spoke to them ; at the word
huried, they were struck with the greatest astonishment, saying
that they were alive, and setting in order what was of use to
them in the world. Then, being better informed, they were
quite astounded that all the time they had lived on earth they
had not believed in the possibility of such a life after death.

*• Hence, all those who come from the world into the other
life are extremely surprised at perceiving that they live, and
are men, as they had previously been ; at pei'ceiving that they
hear, see, and speak ; at perceiving that even their body enjoys
the sense of touch, as before ; but the most surprising of all to
them, when they have ceased wondering at this new situation
(No. 74), is perceiving that the church knows nothing of such
a state for man after death, and, consequently, knows nothing
of heaven and hell, when, nevertheless, all those who have
lived in the world are now in the other life, and live as men, as
they were astonished, also, that this truth was not manifested
to man by vision, since it is so essential to the faith of the
church. It was told them, from heaven, that this might be
done ; for there is nothing more easy when it pleases the
Lord, but that never would those, who have been confirmed
in errors against truths, believe those truths, even were they to
see them."

Peruse once more the 132d sitting of the " Secrets," wherein
will be seen, in the apparition of my father, the tru-th of what
Swedenborg here reveals as to the momentary ignorance in
which certain spirits find themselves who do not believe that
they are dead.

Art. 493. — " The first state of man after death is altogether
similar to his state in this world, because that then it is the
same with exteriors ; thus, his physiognomy, language, charac-
ter — in short, his moral and civil life — are similar to what he
has been in the world ; hence, he who is in the world of spir-
its knows not but that he is still on earth, unless he notices
the objects which are before his eyes, and the things which
have been told him by the angels at the moment of his resur
rection, in order to assure him that he was now a spirit (No.
450). Thus, a life is continued in another life, and death ia
only a passage.

" As the new spirit of man after his life in the world is such,
he is then recognised by his friends and those whose society he
was wont to frequent in the world ; for the spirits recognise
him not only by his physiognomy and language, but also by his
sphere of life when they approach the newly-arrived spirit.
Each, in the other life, while he is thinking of another, has
immediately the physiognomy of the person who occupies
him in his thought, and at the same time several deeds and
•actions of his life are retraced before his eyes ; and when he
is in this state of reminiscence, the object remembered becomes
to him present, as if called for and brought before him. The
same effect exists in the world bf spirits, because the thoughts
are communicated there, and because there space is no longer
known as in the natural world (Nos. 191, 199). Hence, as
soon as they come into the other life, they are recognised by
their friends, their relations, their parents, by those even who
had but a slight connection with them. They speak with each
other, and, in short, renew the familiarities and friendships
which had united them in the natural world. Several times
have I heard those who came from the world which we inhabit ;
they were transported with joy at beholding again their friends,
and their friends participated in this joy at seeing them arrive
and become reunited to them. It is a very common thing for
husbands to meet again with their wives, wives with their
husbands, and congratulate each other at their meeting ; then
they remain together for a longer or shorter period, according
to the degree of attachment they felt for each other in this
world J and, in short, if a love truly conjugal had not united
them (a love which is the conjunction of two souls by heavenly
love), a short time after their new reunion they separate. If
the souls of married couples have lived in dissension — if they
have inwardly hated each other — they now display openly
their mutual aversion, and oftentimes even abuse each other
and fight, without being able, however, to separate till the mo-
ment of their passage to the second state, of which I shall treat
in the following article."

We are conscious that it can not be otherwise : there is no
possible transition between the two kinds existing; it must be,
as we have seen, a continuation of affections w^hich can not dis-
appear suddenly. In the harmony of nature, there can not be
any such escapements; there is progression, but by the catch
of that universal and eternal wheel, a single tooth of which
can not be broken without putting out of order the machine.
Ivlagnetizers, who know with what facility clairvoyantes com-
municate with places and persons at a distance, will readily
admit that it must be thus in heaven, where spaces exist much
less than on earth. It is not, therefore, incredible that so soon
as we think of a deceased friend he should be forthwith with
us ; if we do not see him and feel him, it is because our organs
are too paralyzed ; but the clairvoyante soon proves to us the
truth of this revelation, by describing him to us and conversing
with him.

Who would still dare treat Swedenborg as a madman after
so beautiful a description of the somnambulic faculties, which
certainly were not known in his time as in our days ?

Art. 507. — " When spirits are in this second state, they ap-
pear just as they were when in the physical world; then, the*--
things which they have done and pronounced in the utmost
secrecy are manifested in open day ; for then, as external ap-
pearances no longer enchain them, they speak openly, endeavor
to do openly things similar to those which they did and said in
secret in their earthly life, no longer fearing the loss of their
reputation, and no longer terrified by the other motives which
kept them in check in the world ; consequently, are they shown
in their respective sinful states that they may appear just as
they really are to the angels and good spirits who examine
them. Thus it is that the most secret things are discovered,
the most clandestine works unveiled. According to the words
of the Lord : * For there is nothing covered that shall not be
revealed ; neither hid that shall not be known. Therefore,
whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the
light, and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets, shall
be proclaimed upon the- housetops.' (St. Luke, xii. 2, 3.)
* But I say unto you that every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.* (St.
Matthew, xii. 36.)"

On earth is there aught that we can hide from the perception
of a clairvoyante ? It is not, therefore, ridiculous to admit that
in the world of spirits none is any longer able to conceal
aught ; it is the book of life which will be open to all. The
masks of calm concealing rage, smiles concealing bitterness,
virtue concealing vice, will be left on earth. We can not deny
these truths after having studied magnetic somnambulism. Need
we invite our readers to a perusal of the works of the learned
Swede 1 No, these few passages, we are certain of it, will be
a better invitation than any we could give. We abstain, there-
fore, from all insinuation in this respect.

We are about to proceed into Germany, to consult a philos-
opher highly extolled, and deservedly so, by our savans of the
day.

Germany. — " Fichte, on the Destiny of Man:" Translation
of 1836: page 254: —

" Moreover, it is not from to-day that this conviction exists
in me. Long before conscience had spoken with it's irresistible
authority, I could not contemplate the actual world for a single
instant, without feeling rise within me, shall I say hope ? shall
I say desire? No: better than that, more than that — the
irrefragable certitude of another world. At each glance I let
fall on men or on nature, at every reflection engendered in my
mind by the singular contrast of the immensity of man's de-
sires and his actual misery, an interior voice would raise itself
within me and say : ' Oh ! nothing out of all this can be eter-
nal ; be persuaded of it, another world exists, another and a
better world. * * * J g^t, I drink, in order that I may
eat and drink again. The grave, incessantly open, seizes its
prey ; I descend into it to become the food of worms : T leave
behind me beings similar to myself, that they may eat and drink
until they die, themselves replaced by others, similar to them,
who in their turn will do the same things. Such is my life,
such is the world ; it is a circle revolving eternally on itself; it
is a fantastic spectacle, wherein all is born to die, and dies to
be born again ; it is a hydra with innumerable heads, never
weary of devouring itself in order to reproduce itself, and
reproducing itself to devour itself again. Shall I believe, then,
that it is in the circle of those monstrous and eternal vicissi-
tudes all the efforts of humanity must waste themselves in use-
less efforts ? Shall I not rather believe, that if humanity under-
goes them, it is but momentarily, with the view of arriving at
a state which shall remain final, in order to reach at last a place
of rest, where, recovering from so many fatigues, it will remain
immoveable for eternity, above the agitated waves of the ocean
of ages."

Page 363. — " While here below, we weep for a man, as we
should have but too just a cause for doing so were he deprived
for ever of the light of the sun, were he to go wandering for
eternity in those immense solitudes wherein exists not the con-
sciousness of self, where he sunk never to emerge from them
in the sombre kins^dom of nothinraess : above us, other crea-
tures, no doubt, rejoice at the birth of this man in their world
new to him, as in this we rejoice at the birth of one of our
children.

*' May the day, then, whereon I am to rejoin him, quickly
arrive ! I will leave mourning: and sorrow to the earth which I
shall quit, and that day shall be to me the most welcome of all."

Let us return to France, our dear country, said to be the
least philosophical and most light-minded of all nations. We
will prove to its enemies that they have uttered a falsehood, and
that our libraries swarm with works bespeaking great medita-
tion of mind, and a love of spiritualism more refined than
among many other nations. The limits of this work not admit-
ting of our citing all the authors we are acquainted with, who
have treated on this grand question, we will select from among
them a few who have done so in our point of view : —

France. — Tierre le Loyer. — This writer of the seventeenth
century appears to the eyes of the present generation as a
superstitious character, who lived only among demons. Let
us do him a little more justice; he deserves being admitted as
a conscientious and enlightened writer, who — having been
enabled, by his social position, to see, compare, and judge the
facts which he relates — had a right to pronounce as he did.
Had he been a little less of a devotee, he would have been but
a still greater philosopher. One destroys not the other ; it
merely injures him in the judgment of a few persons who con-
cede nothing to their fellow-men. Le Loyer represents the
philosophy and beliefs of his age. In his treatise on " Spectres
and Apparitions, or Visions of Angels and Demons, showing
themselves sensibly to Men" (1586, 4th book, page 85), he says :

*#**.< ^jj(j after him [Mahomet], I find that King
Avezoar Albuma, a great philosopher and physician, also be-
lieved in the apparition of souls ; for he has left on record, that
having a disease in one of his eyes, and no hope of finding a
remedy, he beheld, while asleep, a deceased friend of his, a
physician, who told him what remedies to apply to recover his
sight; — and Avicenna follows, for the most part, the opinion
of Plato as to souls ; and as Plato has termed the body the
grave of the soul, so by Avicenna the body is termed the paral-
ysis of the soul, through which it can not freely perform its
functions and actions ; and as to the felicity of the soul after
the death of the body, he still agrees with Plato, except in the
damnation of the damned, the punishment of whom consists,
he says, in a continual sorrow at being deprived of what they
have most desired, believing that there is no other torment
for the soul (which is the everlasting fire) than that of being
deprived of the sight of God — which doctrine Plato did not
hold."

Page 88. — *' Certainly the Bramins, the priestly disciples of
the Bragmans, wlio dwell in Calcutta, in the East Indies, be-
sides believing in the immortality of souls, think that they may
be evoked by necromancy, and they are the greatest magicians
in this part of the Indies."

Page 150. — " Do we require a more beautiful solution than
that of St. Augustine, who, after having duly and diligently
discussed the question of the apparition of the dead, at length
unravels and disposes of it in this way: 'If,' said he, 'we
consider as false the apparitions that the faithful and catholics
declare they have seen, and if we set so little value on the
testimony of those who declare that they have seen and heard
with their corporeal senses the souls of the dead, we should
be rightly reputed as too bold and incredulous.' Thus, St.
Augustine founds his opinion upon what the generality of men
believe, and principally good, faithful Christians, who, in his
time, declared and maintained that souls had been seen after
separation from the body."

What was believed at that time may surely be believed now,
when God permits us to enter into communication with souls,
through the medium of somnambulism, at any time and at any
hour.

Delacliambre. — The system of the soul, by Delachambre,
published in 1665, gives a pretty good summai-y of the beliefs
and long theological disputes of the seventeenth century. This
work, highly metaphysical, is worthy of being studied by mag-
netizers. We find, at page 53, these reflections : —

" The greatest difficulty is to know whether the communica-
tion which men have with angels and souls separated can be per-
formed in the same manner (by meeting forthwith) ; for it can
not be doubted that there is some society between us and them,
since there is such between all intelligent natures, and since
the communication we must have together is a point of true
religion ; angels and blessed souls can, in truth, come to us,
penetrate us, and unite themselves to our thoughts, but we can
not go to them if they are in heaven. What, then, can become
of our wishes and prayers with respect to them ? how should
they, being so far off, know our wants and wishes ?"

Page 404. — "It must not, however, be supposed that the
form of the soul and of angels is fixed and determinate, like
that of solid bodies ; it is vague and changeable like that of the
air and the liquids, which assume the form of all the solid
bodies surrounding them, and the difference is this, that the
vivacity of the forms that supervene to the latter is of neces-
sity, and that which is found in spiritual substances depends
on their will ; for, as they move as they please all their parts,
they also assume whatever form they desire."

This proposition comes in support of what has been revealed
to us relative to the forms which souls disengaged from matter
can assume. In the first proposition, M. Delachambre (who
may rightly pass for a philosopher of great merit) considers it
a very rational idea that the soul of deceased persons should
communicate instantaneously with that of terrestrial men,
agreeably to the wishes of the latter. He thus draws his con-
clusions therefrom, by reasonings not systematical, but truly
thelogical.

Lebrun. — Let us see what the Rev. Father Lebrun thinks of
it in his " Critical History of Superstitious Practices,'' 2d edi-
tion, vol. ii., 1732, page 227 :—

" Doubtless it was an abominable superstition to pretend to
make the dead speak in order to pry into the future. Grod had
distinctly said that it was consulting the Evil One, and was a
crime deserving of death : still Saul, setting at defiance the
prohibition and the penalty, ventured to consult a witch, and
ask her to resuscitate, and cause to appear, Samuel. Although
the Evil One had no power over this prophet, and could only
assume his countenance and voice, God, nevertheless, permits
Samuel himself to come and speak to Saul, reproach him for
his crimes, and announce to him his destruction. I am aware
that it is disputed whether what then appeared was the shade
of Samuel or the prophet himself I am also aware that some
persons inquire whether it was supernatural or a sheer impos-
ture ! But this is a point on which there can be neither ques-
tion nor doubt. Those who dispute have not paid attention to
what is said in Ecclesiasticus, for this sacred book distinctly in-
forms us that Samuel, being dead, made known to the king
what would happen to him : ' And after his death, he prophe-
sied, and showed the king his end, and lifted up his voice from
the earth in prophecy, to blot out the wickedness of the people.'
Here, then, is Samuel prophesying after his death, and God
doing, among tlie abominable superstitions of the witch, what
diabolic art could not have operated."

Don't let that astonish you. Father Lebrun ; there was in
the science of the witch nothing more reprehensible than what
you may be pleased to approve in favor of your doctrine. An
apiiarition is a fact, that is what we wished to register, since
we are in the nineteenth century. Let us continue.

Voltaire. — Let us open for an instant the " Philosophical
Dictionary," the panacea of materialists, in which M. Arouet
de Voltaire condescended to write a few pages. Article —
" Man," vol. V. : —

" Where is the man who, as soon- as he withdraws into him-
self, feels not that he is but a mere puppet of Providence ? I
think, but can I impart to myself a thought? Alas! if I
thought of myself, I should know what idea I should have in
a moment ; no one knows it.

*' I acquire a knowledge, but I could not have imparted it to
myself; my intelligence could not have been the cause of it, as
the cause must contain the effect ; now, my first acquired
knowledge not being in my intelligence, not being in me, since
it has been the first, it has been imparted to me by him who
formed me and is the giver of all, whatsoever he be.

" I am altogether lost and humbled when I am made to per-
ceive that my first knowledge can not of itself impart to me a
second, as it would be necessary that it should contain it within
itself.

*' The proof that we do not impart to ourselves any idea is,
'that we receive many in our dreams, and, certainly, it is neither
our will nor our attention which causes us to think in a dream.
There are poets who compose verses while asleep, geometers
who measure triangles ; all this proves to us that there is a
power that acts within us without consulting us.

"All our sentiments, are they not involuntary? — hearing,
sight, taste, are nothing of themselves ; we are conscious, de-
spite ourselves, we know nothing — we are nothing without a
supreme power, that does all."

Who now would venture to say that this article is the work
of a materialist 1 What spiritualist ever better meditated ?

Article — " Magic, "vol. vi., ed. 1785. — "Magic is a science
ma-ch more plausible than astrology and the doctrine of genii.
No sooner do we begin to think that there is in man a being
quite distinct from the machine, and that the understanding
subsists after death, than we give to this understanding a deli-
cate, subtile, aerial body, resembling the body in which it was
lodged ; two reasons, perfectly natural, invite to this opinion : —
the first is this, that in all languages the soul was termed
breath, spirit, wind ; this spirit, wind, breath, was in something
very small, and very delicate. The second — that if the soul
of a man had not retained a form similar to that it possessed
during its life, we should have been unable, after death, to dis-
tincruish the soul of one man from that of another. This soul,
this shadow which subsisted, separated from its body, could
very well show itself in a case of emergency, see again the
places it had dwelt in, visit its relatives, its friends, speak to
them, instruct them. In all this there was no incompatibility ;
what is, is able to appear."

Who, pray, after such a confession, would fear ridicule, by
making a similar one 1 — To find, in the *' Philosophical Diction-
ary," these words : " The soul can see again iJie places it had,
dwelt in^ What novelty is there in what we have just said %
What, then, do clairvoyantes tell us that should be looked ujDon
as incredible ] Nothing. The " Philosophical Dictionary" has
been as far as possible.

Saint- Martin. — We will pass on to the perusal of a few
passages contained in a highly-esteemed work, entitled *' Er-
rors and Truth," by an unknown philosopher (attributed to
Saint-Martin), vol. i., page 31 : —

" No one of good faith, and whose reason is neither clouded
nor pi'ejudiced, but what comprehends that the corporeal life of
man is a state of almost continual suffering and privation ;
thus, from the ideas we have formed of justice, it is not with-
out reason that we look upon the duration of this corporeal life
as a time of chastisement and expiation, but we can not look
upon it as such, without forthwith thinking that there must have
been for man a state anterior and preferable to the one where-
in he now finds himself; and we may say that in proportion as
his actual state is confined, painful, and sown with disgust, so
the other must have been illimitable, and filled with delight.
Each of his sufferings is an index of the happiness wanting in
him ; each of his privations proves that he was made for enjoy-
ment, and his present subjection announces an ancient author-
ity ; in one word, to feel now that he has nothing, is a secret
proof that once he had all.

" From the painful perception of the dreadful state in which
we now see him, we may, therefore, form to ourselves an idea
of the happy state in which he was previously. He is not, at
present, the master of his thoughts ; and it is a torment for
him to have to wait for those he desires, and repulse those he
fears; hence we feel that he was made to dispose of these same
thoughts, and that he could produce them at will ; whence it
is, also, easy to presume the inappreciable advantages attached
to such a power ; he obtains, actually, a certain amount of
peace and tranquillity, only by unheard-of efforts and painful
sacrifices ; hence, we conclude that he was made to enjoy, per-
petually, and without labor, a calm and happy state, and that
the abode of peace was his true dwelling. Possessing the
faculty of seeing all and knowing all, he, nevertheless, crawls
in darkness, shuddering at his blindness and ignorance. Is not
this a certain proof that the light is his element 1 At last, his
body is subject to destruction ; and this death, of which he is
the only creature in nature who has an idea of it, is the most
terrible step in his corporeal career, the act the most humili-
atinor to him, and the one which he holds most in horror.
Wherefore, should not this law, so severe and dreadful for
man, induce us to think that his body had received one infinitely
more glorious, and was destined to enjoy all the rights of im-
mortality!"

Page 43. — *' It is, therefore, evident that this material body
which we bear is the organ of all our sufferings ; it is, there-
fore, it which, forming dense bounds to our view and to all our
faculties, keeps us in privation and suffering. Consequently, I
ought not any longer to dissemble that the junction of man to
this coarse envelope is the punishment even to which his sin has
subjected him temporarily, since we see the horrible effects that
he suffers from it from the moment he is invested with it to that
wherein he is stripped of it, and that hence it is that begin and
are perpetuated the trials without which he can not re-estab-
lish the relations he once had with the light !"

I will make no observation on this passage, which is the full
and entire confirmation of what has been revealed to us relative
to a life anterior, in which we were, as St. Martin says, pos-
sessors of all we now stand in need of.

Here are a few fragments of the same author, extracted
from his last pages on death.

" The society of the world in general has appeared to me
like a theatre whereon we must continually pass our time in
playing our part, wherein there is never a single moment to
learn it. The, society of wisdom, on the contrary, is a school
wherein we constantly pass our time in learning our part, and
where we only wait for the drawing up of the curtain, that is
to say, till the veil of the universe has disappeared, to begin
playing.

" From the way in which worldly folks spend their time, one
would say that they are afraid of not being silly enough.

" Death is but one of the hours of our dial, and our dial
must turn for ever.

" The hope of death forms the consolation of my days ;
therefore would I that men would never say * the other life,' for
there is but one life.

** I have seen that men were astonished at dying, and were
not astonished at being born ; this, however, should more justly
excite their surprise and admiration.

*^ Is it not grievous to the thought to see that man passes his
life in learning how he should pass it ?

" Nothing is easier than arriving at the door of truth, nothing
more rare and difficult than entering it, and such is the case
with most of the learned of this world.

*' If after our death this world should appear to us but a
trance, wherefore should we not regard it as such from this
moment 1 The nature of things can not change.

" As our material existence is not life, our material destruc-
tion is not death.

" Man has warnings of all, but he pays no attention to them ;
in fact, all is in our atmosphere, the secret is to know how to
read in it."

What think you of this last passage, my dearly-beloved
savans ? Your spectacles are of an exquisite polish, but they
do not penetrate so far, and yet this is, this can be seen, com-
prehended, demonstrated with little trouble and in little time ;
but we can not raise Ourselves up to you. Let each remain in
his place ; ours is, you have said, at Bicetre [Bedlam] ; peace
be between us. Be assured, dear readers, that the authors we
quote have never been the inmates of Charenton [also a mad-
house] ; they have been forgotten at the door, where we made
acquaintance with them. We will now introduce to you the
famous, or if you please, poor Marmontel. '

Warmontel. — " Lessons of a Father to his Children on Meta-
physics," page 99 : —

" You perceive," said he, " by the functions performed by
the soul of animals that its destination ceases with the term of
its life, whereas the destination of the soul of man has barely
commenced. Contemplative intelligence ! it has seen but
through a cloud the marvels with which the Eternal has been
pleased to render it a witness, and only by disengaging itself
from these material veils will it fully enjoy the sight of the
great work, and that of its author."

Page 118. — " No, my children, if God has left to man the
power of rendering himself worthy of reward and punishment,
and if both are not distributed in this life with a constant and
strict equity, there is for man another life in which God re-
serves to himself to be just; it must be so, otherwise he would
not be God."

" Possibly I here make use of a very bold expression ; for
what is the right of the creature with respect to his Creator?
What is the engagement and obligation of the Creator toward
the creature ? He owes him nothing, strictly speaking, but he
owes it to himself, or rather it appertains to his divine essence
and the excellence of his nature, to desire naught which is not
perfectly conformable to the eternal idea of justice and good-
ness. We have reason to reproach men for having made for
themselves a God after their own image, attributing to him
qualities unworthy of him, and these are errors of the imagi-
nation from which I hope to preserve you. *****
Annihilation was ever the honuble hope of crime ; immortality
was ever the consolation of oppressed innocence and the sup-
port of virtue."

130. " It is this presentiment of a life to come which, in all
times has imparted so much streiigth and elevation to virtuous
souls, to such men as Socrates, Theramenes, Leonidas, Cato,
Thraseas, and in an especial degree to the martyrs of this holy
religion whose fundamental doctrine is the immortality of the
soul. Man, occupied with a boundless felicity which it is per-
mitted him to hope for, no longer regards this life but as a
fugitive flash which escapes and vanishes through light clouds.
A serene day is beyond, and this day which never night will
darken awaits him. It is in eternity that he beholds what
sort of being is his God, and there it is that he recognises
him as supremely good and just. Physical evil, with re-
spect to man, is therefore a fresh proof of the immortality
of the soul ; moral evil still adds to this proof, since it sup-
poses a free will, and liberty in man is an infallible proof of
immortality."

Let us now consult a few writers who have devoted them-
selves to the study of magnetism, for all bucklers are good to
parry the blows aimed at us ; we are not sorry at sharing
ridicule in company. We will, however, first introduce the
celebrated Ch. Fourier.
Fourier. — We find in liis " Life and Theory," by Cb. Pel-
larin, 2d edition, 1843, page 394 : —

" Fourier expressed himself as follows in a letter to Muiron,
dated 3d November, 1826 : ' It appears that Messi-s. G. and P.
have given up their work on magnetism ; I would wao;er ihat
they don't succeed witii the fundamental argument. I mean
that if all is knit together in the system of the universe, there
must exist a means of communication between the creatures
of the other world and this one ; that is to say, a communica-
tion of the faculties of the ultra-mundanes or deceased, and
not a communication with the latter ; this participation can not
take place in the watchful state, but only in a mixed state, as
sleep or something else. Have magnetizers discovered this
state ? I know not ; but in principle I am aware that it must
exist, and if it is the state of artificial somnambulism, no ad-
vantage will be derived from it so long as we are ignorant of
the calculation of the sympathies of characters in identities
and contrasts. For want of sorting, according to this theory,
magnetizers and the magnetized, we shall undergo a score
failures for one successful result, and this will give a superiority
to the skeptics and detractors.' "

What you foresaw I have put in execution. I wanted
but your erudition to draw from it the sage conclusions that
you — worthy man for such a task! — would have drawn
from it.

'Bertrand. — Let us pass on to Doctor Bertrand. " Treatise
on Somnambulism," 1823.

" It is evident that those who admit an immaterial principle
within us, can not consider it as confined or limited in any part
of space, and that it can be no more placed in our body than
anywhere else,* and, consequently, that nothing can limit the
extent of its perceptions."

* " If v^e are induced to place our soul in our body, and to believe that it is main-
tained there, it is merely because we feel only in tlie extent of the matter consti-
tuting it, and because we can not act on any particle of matter beyond the limits.
We ought not, therefore, to consider our body as containing our soul, as a thing
material contains another, but only limiting the extent of the matter in which it is
given it to act and feel." — fiYc^e to tlte above xvorh.J

For so confirmed a skeptic as Doctor Bertrand, this propo-
sition is not a very materialist one ! far from it.

" The soul can as well take cognisance of objects the farthest
off from its body as of those nearest to it ; for the view at
the greatest distances once operated, there will be nothing to
create surprise, or what may not even seem necessary ; for, if
our soul is quite as well at the antipodes as in our body, where-
fore, if it desires to direct its attention on an object fifteen
hundred leagues off, should it not equally as well take cogni-
zance of it as of that within a few feet of it ?

Page 257. — " Sometimes the somnambulist was shown ab-
sent persons, or those who had been long dead. When she
opened her eyes, seeing before her a spectre or phantom, she
was sensibly moved, and, at times, scenes occurred that might
have injured her health. It would be dangerous to repeat
such experiments often ; I warn magnetizers who should be
tempted to make similar ones, that serious consequences
might be the result, alike injurious to the health and mental
faculties."

I reply to Doctor Bertrand that the magnetizers who have
made experiments of this kind, doubtless, knew not how to
conduct them; this, it is true, might seriously affect the clair-
voyante's mind ; but those which I propose, and which have
been read, can present no inconvenience of the kind, and
ought, on the contrary, to establish demonstratively the exist-
ence of the soul after its separation from the body. The spec-
tres or phantoms which the said clairvoyantes saw were naught
else but the last state of the deceased patients, whom, in their
ecstatic ignorance, they went to seek in the graveyards, and
which the ignorance, not less great of the magnetizers allowed
to subsist on the clairvoyante's awaking. This, it is true,
must have produced injurious effects ; but which ought to
prove to the magnetizers that these corpses, reduced years
ago to dust, nevertheless existed for the clairvoyante, and de-
monstrated to them the immortality of material forms in the
world of effects, as spiritualism demonstrates the immortality
of the causes in the type- world. Doctor Bertrand is far from
wishing to believe in such communications between the two
worlds, as will be seen by the following article ; but his citing
it is sufficient for us to reproduce it, thinking, that those who
may have been convinced by the experiments we have cited
will explain it otherwise : —

" The members of the Exegetical Society of Stockholm were
zealously engaged in magnetizing. In 1787 and 1788, ihey
had come, I know not how, to the persuasion that the marvel-
lous facts of somnambulism could not appertain to the material
man, and that it must be some pure intelligence speaking through
the mouth of patients fallen into this state ! Well ! all the sick
persons sent to sleep by men persuaded of this idea, not only
were persuaded of it themselves, but also, like the possessed,
they identified themselves with the spiritual substances supposed
to speak through their mouth ; and when the magnetizer, after
sending them to sleep, put to them the usual questions : * Who
are you who speak V they replied, conformably to the ideas of
the person questioning them, I am the brother, the father, the
friend, or child of the person you have sent to sleep. And then
he would speak of the dead, discuss points of philosophy, preach
the doctrine of Swedenborg, and give information of what was
passing in the other world. * * * * * #

I could add to these examples, so conclusive, a great number
of others not less so."

Doctor Bertrand apparently throws out a bint to the effect
that he looks upon the members of this society (one of the most
learned that ever existed), as poor visionaries, who were the
sport of their imagination and of the more or less nonsensical
ramblings of their clairvoyantes. Had the doctor thought of
experimenting himself, he would have instantly recognised the
truth or falsehood of these communications. To reject an as-
sertion supported by well-informed men, without mature exam-
ination, is not being logical, and above all to terminate with this
phrase : ' T could add to these examples, so conclusive, a great
number of others not less so.' If these examples are conclu-
sive, and you do not admit them, doctor, you know only how to
cite, and not conclude.

Chardel. — We will pass on to another magnetizer, whose
knowledge and veracity can not be doubted. M. C. Chardel,
counsellor at the court of cassation at Paris, in his ''Essay on
Psychology," third edition, 1844, page 111, thus expresses him-
self:—

" The human soul seems, therefore, a stranger on earth — a
prisoner in a new world; the body lends its organs to perceive
ir, and life gives it the means of making use of them, but in
opening it to the material world it closes against it the spiritual
one."

This passage comes to the support of the anterior existence
of which we have already' spoken.

Page 357 (Appendix). — " Antiquity believed in communica-
tions with the other world, it recounts numerous instances of
such which the present age classes among fables ; still, in our
days, the apparitions of spirits are not more rare than formerly,
only we conceal them in the veil of ridicule with which we can
not hide the truth as well as error. I grant that facts of this
kind demand an explanation, and 1 will give one, but to make
it understood it is necessary that it should be preceded by an
inquiry as to the mode of existence of souls ; moreover, I beg
to remind the reader that I have studied nature in a path but
little known, and I make an appeal not to his credulity but his
examination."

M. Chardel taking, then, his stand on the writings of Swe-
denborg, on facts of ecstatisirij and several apparitions personal
to himself and full of interest, concludes with a firm belief in
the world of spirits, and the possibility of communicating with
them ; he believes in the recollection of self, and all that can
constitute individuality in the world of spirits. He continues
thus (page 384) : —

" In the spiritual world there are no longer either fathers or
mothers, brothers or sisters ; the ties of family are broken, all
the sentiments are laid bare, and the nature of the sensibility
of each once determined no longer has occasion to change.'

Savans, M. Chardel was in your ranks, and believed in
spirits !

Du Potet. — While we conceal ourselves behind these buck-
lers, for the sake of a short respite, we will open the essny on
the "Philosophical Teaching of Magnetism," by M. Du Potet,
page 12, wherein we find these severe words, which you merit
savans, and which this writer ought to have remembered before
analyzing the *' Secrets."

" You, savans of our country, you have not shown yourselves
better informed than the Siamese, as, for these sixty years, it
has been bawled in your ears : The magnetizers march to the
discovery of a moral world ; all the phenomena they produce
indubitably prove its existence. You have declared that they
were impostors, idiots, and of you all those are the most illus-
trious who have signed the judgment which will attest to all fu-
ture ages your ignorance and insincerity."

Page 68. — " The knowledge of man and his destinies is within
the science of magnetism ; delay not too long to assure your-
self of this, thy days are limited, no eagle-eye is required to
measure their extent.

" Let thy actions be virtuous, for, know that thy soul will
remember them all after thy life on earth and the remem-
brance of them will be ineffaceable. Not on sand are hutnan
actions graven, hut in the conscience. The torments of thy
crimes will have no end. Thy heart may perish without remov-
ing the least stain from thy soul; this rust would he constant-
ly gnawing it, for thou couldst no longer conceal anything, even
from thyself, and thou thyself ivouldst he thine oivn inexorable
judge. Whatsoever thou shalt have thought shall he known hy
all who wish to know it. For thee no more dissimulation is
possible ; no longer any mask. As thou wilt he ahle to read in
others, so they in thee, and thy most trifling actions will appear
like a cloud under a serene sky.

*' Pray that* thy life may be short; if thou hast lived well thy
soul will quit the prison that confines it, it will issue from it
radiant and full of light. This world of mockers and fouls sus-
pect not the object of life; imitate it not, it believes in a pro-
longed ball ; whatsoever flatters its pride and intoxicates its
senses is found assembled; but one day the Amphytrion of this
banquet will dismiss bis guests — tbeir life will tben be extin-
guisbed like tbe tapers tLat ligbted up tbe fete."

Page 231. — " The soul — What is a soul 1 "Who has ever
seen a soul ? Where does it reside ? Let it he shown to us.
Words as stupid as would be tbose of a person wbo sbould say,
' Where is the wind ? Wbo has ever seen tbe wind ? Let it
be shown to us.' And many seek for tbeir soul, as did tbe man
for his horse when on his back. Oh ! great geniuses of our
time, illustrious mortals, strike but a blow on your shell, pain
will answer you ; you will have tbe consciousness of your ex-
istence, you will be warned that there is within you something
that watches and is uneasy, not your high reason ; strike again,
and let the blood run, tbe occupant will take leave of you, quit-
ting its domicile, and none of you will be able to repair it, and
set it in motion. In vain may you cry, tbe air will resound in
vain vi\\h. your cries; the closed mouth v/ill remain dumb.
Should it be that of one of your orators, one of those mouths
that in this world have a reply for all ? Doubtless he who ex-
plains, accounts for all, has no need of having recourse to the
Divinity; and hence it is that savans deny what they can not
conceive or explain. A trumpery penny mirror, could it but
speak on the objects it reflects, would reason like our savans ;
it would have, however, behind its surface but a little mercury
and tin : of what, then, are the brains of our great men com-
posed ?

" Before the soul is disengaged from matter, it can already
converse with pure spirits. God has permitted it, but in an
imperfect manner. It can plunge its look even to the abode
of those who have for ever lost the human form [material,
meant by M. Du Potet] ; it gives up its secrets, however, only
with very great reserve."

M. Du Potet then cites several ecstatic facts, by which he
demonstrates this truth. He assures us that he himself has
received counsels from a spiritual voice similar to those given
Bruno, of which mention is made in the first volume. AVe can
not doubt the highly studious and upright mind of this savan,
who may be heard every Sunday, at bis conferences, develop-
ing his beliefs, which are, as we have just seen, as spiritualist
as we can desire them. M. Du Potet has not become the
apostle of such beliefs without mature examination, and thor-
ough conviction of their truth. We venture, therefore, to hope
that with support we shall appear less ridiculous, as we pro-
claim nothing more than he does. Had the limits of this work
permitted us, we would have opened the numerous and esti-
mable works of the rich library of magnetism, in which we
could have collected as many facts of this nature as we could,
have desired ; but this would have been abusing, the complai-
sance of our readers ; we will content ourselves with recom-
mending to them the perusal of Mesmer, Puysegur, Deleuze,
Petetin, Despine, Billot, Charpignon, Ricard, the abbe Lou-
bert, Loisson de Guinaumont, Teste, Grautier (Aubin), Possin,
Delaage, and those whom we have quoted, Szc. They will find
in these authors an entire confirmation of the spiritual commu-
nications treated of in this work. After such perusal, we
believe we shall no longer be in their eyes but a man who may
have erred in certain propositions ; who, for want of sufficient
education, is unequal to the task; but who has done his best to
communicate to his brethren, whom he loves with all the
strength of his soul, ideas that may tend to mitigate their pain-
ful position on earth. He has done so conscientiously, truth-
fully, fondly ; may he succeed agreeably to his wishes. I
terminate, by solemnly protesting, before God, that in all that
I have said, I have in nowise perverted the truth in favor of
any system whatever ; that of all the sittings that have been
read, I possess certificates, and keep them at the service of all
my readers, whom, moreover, I would recommend to experi-
ment for themselves, according to the instructions laid down in
the first volume. It is a general property, and will convince
them better than all that could be written on the subject.

I receive, every day, fresh confirmations of the success of
this property of the soul, from honest magnetizers, who wish,
before judging, to experiment without partiality. To make
mention of all the facts of this nature would far exceed the
limits prescribed me in this work. Having just founded a
society of spiritualists in Paris, which will publish its works in
a journal entitled " The Spiritualist Magnetizer," the first
number of which has appeared, we will report in its columns
the most curious facts with which we may become acquainted.



DEVOTEDNESS.

In these days of trouble, alarm, and mourning, in which we
live, I despaired of the prediction which our good brother Swe-
denborg had made in saying to me : " Your second part of the
* Secrets' will be printed ; such is the will of God. Do not be
disquieted ; when the time comes, some one will aid you."
Who could have believed in the realization of this prophecy
at a time when naught but falsehoods and enmities ai'e seen
issuing from the press ; when not a single publisher dares ven-
ture to publish the least work ; when each locks up his money
in the painful prevision of events in which it may be found of
absolute necessity. Having only just reimbursed myself for
the expenses of the first volume, I had not at my command the
funds necessary for printing the second, when the venerable
and beneficent old man to whom I was indebted for publishing
the first, one day came and handed to me the same note for
five hundred francs, on the same conditions as before. At my
observation that it was rash to venture a second trial — that this
time I might not be able to reimburse him — he replied to me :
*' May God be with us, and his will be done 1 Should you be
unable to repay me, you will not have to reproach yourself
with having asked me for it ; and, as for me, I shall think no
more of it." Know you, reader, the age and the means of this
devoted friend of the sciences 1 Why, he is seventy-eight
years of age, and has an income of six hundred francs (about
one hundred and twelve dollars) !

A few days after this offer, I received by post a letter, from
the same person who had sulDScribed a hundred francs for the
first volume, containing a bank-note of the same amount, as his
subscription to the second, with a request not to mention his
name, and, above all, to spare myself the trouble of tbankino-
him. Oh, thanks, thrice thanks ! generous men : this fine ac-
tion will not go without its reward. I had asked nothino- of
these two persons who conducted this affair. I was bound to
question M. Swedenborg, to inquire whether I ought to send
this second volume to the press ; and he said to me : " This
volume must be printed by the 20th February, for certain
ev — are drawing near ; it is in like disasters that consolations
are needed."

Here it is, dear reader, without having met with any acci-
dent. May it answer your kind expectations, and fortify you
in these times of trouble, when it is precious to know how to
die, and still more precious to know whither we go]

