LIBRARY

OF

THE YORKSHIRE COLLEGE.



PRESENTED BY

LEEDS UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

Classmark:
Special Collections

W



3 0106 0



054 6017



Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2015



https://archive.org/details/b21524993



AN



INTRODUCTION

TO

THE STUDY

OK

ANIMAL MAGNETISM

THE BARON DUPOTET DE SENNEVOY.



WITH AN APPENDIX,

CONTAINING

REPORTS OF BRITISH PRACTITIONERS IN FAVOUR OF THE
SCIENCE.



" History would be earthy were it not

For spiritual deductions ; but where facts
Could be authenticated, I have ever
Given faithful record and fair inference,
Rearing a superstructure on just grounds."

Cosmo de Medici.



LONDON
SAUNDERS & OTLEY, CONDUIT STREET.
1838.



university

LIBRARY,
LEEDS.



T. C. Savill, Printer, St. Martin's Lane, Charing Cross.



A MONSIEUR LE COMTE DE STANHOPE.



MONSIEUR LE COMTE,

Plusieurs mois s'etaient deja ecoules en
tentatives vaines pour amener les savants de votre
pays a etudier les phenomenes du Magnetisme
Animal ; mes nombreux appels a l'examen des fails
nouveaux etaient restes sans reponse, et la presse
et Topinion que mes experiences du " North London
Hospital," auraient du eclairer, s'etaient au contraire
dechainees contre moi. Ces obstacles si puissants
me paraissaient insurmontables, car alors une seule
voix s'etait elevee pour prendre ma defense. Le
coeur attriste j'allais renoncer au dessein que j'avais
forme de repandre le magnetisme en Angleterre,
et porter a un autre peuple la decouverte si im-
portante du Magnetisme Animal.

Vous m'encourageates alors, Mr. le Comte ; vous
me fites esperer un changement favorable dans
l'esprit de vos concitoyens, et pour la verite dont
je me suis fait le defenseur, un meilleur avenir.
Conflant dans vos paroles, je restai ; et bientot le
concours de medecins distingues, et le votre, Mr.
le Comte, vint rendre ma mission plus facile, et
applanir quelques-unes des nombreuses dimcultes
qui s'etaient opposees a l'execution de mes projets.

Si done la science que je professe s'etablit en
Angleterre vingt annees plus tot qu'elle ne l'eut fait
peut-etre, si le bien qui doit en resulter pour
Fhumanite a deja commence, une partie du tribut
de reconnaissance vous appartient sans doute ; et
en vous dediant cet ouvrage, j'ai voulu que ce fait
ne fut pas ignore.

Veuillez, Monsieur le Comte, recevoir l f assurance
de mon profond respect,

Le Baron Dupotet de Sennevoy.



20, Wigmore-street, Cavendish- square,
le 7 Mai, 1838.



CONTENTS.



Chapter Page
I. History of Animal Magnetism 1

II. Physical Phenomena of Animal Magnetism 29

III. Psychical Phenomena of Animal Magnetism .. . ... 58

IV. Method of Conducting the Magnetic Operation ... 137

V. Precautions to be Observed, and Dangers to be Ap-

prehended, during the Magnetic Operation ... 160

VI. Curative Effects of Animal Magnetism 183

VII. Power of Animal Magnetism. — Magnetism of In-

animate Objects 208

VIII. Testimony of the Ancients 222

IX. Sorcery and Witchcraft 262

X. Royal Touch. — Cures of Greatrak's. — Physiogno-

mical Superstitions 289

XI. Early Writers on Magnetism. — Animal Mag-

netism in England 307

XII. Explication of the Phenomena of Animal Mag-

netism. — Tendency of the Doctrine 329

APPENDIX.

I. Report of Cases treated Magnetically, at the North

London Hospital, by Dr. Elliotson 349

II. Further Report of Cases treated Magnetically at

the North London Hospital 355



Vlll

Page

III. Further Report of Cases treated Magnetically at

the North London Hospital 362

IV. Case of Hysteria treated Magnetically, in Private

Practice, by S. Sandys, Esq., Surgeon, Francis-
terrace, Camden-town 367

V. Case of Rheumatism, with Periodical Fits of Deli-

rium, treated Magnetically, in Private Practice,
by Thomas Chandler, Paradise-st. , Rotherhithe 372
VI. Case of Epilepsy treated Magnetically, in Private
Practice, by J. N. Bainbridge, Esq., Surgeon,
86, St. Martin 's-lane, London 377

VII. Report in favour of Animal Magnetism, by Herbert

Mayo, Esq 379

VIII. Report of the Case of Lucy Clark, treated by Baron

Dupotet de Sennevoy, at No. 20, Wigmore-
street, Cavendish -square. Communicated by
George Denton, Esq., Surgeon, Tottenham ... 387



PREFACE.



The object of the present volume is to lay before
the British public a compendious view of the ele-
mentary facts and principles of Animal Magnetism.
Hitherto there has been in this country a disincli-
nation to entertain this investigation ; but I trust
the evidence now adduced will tend to dispel this
prejudice, which can only have arisen from the
science not having been yet fairly represented.

It is evident that our belief in the facts of any
newly-announced doctrine must be derived either
from authority, or from direct personal observation.
In respect to authority, the most eminent scientific
men in Europe have acknowledged the facts of
animal magnetism. Among others, Cuvier, La
Place, Ampere, Hufeland, Treviranus, Humboldt,
Sprengel, Reil, Autenreith,Brandis, Kieser, Gmelin,
Georget, Cloquet, Rostan, Andral, Dugald Stewart,
Coleridge, &c. ; and by referring to the Appendix
of this Volume it will be observed that two of the
most distinguished medical professors in this city —
Professors Elliotson and Mayo — have also recently
convinced themselves of the reality of the mag-
netic influence. In addition to these authorities,
I may also appeal to the Report of the Commission
of the French Academy, which, after a very formal
and deliberate investigation, recorded facts in sup-
port of animal magnetism, the details of which
cannot, I apprehend, be in any way impugned.
Hence, if reference to authority fail to command
conviction in its favour, at least it should induce
those who have not yet studied the science to
suspend their judgment until they have investi-
gated it.

Again: The appeal to personal observation is
open to every inquirer, and can, it is obvious, be
obtained only by attending the seances of any pro-
fessor of animal magnetism, whether at the North
London Hospital, or at my own apartments, where
I shall always be happy to afford men of science
and literature every facility for the examination of
magnetical phenomena. Here, however, I would
caution those who attend such demonstrations, not
to form an opinion too hastily ; — let them, in parti-
cular, beware how they attach importance to negative
evidence. It is not pretended by magnetisers that
all individuals are equally susceptible of the mag-
netic influence ; the best magnetisers will occasion-
ally fail to induce any ostensible effects ; further-
more, from my own experience I do not think the
phenomenon of somnambulism occurs in more than
three out of ten cases, yet the positive evidence is
hereby not rendered the less interesting, much less
is it in the slightest degree invalidated.

It remains for me to add, that this volume is
intended only as an introduction to the study of
animal magnetism ; it being my intention to publish,
speedily, a more comprehensive and systematic work
on the subject.



20, Wigmore-street,

Cavendish-square,



AN

INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY

OF

ANIMAL MAGNETISM.



CHAP. I.

HISTORY OF ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

In commencing a course of demonstrations in London
on Animal Magnetism, I am aware of the many diffi-
culties that surround me, and I rely on overcoming
them, only upon the truth of the cause I advocate.
In Paris, when this new discovery first became the
theme of discussion, it was assailed by every species
of hostility ; learned professors denounced it from
their chairs ; unlearned journalists made it the subject
of their flippant pleasantries ; it was turned into ridi-
cule on the stage ; and every satirist who could pen
an epigram, directed the energies of his wit against it.
But animal magnetism could not thus be put down.
In the same city, only a few years afterwards, when
the shock of political convulsions had subsided, and
science and literature again resumed their dominion,
the same facts again challenged attention. In vain
were they denied ; they were over and over again de-
monstrated in the public hospitals, in the presence of
a numerous auditory, to the conviction of the most
sceptical ; and the force of the evidence alone bore
down those official barriers of pre-judgment which so
often obstruct the path of knowledge. Hence, the
Academie Royale de Medecine was in a manner forced,
by the cogent remonstrances of its own members, to
appoint a new commission to investigate the subject ;
and after a most elaborate and scrupulous inquiry,
during which every possible source of "fallacy which
suspicion could suggest was narrowly scrutinised,
the commissioners, many of whom were previously
unbelievers, not only attested the truth of animal mag-
netism generally, but cited, in their report, facts the
most unequivocal, proving the existence of the higher
order of the phenomena which its influence induces.
In France, this was an important epoch in its his-
tory ; but in the meantime, in Germany, Holland,
Sweden, Russia, the new science spread rapidly ;
so that, at present, public establishments for the
practice of animal magnetism exist in many of the
most enlightened cities of Europe. Journals report-
ing its progress are periodically published ; theses in
its favour, by the candidates for medical degrees,
are admitted and defended in the schools of medicine ;
and among those who, from personal observation,
have attested its phenomena, may be enumerated the
names of some of the most eminent scientific men
of the age. On the continent, such is the present
state of animal magnetism ; but in England it is
otherwise ; here the subject has not been fairly inves-
tigated ; here it is yet only imperfectly understood ;
and here, therefore, I expect to encounter the same
obstacles, the same prejudices, even the same personal
hostility which I had to contend against twenty years
ago in Paris ; but so firmly do I believe in the steady
and immutable progression of truth, that I enter
cheerfully on the task, satisfied that if the most in-
credulous of my antagonists will only witness and
investigate the phenomena, they will become convinced
of their reality.

On my arrival in this city, it was my intention to
demonstrate the influence of animal magnetism before
the students and medical professors in the public hos-
pitals, and for some time, through the kindness of Dr.
Elliotson, I was permitted to do so at the North Lon-
don Hospital ;* but the managing committee having, in
his absence, objected to my continuing my operations
at this Institution, I was obliged to seek another arena ;
and the apartments I have now selected are sufficiently
spacious for the purpose. f This circumstance I do
not mention with the intention of imputing blame to
any of the parties concerned, but simply from the de-
sire of its being clearly understood that I have never
evaded confronting the most sceptical members of the
medical profession, and have always courted, if temper-
ately conducted, the most direct and rigid investigation.

Here, therefore, in the presence of many highly-dis-
tinguished visitors, I daily pursue my demonstrations —
here I have convinced many of the real existence of
the magnetic influence, nay, on several occasions,
have magnetised the sceptics themselves, — and here
I have succeeded (which is to me a more gratifying
reflection) in alleviating the sufferings of many persons
afflicted with chronic nervous complaints, which had
resisted every ordinary method of medical treatment.

The curative effects of animal magnetism, at an early
period, excited the jealousy of the medical faculty in
Paris ; hence, the Academie Royale de Medecine, in
the exercise of its royal prerogative of intolerance,
issued the following law against it : — " No physician
shall declare himself a partisan of animal magnetism,
either by his practice or by his writings, under the
penalty of being struck off the list of docteurs-
regents."* This intolerant decree was dated 27th
August, 1784 ; but it was some consolation to the
professors of the new science to remember that only
a few years previously, in 1745, the same august
body had proscribed the practice of inoculation as
" murderous," " criminal," and " magical ;" that in
1636, after lengthened debates and expostulations, it
prohibited the use of antimony ; and shortly afterwards
issued another of its royal mandates against the in-
troduction of quinquina, or the Peruvian bark, which
the sagacious ecclesiastical authorities alleged could
possess no virtues, save what it derived from a com-
pact which the Indian who had discovered it must
have made with the devil. Hence it would appear,
that if learned incorporate associations of science have
the advantage of enjoying the collective wisdom of
their members, they have also the disadvantage of
being encumbered with the aggregate weight of their
prejudices ; and accordingly, few discoveries have
ever emanated from the bosom of Royal Societies,
which, in their anxiety to maintain the retrospective
dignity of science, forget the intuitive progress of the
human mind. It may be true that the terrors of the
inquisition have been abolished, and that the stake is
no longer the symbol of their tyrannical power ; but
such decrees as the above are calculated to perplex,
harass, and torment the individuals against whom they
are directed. It is clear that the above anathema of
the Academie Royale de Medecine against inocula-
tion, antimony, Peruvian bark, and animal magnetism,
could no more arrest the progress of science, so far
as either of these discoveries was concerned, than
could the voice of Canute the Great restrain the
influx of the tide before him.

The influence of corporeal apposition, either by
the touch, the breath, or the saliva, in the cure of
diseases, has in all ages been recognised ; but it is to
Mesmer* we are indebted for the discovery of animal
magnetism ; he systematised its principles — he reduced
them to practical application. This eminent indivi-
dual was born at Mersburg, in Swabia, on the 23rd
of May, 1734, and studied medicine at Vienna,
where he attended the lectures of Van Swieten and
De Haen, and took his degree of doctor in medicine
in 1766. He was a man of quick perception, vivid
imagination, and persevering disposition. His inau-
gural dissertation, which he published and publicly
defended, was on the influence of the planets on the
human body,* wherein he maintained that the sun,
moon, and fixed stars, mutually affect each other in their
orbits ; that they cause and direct on our earth a flux
and reflux, not only in the sea, but in the atmosphere ;
and affect in a similar manner all organised bodies,
through the medium of a subtile and mobile fluid, which
he conceived pervaded the universe, and associated all
things together in mutual intercourse and harmony.
About this time the mineral magnet was held in much
repute as a therapeutical agent, and Father Hell, a
Jesuit, and professor of as.ronomy at Vienna, invented
steel plates of a peculiar form, which he applied with
much success in the treatment of various diseases.
The medicinal efficacy of these mineral plates he ima-
gined depended on their form ; but Mesmer soon
discovered that although their application apparently
produced certain manifest effects, yet that he could,
without using them at all, by passing his hands
from the head downwards towards the feet of the
patient, even at a certain distance from the body,
induce the same effects. He therefore came to the
conclusion that the magnetic property, which he termed
animal magnetism, originated in himself, and that he
could at pleasure communicate it to organized or un-
organized bodies. In 1773 — 1774, he undertook the
treatment, on this principle, of a girl named ^sterline,
w r ho had been several years afflicted with severe con-
vulsive fits ; and in this case he thought he observed the
flux and refiux of this fluid, and he also noticed that
after every crisis she was relieved. He communicated
his discovery without reserve, and his method of con-
ducting the operation, to Baron de Stoerck, president
of the faculty of medicine at Vienna, and first phy-
sician to his Majesty. His advice to Mesmer was, on
no account to publish his discovery, as such an inno-
vation in medical practice would not fail to expose
him to the censure and hostility of the faculty. But
notwithstanding this admonition, Mesmer adopted, in
a variety of cases, the new magnetic mode of treat-
ment ; and among the number of his patients was
M. Bauer, the celebrated professor of mathematics, at
Vienna, who put himself under his care, and publicly-
attested the cure he effected.

* The circumstance of Mesmer having chosen so astrological a
subject as that of the influence of the planets on the human body
for his inaugural dissertation, exposed him to considerable derision ;
but it should not be forgotten that many men of high medical re-
putation have not disdained the same inquiry. In 1704, the emi-
nent Mead published his Latin treatise " On the Power and
Influence of the Sun and Moon on the Human Body, and the
Diseases which arise from them." In 1747, Richter published, at
Gottingen, an essay " De Potestate Solis Humanum Corpus." In
1795, Balfour put forth a treatise on " Sol-lunar Influence in
Fevers ;" and in 1806, Murat another, " De l'lnfluence de la
"Nuit sur les Maladies.'' A host of authorities, ancient and mo-
dern, to the same effect, might be cited ; in fact, many physicians
of the present day believe that sol-lunar influence does affect the
course of certain diseases, especially nervous and mental affections ;
and even supposing their views concerning the direct nature of
this influence to be erroneous, this much is certain, that the human
body, in health and in disease, is materially influenced by the
vicissitudes of the atmosphere ; and how far the relative positions
of the heavenly bodies may disturb its equilibrium, or other-
wise affect its conditions, remains yet a curious problem for the
study of those interested in meteorology. In selecting, therefore,
this subject for his thesis, Mesmer was not guilty of the extrava-
gance which many, who are ignorant of the evidence which exists
upon it, have attributed to him.

The erroneous reports which were soon circulated
abroad concerning the method he adopted, induced
Mesmer to address a letter to the different scientific
academies in Europe, wherein he gave an account of
his discovery, and solicited their attention to the subject.
The Academie des Sciences de Berlin was the only one
which deigned an answer to his epistle, and in so doing
passed on him the laconic sentence, " Qu'il n'etait qu'un
visionnaire." It appears that Mesmer himself could
not understand the apathy with which his discovery
was treated. " The system," said he, " which led me
to the discovery of animal magnetism was not the
work of a single day. Long trains of reflection had
successively accumulated in my mind. Nothing but
my own perseverance gave me the necessary courage
to encounter the prejudices of reason and philosophy,
without considering myself guilty of great temerity.
The cold manner in which the first notions I ventured
to publish were received, surprised me ; it was alto-
gether so unexpected. More especially did derision
appear to me misplaced, proceeding as it did from the
learned, and especially the medical, world, — since
my system, even had it been entirely destitute of
truth, would at least have been as reasonable as any
of the systems which are adorned with the name of
universal principles. This failure of success induced
me to revise my former opinions, and so far from
losing by this scrutiny, they reappeared to me clad in
the brightest colours of evidence. Indeed, everything
convinced me, that in addition to those principles
which are admitted in the sciences, others existed
which had been neglected ; and I repeatedly said to
myself, So long as the principles of the sciences are
uncertain or false, the efforts of the greatest geniuses
for the happiness and instruction of their fellow-crea-
tures can be of no avail. I then compared medical
men to travellers who have lost their way, and go
further and further out of the right road, instead
of turning back to find out their mistake."

In 1775, desirous of further prosecuting his re-
searches, Mesmer travelled into Swabia and Switzer-
land, and at the public hospitals at Berne and Zurich,
in the presence of numerous physicians, performed
many remarkable cures. On his return to Vienna,
he passed through Munich, where his highness the
elector of Bavaria consulted him, and sought an
explanation of his reported wonders. Accordingly, he
performed the magnetic operation on several patients
in his presence, and convinced him of the truth of the
doctrine. The Academie des Sciences of Bavaria
shortly afterwards elected him a member, an honour
which Mesmer, in the present probationary state of
the science, could not fail to have appreciated. He
therefore, in 1776, made a second journey into Ba-
varia, and was equally successful, curing, among
many other interesting cases, M. D'Osterwald, di-
recteur de l f Academie de Munich, who had been suf-
fering under partial amaurosis (loss of sight) and
paralysis. He then returned again to Vienna, where
he continued treating magnetically a variety of cases,
some account of which was published in an anony-
mous pamphlet, entitled, " Kecueil des Cures Operees
par le Magnetisme. Imprime a Leipsic, 1778." At
length, having in the most frank and unreserved man-
ner communicated his views and mode of treatment to
all in Vienna who cared to be instructed in them, and
deeply interested in the success of his discovery, he
determined on proceeding to Paris. His reputation
had already preceded him, and on his arrival in the
French capital, February, 1778, he became the object
of general interest and attraction. His doctrines,
however, were violently assailed ; the members of the
Academie Royale de Medecine summarily repudiated
them, and threatened to excommunicate all who
adopted or promulgated them ; but in the midst of
every description of abuse, satire, and contumely, he
maintained a quiet self-possession, which could only
have sprung from an inward conviction of the truth
of the principles he maintained.

Surrounded as Mesmer was by enemies, both
public and private, his unassuming manners, his
manifest sincerity, his earnest yet silent enthusiasm,
and above all, his benevolent disposition, conciliated
for him the esteem of persons of almost all ranks
and pretensions. Men of high birth, learning, and
scientific eminence, crowded round him, and listened
to him with delight ; and many not only became
proselytes to his doctrines, but set about advo-
cating them with the most unbounded enthusiasm.
Among the number of his converts was Dr. Deslon,
first physician to the Comte D'Artois, and a member
of the Academie Royale de Medecine, who soon threw
off the mantle of his allegiance to the tyrannous
authority of the Academy, and became one of his most
zealous disciples. It is impossible, indeed, to conceive
the sensation which the discovery of animal magnetism
excited in Paris. No theological controversy in the
earlier ages of the catholic church was ever conducted
with greater bitterness. On the one side, the adver-
saries of Mesmer, closing their eyes to the facts before
them, and hurried away by an impetuous party spirit,
endeavoured to proscribe the discovery as mischie-
vous, false, and heretical ; on the other side, his
advocates vindicated his cause with an impatient
zeal and sincerity which was equally intolerant of all
doubts or explications. One party denied altogether
the effects of animal magnetism, or ascribed them
to the operation of some very common-place natural
causes, while the other, equally indignant, exaggerated
the pretensions of the new science, and carried their
theories in its defence to an absurd extent. In less
than eighteen months, Paris was inundated with up-
wards of five hundred controversial pamphlets, — erudi-
tion, sarcasm, and wit, alternately assailing and vin-
dicating the doctrine. The prohibitory decree above
cited of the Academie Royale de Medecine, against
those who ventured to practise animal magnetism,
was in many cases altogether disregarded, and several
of the docteurs-regents who refused to tamper with
their consciences, or submit to such a verdict, were
deprived of the honours and emoluments of their
profession. Among these were Dr. Deslon and M.
Varnier, who opposed, in a very able memoir, the
decision of the medical faculty against him. This
memoir was drawn up by M. Fournel, and accom-
panied by the joint opinion of seventeen advocates,
who severely and justly deprecated the arbitrary
conduct of the medical faculty especially, for exacting
an oath from individuals that they never should believe
in magnetism, and never become disciples of the sys-
tem. Upwards of thirty physicians were so denounced,
and among them, M. Dongle, docteur-regent, who has
given the following account of his interview with
these scientific autocrats : —

" Each of the magnetising physicians received a
special summons ; and almost all appeared, and were
sent into a separate chamber from the judges. Each
waited with impatience his summons, and walked up
and down, wondering what was going to happen. At
length the usher appeared, and I was first summoned,
having that honour, as the eldest of the company. I
entered, much surprised at not finding myself followed
by any of my companions. I was requested to be
seated, and the dean began by inquiring if I had paid
anything for the instruction I had received in mag-
netism. Surprised at this question, I answered that
M. Deslon did not receive money ; that he only admitted
medical men to observe and assist him ; that he was in
the highest degree respectable, modest, and obliging ;
and that of this the faculty were not ignorant. I
was interrogated like a criminal, and fancied myself
transported to the Great Hall of La Tournelle. They
at length concluded by presenting me with a paper
which I did not consider myself at liberty to sub-
scribe. I declined signing it, and assured the faculty,
as a proof of my zeal and deference, that I had
not yet discovered in this method a sufficient degree
of utility to induce me to make any report on it."*
This inquisitorial interview between the physician,
already pre-judged, and his court of accusers, was pre-
cisely analogous to the arraignment of Galileo before
the unrighteous judges who condemned him.*

But notwithstanding all this, the practice of animal
magnetism soon prevailed to such an extent, that
Louis XVI. appointed numerous scientific commis-
sions to examine and report on the subject. One of
these included Lavoisier, Bori, Bailly, Franklin, Jus-
sieu, and many other not less illustrious individuals.
The public expected much from such an areopagus ;
but these learned commissioners, instead of proceeding
on what in this country is called the Baconian method
of induction, — instead of restricting their attention
to the facts which were laid before them, set about
inquiring into the cause by which they were produced.
They proceeded to inquire into the existence of the
fluid which Mesmer had described, but it escaped
their researches. They could not discover it by
the sense of sight, touch, or taste ; they could not
collect it in masses, nor subject it to any test of mea-
surement or weight ; they therefore made a leap in
the dark, and came to the conclusion, that animal
magnetism did not exist, and that the facts which they
had witnessed were occasioned only by imagination,
imitation, and manual contact. " L'imagination," said
they, " fait tout, le magnetisme animal est nul : imagi-
nation, imitation, attouchement, telles sont les vraies
causes des effets attribues au magnetisme animal."

* An anecdote is somewhere told of Galileo, that when he was
condemned by the inquisitorial tribunal for demonstrating the
revolution of the earth on its axis, in the presence of his judges,
he stamped the ground with his foot, and exclaimed, with an air of
triumph, " It moves, notwithstanding!"

This judgment pronounced by the commissioners
was attacked from all quarters. They had, it was evi-
dent, substantiated the facts of animal magnetism, and
in endeavouring to overthrow the theory of Mesmer
had only hazarded another infinitely more untenable.
A society existed at Strasburg, which published
annals, wherein immediately appeared facts of mag-
netisation which the explanation of the Academy
could not account for ; and reports to the same effect,
from Nantes, Bordeaux, and Lyons, also appeared.

But that which contributed to give the system of
Mesmer more stability, and which shook the respect
which many might have entertained for the decision
of these royal commissioners, was, that M. Jussieu
dissented from his brother commissioners, refused to
sign the report drawn up by Mauduyt, Audry, and
Caille, and drew up a counter-report of his own,
wherein he also attested the facts of animal magnetism,
and only proposes another theory in explanation of
them. Instead, therefore, of these commissioners
settling the disputed point as to the existence or non-
existence of animal magnetism ; their reports only
gave the subject an additional interest. Societies for
the investigation and propagation of the doctrine,
under the name of " Societes de l'Harmonie," were
formed throughout France, Germany, and Switzerland,
and many distinguished persons were initiated into its
secrets. The Societe de l'Harmonie, at Strasburg
alone, was composed of one hundred and eighty mem-
bers, and proces-verbaux,* or affidavits attesting the
treatment and cure of various cases, were deposited
with public notaries, and printed copies of them dis-
tributed in all directions. In the meantime, Mesmer,
for the benefit of his health, withdrew to Spa, whither
he was followed by numerous persons of rank and
fortune, who were still desirous of placing themselves
under his treatment. I regret I have not space to
enter into further details concerning his personal
history ; suffice it to add, that, after receiving a sub-
scription, which was raised in compensation for his
having devoted his life to the promulgation of so im-
portant a discovery, he retired to his native place,
where he died, much beloved and honoured, on the
5th of March, 1815, at the advanced age of eighty-
one.

While animal magnetism was thus making a steady
and rapid progress in France, political events, which
shook the foundations of society, absorbed every con-
sideration. The French revolution broke out, and
threw a temporary cloud over science, literature, and
the arts. The Societes de 1'Harmonie were many of
them dissolved, and the patrons and disciples of Mesmer,
for personal safety, expatriated themselves, carrying
with them the discovery of animal magnetism back to
its native land, and diffusing its principles through
Germany and Holland, Sweden and Russia. Some,
too, of the pupils of Mesmer carried the doctrine as
far as America : thus do all great truths, in spite of
every opposition, gradually become diffused over the
face of the civilized globe. When the terrors of the
French revolution had subsided, and society in some
measure recovered its equilibrium, animal magnetism
participated in the advancement of the other sciences.
In almost all the university towns of Germany, public
lectures on the subject were given ; the Academie des
Sciences de Berlin, which had denounced Mesmer as
a visionary, now offered a premium of 3,300 francs —
750 dollars — for the best explanatory thesis on the
science ; and a public hospital, in that city, for the
treatment of patients by animal magnetism, was
opened.*

In Prussia, Austria, Bavaria, Russia, laws were passed
by the respective governments, prohibiting its prac-
tice by all persons, excepting by physicians regularly
educated. In France, the discovery by the Marquis de
Puysegur of magnetic somnambulism had already
thrown an additional charm over its study, and en-
riched physiology and psychology with a newly-de-
veloped class of facts in the highest degree curious
and interesting. Next to Puysegur appeared the Abbe
Faria, who opened in Paris an institution for magnetism
which attracted the attention of many scientific men.
He was himself endued with the magnetic power to a
degree which would have appeared incredible, were
it not a notorious fact that its intensity augments
with exercise. The daily increasing converts to mag-
netism attached themselves to this man of wonders ;
they listened with interest to his lectures, and learned by
his instructions how themselves to conduct the opera-
tion. It is impossible to conceive a more direct and
conclusive experimentum cruris than this. The mag-
netiser assumed not to himself any exclusive privilege,
nor did he pretend to be initiated in any mysterious
or incommunicable cabalistic art ; on the contrary, he
assured his auditors that they had only to investigate
the phenomena to be convinced of their reality, and
invited them in their turn to try the operation them-
selves, assuring them that they would be as successful
as himself, if they only complied with the elementary
principles of the science, which are in themselves
simple and explicit, and equally intelligible to all.
The instructions of the Abbe Faria were by many
followed, — his predictions verified : and who that has
thus practically studied animal magnetism has ever
turned away sceptical from it ?

* I am sensible that I ought not to pass over in silence the
names of Wienholt, Gmelin, Scherf, Bockman, Kluge, Ennemoser,
Lichtenstad, Stieglitz, Wolfahrt, and many other eminent men,
to whom the science has been, in Germany, indebted ; but in this
little volume I can only give a very brief outline of its history,
besides which, I wish to induce conviction by appealing to pre-
sent facts, — the phenomena I daily demonstrate, — rather than
by reference to any retrospective or collateral evidence, however
satisfactory or conclusive.

The foundation of the science having been thus
established on evidence the most indisputable, three
separate schools of magnetism arose : — 1st, the
original school of Mesmer. This prevailed principally
in Paris. Its doctrines were very similar to those of
the Epicurean philosophy, as described in the poem of
Lucretius. Its disciples believed in the existence of
the universal fluid above described, and conducted the
operation physically, — that is, by passing the hands im-
mediately over, or at a short distance from, the body
of the patient. 2nd, the school of the Chevalier de
Barbarin. This was founded at Lyons, and, although
it had many partisans in France, prevailed principally
in Sweden and Germany. Its principles remind us of
the Platonic philosophy ; its disciples maintained that
the magnetic operation depended entirely upon a
pure " effort of the soul/' and was to be conducted
only upon psychical principles. They were there-
fore termed spiritualists. Lastly, the school of the
Marquis de Puysegur, founded at Strasburg, the
disciples of which, professing to be guided only by
observation, called themselves experimentalists. The
characteristic feature of this school is, that it com-
bines the physical treatment of the school of Mesmer
with the psychical treatment of that of Barbarin.
That which I consider the best method of conducting
the magnetical operation will hereafter be described ;
but in the meantime I may observe, that notwithstand-
ing the magnetisers divided themselves into these
different sects, they all maintained the same funda-
mental principles : they differed in theory, but each
school agreed in producing the same practical results.

While animal magnetism was thus spreading rapidly
in all directions, numerous detached pamphlets and
treatises appeared in its defence ; but it was obvious
that a good elementary, systematic work on the subject
was still wanted. This desideratum was not supplied until
1813, when Deleuze* published his " Histoire Critique
du Magnetisme iVnimal." The Author, who held the
situation of librarian, and enjoyed the rank of Pro-
fessor of Natural History at the Jardin des Plantes,
in Paris, was highly esteemed in all classes of society.
His scientific knowledge was well known ; his moral
integrity unimpeachable ; the book, too, was written
in a tone of candour and moderation which carried
conviction along with it. No one ventured to chal-
lenge the truth of the facts which he described ; but
he was forced to pay the penalty of his veracity, inas-
much as, on account of his having published this criti-
cal history, he was refused admitance as a member
of the Institute, although he had every qualification
which entitled him to the honour. It is really me-
lancholy — nay, it is difficult to suppress our indigna-
tion — when we see the generous advocates of truth thus
assailed by every species of paltry persecution. Ye
men of science and literature, who boast of the ad-
vancement of the human intellect, and arrogate to
yourselves the superior advantage of living in the
nineteenth century, be not deceived ; but examine
well whether the same desolating spirit of intolerance
be not yet abroad, which so long obstructed the pro-
gress of science, and cast a withering blight over the
fields of knowledge.

But to return. After the appearance of the Histoire
Critique du Magnetisme, by Deleuze, many men of
the highest scientific eminence felt compelled, by the
cogency of the evidence in its favour, to examine the
facts ; and the opinions expressed in favour of animal
magnetism by Ampere, Laplace, Cuvier, and other
men of equal eminence, any one of whose names
ought to have silenced the voice of factious scepticism,
induced many who were previously indifferent to
investigate the subject. This was in 1819; I was then
young, and a medical student, a stranger to all the
prejudices of another age. I was yet ignorant that
physical facts were to be rejected because they were
inexplicable, or because they were contrary to received
doctrines. On animal magnetism I had already thought
and read much ; and, never doubting but that truth
would eventually be triumphant, I solicited permission
to make experiments at the Hotel-Dieu. My request
was granted, and the results published in a little bro-
chure, entitled (i Expose des Experiences de l'Hotel-
Dieu," which was translated into German and Italian,
and passed through three French editions. It may be
sufficient to state here that my success was complete.
Among other cases which I treated was that of a
girl who had been thirteen months in the hospital,
suffering from hcematemesis, (vomiting of blood from
the stomach,) which had resisted the ordinary methods
of medical treatment. In the presence of forty phy-
sicians I magnetised this patient, who received such
decided and manifest benefit from the operation, that
in twenty-seven days she left the Hotel-Dieu perfectly
cured. In this case, the vomiting of blood, which had
immediately subsided on the first magnetisation, re-
turned on its being suspended ; and on the second
operation again ceased, and did not afterwards recur.
It may be added, that the magnetic treatment induced
in this patient all the extraordinary phenomena of
somnambulism ; and every trial which incredulity and
ingenuity could suggest was had recourse to with the
view of ascertaining whether there could be any possible
collusion. An account of the phenomena, as they had
presented themselves, was afterwards drawn up and
signed by MM. Husson, Geoffroy, Rccamier, Briche-
teau, Delens, &c, in fact, by all the medical men who
were present, and the document was deposited with a
notary in Paris. At the Hospice de la Pitie I afterwards
performed other magnetic operations, which led to still
further trials ; after which, MM. Georget and Rostan,
both eminent pathologists, published their observa-
tions, — the former in his work on the physiology of
the brain, the latter in the article Magnetisme, pub-
lished in a medical dictionary, in 1823. Both were
prepared for the consequences of their avowal in
favour of animal magnetism. They knew that the
spirit of the age would be strongly opposed to their
assertions, but confided in futurity for the justifica-
tion of their opinions.

At the Salpetriere, also, M. Esquirol authorized
experiments on the epileptic patients, of whom there
were many in the hospital ; and there, also, the mag-
netic phenomena were produced in the midst of a
crowd of medical men, all anxious to verify, per-
sonally, facts of so extraordinary a nature. At the
Bicetre a similar scientific investigation was con-
ducted ; but it was at the Hospice de la Charite
that animal magnetism was most extensively pursued.
Here, in the presence of about three hundred medical
men, experiments were conducted by Dr. Foissac, which
were demonstratively conclusive as to the production
of all the higher order of the phenomena. Nearly at
the same time other experiments were made at Val-de-
Grace. I magnetised there, in the presence of many
students and medical men, an epileptic soldier, who
experienced very marked effects. A young physician
attached to the hospital, M. Desruelles, submitted
himself to magnetisation, and the action was so violent
that after a few minutes I was obliged to desist operat-
ing. Other experiments, equally convincing, were
performed in the presence of M. Broussais, and seven
or eight other physicians. Dr. Frappart threw into
somnambulism a soldier affected with a nervous com-
plaint ; and the trials made upon him left no doubt re-
specting the power of magnetism. So convinced was
M. Broussais on the subject, that he authorized the
publication of the facts.

A distinguished young physician, Dr. Bertrand,
whose premature death was an irreparable loss to
science, established, about this period, conferences
on magnetism at his own residence, which were
attended by many scientific men. Many members
of the chamber of deputies also interested themselves
in the progress of the science. M. Chardel, the
Comte de Gestas, M. de Lascases, &c, opened
their saloons to those who were desirous of being
instructed in magnetism ; and the corps medical of
Paris were in a manner compelled to give the sub-
ject more serious attention. The report of Lavoisier,
Franklin, Bailly, &c, in 1784, was no more appealed
to as the death warrant of the system ; it was no longer
alleged that there was no truth in Animal M.agnetism
because these learned academicians had ascribed all its
effects to imagination, imitation, contact, &c. The con-
stant accumulation of facts which were incontrovertible
succeeded in overturning so effectually this long-dis-
puted academical verdict, that one of the members of
the Academy felt it his duty to propose that a new
special commission should be appointed to investigate
the subject. This was a perplexing proposition ; the
Academy knew not which side to take. It was com-
posed of many members who were convinced of the
truth of animal magnetism, and many who were un-
decided, and desirous of receiving further information.
The older members were unwilling that the magnetisers
should derive any importance from their decision ; they
were even apprehensive that the bare nomination of a
committee of inquiry would lead to an impression that
they were favourably disposed towards the doctrine ; and
several were naturally enough disinclined to disturb,
much less to rescind, the decision against it contained
in the old report. But the case was urgent ; they there-
fore adopted an intermediate course. They appointed
a committee, MM. Adelon, Burdin, Marc, Pariset, and
Husson, to make a preliminary investigation, and
report whether the Academy, without compromising
itself, could appoint a new commission. This was
surely proceeding with all due precaution, — and what
was the result ? The committee convinced itself that
the evidence was sufficiently strong in favour of animal
magnetism to warrant the Academy in authorising
another official investigation; and on the 13th of De-
cember, 1825, some months after their appointment,
the commissioners, faithful to their duty, presented
themselves to deliver their report. There was on that
day an excitement among the members in the council
room which did not terminate with the sitting. Three
days were occupied by the debate, when at length the
Academy decided, by a majority of ten, in favour of the
appointment of a new commission. Eleven members
were therefore nominated — viz., Bourdois de la Motte
(the President), Fouquier, Gueneau de Mussy, Guer-
sent, Husson, Itard, Marc, J. J. Leroux, Thillay,
Double, and Magendie ; and they immediately began
their labours by an address to all magnetisers, inviting
them to exhibit, in their presence, the effects they
professed to induce ; and some hospitals even were
placed at their disposal. Very few replied to this ami-
cable appeal, because this inquiry gave publicity to
those who took part in it ; and many who believed in
magnetism, and practised it, were not willing to come
forward, as a failure would have exposed them to
ridicule.

The chair of the Faculty of Medicine of Paris now
resounded for the first time with the language of mag-
netism. Professor Rostan pronounced an apologetic
discourse on Mesmerism, and described its wonderful
effects, in the presence of more than four hundred
of his pupils.

Lhullier Vinslow, in a treatise on Materia Medica,
acknowledged the existence of magnetism, without
any restriction. Professor Segalas, in his private
lectures, also undertook its defence, frankly acknow-
ledging that he had been incredulous, but that, having
magnetised, he had produced extraordinary phenomena.
Marjorlin recommended its employment in certain
nervous complaints ; Fouquier did the same ; and
magnetising physicians were now seen for the first time
since 1784. At this period it occurred to me to give
public lectures on the subject, and more than eight'
hundred young men received instructions from me —
very imperfect, it may be, but nevertheless, they
learned what was meant by animal magnetism.

But to return to the proceedings of the newly-ap-
pointed commission. Five years having elapsed, and
it not having yet accomplished its task, some anxiety
was felt as to the motives for so long a delay, and
fears were entertained lest there should be any evasion
of their duty on the part of the commissioners. Seve-
ral magnetisers had presented facts to their notice,
and I had also placed myself at their disposal. They
had met at my residence several times to witness ex-
periments, and I had received their promise that the
effects produced before them should be acknowledged.
At length, the commissioners announced that they would
read their report to the Academy on the 20th of June,
1831. The hall in which the Academy assembled, so
empty on ordinary occasions, was crowded that day ;
even the passages were obstructed by the curious. It
might have been supposed that one of those decrees
on which the weal or woe of a nation depends was in
agitation. All the members of the Academy, even
those enfeebled by age, were at their posts. The
meeting was then opened, and M. Husson, the reporter
of the committee, appeared at the bar with a volu-
minous roll of paper in his hand. He spoke in a
grave and somewhat measured tone, and began by-
reviewing the events which had preceded the nomina-
tion of the commission ; he then invoked the memory
of the ancient friendship borne by the elder practi-
tioners present, to its members ; — he at length came to
the point, and related, first, all that had appeared
doubtful to the commissioners ; then he cited the facts
which could be explained by causes foreign to mag-
netism ; and lastly, the positive facts which could only
be referred to magnetism itself.- But as the forms of
oratory, and the cases already cited, had absorbed
much time, the conclusion of the report was deferred
until the next meeting.

This was the day of the grand battle ; — I say, battle,
for on this occasion there was a general affray among
the members of the Academy. While the report was
being read, they listened with uneasiness to the facts
detailed ; but when the higher phenomena of lucidity
were described, a general murmur, not very flat-
tering to the commissioners, prevailed, which gra-
dually increased, until several Academicians started
from their seats, and apostrophised, in unmeasured
terms of indignation and contumely, the men who had
conscientiously related the facts which they had seen
and attested. An outcry was raised on all sides against
the commissioners ; but, without being disconcerted,
many members of the Academy, who believed in mag-
netism because they had themselves examined it,
vindicated them, and retorted : — « You do not
believe in magnetism — be it so ; but in this very
place the circulation of the blood was denied ; yet
the blood does circulate ! Here they who practised
inoculation were denounced as impostors, and the
inoculated as dupes and idiots ; yet was inoculation
no imposition or idiotcy ; — here, also, the physicians
who first employed tartar emetic were put on their trial,
and expelled the Academy ; yet we have now for col-
leagues men who employ it in enormous doses !"*
Another exclaimed, with stentorian voice, " This Insti-
tution ridiculed those who affirmed they had seen
stones fall from the sky ; yet meteoric stones do fall !"
Thus the sanctuary of science was on a sudden con-
verted into an arena of Babel-like confusion, because
a few of the learned members of the Academy
were not prepared to accredit the facts which the
commissioners, whom they had themselves delegated
with the inquiry, reported to them. But it was ne-
cessary to terminate so turbulent a discussion ; and
then came the question whether the report should be
published or not, which, after another stormy conten-
tion, was decided in the negative. As most of the
members, however, wished a copy of it for themselves,
it was agreed that a limited number of copies should
be lithographed.

* At that period Ricamier administered tartar emetic in doses
of twenty, forty, eighty, and one hundred and sixty grains.

This report, in 1833, was translated into English by M. Col-
quhoun, — an advocate at the Scottish bar, — to whom animal mag-
netism in this country is much indebted. He afterwards, in
1836, published the " Isis Revelata/' in two volumes, which pre-
sents us with an admirable account of the origin, progress, and
present state of the science. This latter work contains a mass of
interesting information on the subject ; besides which, it is written
in a philosophical tone, and pervaded throughout by a spirit of
persuasive eloquence which is as creditable to the feelings as to
the judgment of the learned author. It is impossible to conceive
any impartial mind rising sceptical after its perusal.

The Academie Royale de Medeeine thus put on re-
cord clear and authenticated evidence in favour of
animal magnetism. We have first, be it observed, the
favourable opinion, founded on experimental inquiry,
of the preliminary committee, appointed to investigate
whether the evidence were sufficiently strong to
warrant the Academy in appointing a new commis-
sion ; we have next the report of the new commission,
detailing circumstantially the facts which its members
witnessed, and the methods they adopted to detect
every possible source of deception. It should also be
remembered that many of the commissioners, when
they entered on the investigation, were not only un-
favourable to magnetism, but avowedly unbelievers,*
so that their evidence in any court of justice would be
esteemed the most unexceptionable that could possibly
be desired. They were inquiring, too, not into any
speculative or occult theory, upon which there might
reasonably be a chance of their being led away by
sophistical representations ; but they were inquiring
into the existence of facts only — plain, demonstrable
facts — which were in their own nature palpable to every
observer. Here there was no ground for evasion ;
but I do not seek to convince any persons in this
country by appealing to the evidence, satisfactory as
it may be, contained in this report, nor do I solicit their
belief on the faith of any existing scientific authorities,
however high or estimable, — I invite the men of
science and letters in this enlightened city to witness
the phenomena themselves, and critically examine them*
If animal magnetism be a fraud or a delusion, let
them openly unmask the imposition ; if, on the con-
trary, its principles be, as I believe, founded on truth,
let them not shrink back on the threshold of a science
which opens a new field for investigation, and which
promises to confer the most signal blessings on suffer-
ing humanity.

* One of the incredulous members, M. Itard, subjected himself,
as will be hereafter seen, to the magnetic action. I operated. The
effect was decisive, and convinced all who were present of the
reality of the magnetic influence. What further or more conclu-
sive evidence could be desired ?


CHAPTER II.

PHYSICAL PHENOMENA OF ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

The effects of animal magnetism have been described
as marvellous, incredible, contrary to the course of
nature : this is exaggeration. It is true that many of
them are very remarkable, but they are not more
extraordinary, nor are they more inexplicable, than
many other physiological and psychological pheno-
mena which frequently occur in normal and abnormal
conditions of the human body. He who would study
the philosophy of organisation must expect to meet
with marvels ; his path will be infallibly beset by
mystery. " The greatest wonder of all wonders," ob-
served Lessing, " is, that we are insensible of the
wonders that daily surround us." The phenomena
of animal magnetism are extremely various, the rea-
son of which may be satisfactorily explained. Thus,
in the physical sciences, chemistry, electricity, gal-
vanism, the conditions being always the same under
which certain experiments are performed, the effects
may with tolerable certainty be predicated ; but in
animal magnetism this is not the case, because the
conditions under which the operation is performed
can never be precisely similar. The power of the
magnetiser, the energy of his volition, and the sensi-
bility or constitution of the person operated upon,
must in every case vary ; and hence the effect pro-
duced must be very much diversified ; yet an intelli-
gent eye will not fail to perceive that these varied
effects are in reality modifications of the same phe-
nomena, resulting from the operation of the same
cause, the laws of which may, it is true, be at present
only imperfectly understood ; but I am nevertheless
persuaded that animal magnetism — that active prin-
ciple which we possess, within us, and which, under
the energy of our volition, manifests itself by the
effects it visibly induces — does possess fixed and con-
stant laws, which the progress of knowledge will even-
tually reveal to us. Let us not, therefore, in the
meantime, indulge in hypothetical conjectures, and fly,
as fancy may suggest, from one uncertain theory to
another ; but let us restrict our attention to facts
which are attested by men who are worthy of credit
and competent observers — facts which I profess myself "
capable of reproducing whenever the occasion may re-
quire it.

The variety of the phenomena which are produced,
as above stated, by the magnetic operation, renders it
difficult to classify them. I shall, however, adopt the
course usually observed in explaining the physical
sciences. I shall proceed gradually from the effects
which are most simple to those which are more and
more complex ; but even this can only be done in
an arbitrary manner, because the higher phenomena
are often developed in conjunction with those which
are much less so ; and on this account, many persons
in the commencement of the study are startled, and
their incredulity is excited by the appearance of
facts which they are not prepared to receive. Such,
too, is the disposition of the human mind to theorise,
that many set about explaining facts before they are
assured of their existence, or can appreciate their
specific character, so that many of the higher mag-
netic phenomena seem to carry such persons back at
once into those remote fabulous ages when every un-
usual occurrence was pregnant with mystery, and
conjured up phantoms of superstition, which, when
the mind is darkened by ignorance, constantly impose
on human credulity. But it is well known, that as
science advances the light of truth gradually dispels
these imaginary prodigies, and those appearances
which were once deemed supernatural, lose entirely
the character of the marvellous, and become associated
with the ordinary phenomena of daily observation.
Let those, therefore, who are about to enter on this
investigation, not prematurely exclaim, " Extraor-
dinary !" " Impossible !" I shall cite no fact that is
not well, nay, incontrovertibly established ; not one
that I am not myself prepared to demonstrate.

When an individual subjects himself to the mag-
netic operation, the change which is thereby produced
in his habitual mode of being, is often very sudden
and manifest ; but more frequently it is necessary for
the magnetiser to persevere for awhile before any
ostensible effect is induced. This will depend, it is
obvious, on the power of the magnetiser and the sus-
ceptibility of the person magnetised ; but although in
some cases no effect be externally manifested, it will
in the sequel be found that no individual can mag-
netise another without producing some change in his
organisation ; nay, sometimes the effect of the mag-
netic action is not felt until some time after the opera-
tion. The symptoms most commonly induced are
the following : — slight pricking and winking of the
eyelids — an increase, or perhaps diminution, in the
pulsations of the heart — a sensible alteration in the
temperature of the body — the cheeks sometimes are
flushed, or become extremely pale — the expression of
the countenance, indeed, undergoes a remarkable
change — stretchings of the limbs and deep y awnings
succeed — a gurgling noise (borborygmus) is often
heard in the throat — the patient is, perhaps, disposed to
move, yet feels unable to do so, or experiences an un-
usual sense of composure, which is to him a peculiar, an
undefined delight — the breathing frequently becomes
much affected, and by a singular anomaly, occasionally
the circulation increases in rapidity, while the respiratory
movements of the chest become less and less frequent.
In one case, particularly, which fell under my obser-
vation, the pulse previous to the operation was sixty-
five, the inspirations twenty-four per minute ; after the
operation, however, the pulse rose to one hundred and
fifteen, and one hundred and twenty, while the inspi-
rations fell to twelve. These are the primary and
most simple effects of animal magnetism ; but often,
under circumstances which it is previously impossible
to determine, phenomena of a more remarkable cha-
racter are developed. The eyelids of the magnetisee
appear spasmodically affected, and close against his
will ; in vain does he attempt to open them, or change
his attitude, in order to keep himself awake ; for if
the magnetiser persevere, he yields gradually to his
influence, and sleep, more or less profound, super-
venes. His head, by its own weight, inclines forward
upon the chest, or more rarely, is thrown backwards ;
his eye-lids are generally half open, and the eye-ball
moves slowly in the socket ; its motions may be fol-
lowed by the observer, who will perceive it gradually
become fixed ; drops of mucus fall from the lips, the
limbs become cold, and the respiration audible. If
spoken to, the magnetic sleeper may perhaps attempt
an answer, and appear manifestly unable to speak, or
he will suddenly awake, rub, his eyes, stare round him
with astonishment, and recollect what has passed, as
we may recal a dream. To disturb any one in this
state is highly improper, for convulsive fits may be
thereby occasioned ; indeed, the curiosity of the idle,
and their wanton interference with persons in a mag-
netic state, may, when they are least aware of it, lead
to dangerous consequences.

In many instances the magnetic action induces much
agitation, and partial or general convulsions, pheno-
mena, which are so striking that they naturally at-
tracted the principal attention of Mesmer and his
immediate disciples. He termed these convulsions
crises, because he presumed that during them the
disease, thus magnetically treated, underwent a specific
alleviation or cure. That these remarkable conditions
are induced by animal magnetism, I prove daily, — but,
lest my authority should be impugned as ex parte evi-
dence, I shall here adduce testimony which may defy the
suspicion of the most sceptical, inasmuch as it is the
evidence of the commissioners who, in 1784, repudi-
ated the theory of Mesmer ; men who were notoriously
so hostile to the science that they grasped at every
shadow which could throw a doubt upon it.

It is from their memorable report, which was, some
years ago, so often cited against animal magnetism, that
I extract the following graphic account of the effects
which its influence often induces. w The patients,"
observe the commissioners, " present a spectacle ex-
tremely varied, in proportion to their different habits
of body ; some of them are calm, tranquil, and un-
conscious to any sensation ; others cough, expectorate,
are affected with a slight degree of pain, a partial or
general heat, and increased perspiration ; others are
agitated and tormented with convulsions. These con-
vulsions are of extraordinary violence and duration ;
as soon as one person is convulsed, several others are
affected by the same symptoms. The commissioners
saw crises of this kind which lasted upwards of three
hours, and which were accompanied by a thick and
viscid fluid brought away by the violence of the
effort. * * * Nothing can be more astonishing
than these convulsions ; he that has not witnessed the
scene can have no idea of it, and on beholding it, the
spectator is no less struck with the profound repose of
one class of patients than with the violence which
agitates another. He observes with admiration the
various incidents that are repeated, and the sympa-
thies that are developed. He sees some patients seek
each other with eagerness, and in approaching, smile,
converse with all the demonstrations of attachment,
and soothe their mutual crises. They are entirely
under the government of the person who distributes
the magnetic virtue. In vain may they appear to be
in a state of extreme drowsiness, his voice, his look,
a motion made by him, arouses them. It is impossible
not to recognise in these uniform and constant effects
an extraordinary influence acting upon the patients,
making itself master of them ; and the magnetiser, he
who superintends the process, appears to be the common
centre whence this extraordinary power diverges."*

* Rapport des Commissaires charges par le Roi de l'examen du
Magnetisme Animal. Imprime par ordre du JRoi t a l'imprimerie
Royale. Paris, 1784. This Report had a very wide circulation ;
upwards of 20,000 copies were issued.

This, be it remembered, is the concurrent testimony
of Lavoisier, Bori, Bailly, Franklin, &c. ; but it is
superfluous to dwell on facts which were established
in a former age ; I revert to them only because I am
anxious that the reality of their existence shall be
placed beyond the possibility of a doubt.

It has been already stated that the magnetic operation
induces sleep ; it is a state of sleep, however, very dif-
ferent from natural sleep ; its phenomena were first des-
cribed by the Marquis de Puyscgur, but, in conformity
with the plan already laid down, I shall detail its phy-
sical conditions before proceeding to those phenomena,
which are of a purely psychical nature, and in
the highest degree interesting, inasmuch as they
reveal to us the manifestations of a spiritual existence,
independent of the ordinary instruments of corporeal
organisation. In contradistinction to the natural,
this has been termed the magnetic sleep, or somnam-
bulism, which may be more or less complete, — that is to
say, its phenomema may be more or less perfectly
developed. In this peculiar state of sleep, the surface
of the body is sometimes acutely sensible, — but more
frequently the sense of feeling is absolutely anni-
hilated. The jaws are firmly locked, and resist every
effort to wrench them open ; the joints are often rigid,
and the limbs inflexible ; and not only is the sense of
feeling, but the senses of smell, hearing, and sight,
also, are so deadened to all external impressions, that
no pungent odour, loud report, or glare of light, can
excite them in the slightest degree. The body may
be pricked, pinched, lacerated, or burnt; fumes of
concentrated liquid ammonia may be passed up the
nostrils ; the loudest reports suddenly made close upon
the ear ; dazzling and intense light may be thrown
upon the pupil of the eye ; yet so profound is the
physical state of lethargy, that the sleeper will remain
undisturbed, and insensible to tortures, which, in the
waking state, would be intolerable. These may ap-
pear startling assertions, and it should be conceded,
that in proportion as any alleged facts may appear ex-
traordinary, do they demand additional weight of evi-
dence to establish them. This state of insensibility,
now described, therefore requires to be proved by the
most direct positive evidence; it must be evidence,
at once clear, unequivocal, and above all suspicion ;
it must be evidence, too, that is tangible to those
who will entertain the investigation, and this I am
prepared to adduce. Can more in reason be desired ?
I cite authorities, I refer to scenes which occurred in
public hospitals, in the presence of living witnesses,
conscientious and competent observers, only because I
cannot bring the experiments under the eye of the
reader while perusing this page ; but if he choose to
visit any of my public seances, he may convince him-
self, by personal observation, of the truth of the facts
which are here stated ; and I make this appeal, fully
sensible how difficult it is to disturb that apathy which
scepticism usually engenders, or to excite even the
desire of inquiry in minds which have already come
prematurely to a conclusion.

Accordingly, I now proceed with the evidence. In
1820, numerous experiments were performed by me in
Paris, at the Hotel-Dieu, and many incredulous phy-
sicians, attracted by the novelty, witnessed them, and
wished to satisfy themselves that there was no decep-
tion. To this I assented, and accordingly they pro-
ceeded to prove the insensibility of the patients by a
variety of tests, many of which were very cruel ; but
these experiments were not performed by me ; it was a
sort of sacrifice of humanity which incredulity insisted
upon, and in the infancy of the science I had no alter-
native excepting to permit them, or allow truth itself
to be compromised by the refusal. Hence the uncon-
scious patients were subjected to the following trials : —
their lips and nostrils were tickled with feathers ; their
skin was pinched until ecchymoses (bruises) were pro-
duced ; smoke was introduced into the nasal passages,
and the feet of one female were plunged into a strong
infusion of mustard-seed at a high temperature. But not
the slightest sign of pain did they evince. The expres-
sion of the countenance remained unchanged, nor was
the pulse in any degree affected. On being awakened,
however, out of the magnetic sleep, they all experi-
enced the pain usually attendant on such applications,
and were exceedingly angry at the treatment they had
received. Many of the physicians who had witnessed
this scene, and who were convinced of the reality of
the magnetic influence, applied to me to teach them
how to conduct the operation, and several very soon
acquired the method, upon which they proceeded to
convince themselves, by their own personal experi-
ments, of the absolute extinction of sensibility in such
cases. The means they adopted were on many occa-
sions revolting, but the result removed every shade of
doubt from their minds. I now, therefore, proceed to
adduce their evidence. It is no longer I who attest
the facts ; and praise or blame, should either be be-
stowed, will be alike inapplicable to me. Here, there-
fore, I subjoin the following proces-verbal by Dr. Ko-
bouam, who was then attached to the Hotel-Dieu.
" I, the undersigned, certify, that on the 6th of
January, 1821, M. Recamier, on visiting the hospital,
requested me to put into magnetic sleep a man
named Starin, whose bed was No. 8 of the ward
Sainte-Madelaine. M. Recamier first threatened him
with the application of moxa,* if he allowed himself
to fall asleep, and I caused the patient, much against
his will, to pass into the magnetic sleep, during which
M. Recamier applied the moxa on the fore-part of the
right thigh, which moxa produced an eschar seven-
teen lines in length and eleven in breadth ; that
Starin did not manifest the least sign of pain, either
by crying out, gesture, or variation of the pulse ; that
he did not feel the application of the moxa until I had
roused him out of the magnetic sleep. Madame Sainte-
Monique, the matron of the ward, MM. Gibert, La
Peyre, Bergeret, Carquet, Truche, &c, &c, were pre-
sent during this seance" Here, also, is another proces-
verbal by the same physician. " I, the undersigned,
certify, that on the 8th of January, 1821, at the re-
quest of M. Recamier, I put into magnetic sleep the
woman Leroy (Lise), lying in the bed No. 22 in the
ward Sainte-Agnes. M. Recamier had previously
threatened that he would apply a moxa to her person
if she allowed herself to fall asleep. I, Robouam, then,
much against her will, caused the patient to fall into
magnetic sleep, during which M. Gibert burned
agaric under her nostrils, and this nauseous smell pro-
duced no perceptible effect ; that afterwards M. Reca-
mier himself applied moxa on the epigastric region
(pit of the stomach), which produced an eschar of
fifteen lines in length and nine in breadth ; that dur-
ing the operation, the patient did not shew the least
symptoms of suffering, either by cries, gestures, or
variation of the pulse ; that she remained in a state
of perfect insensibility, and that on awakening from the
magnetic sleep, she shewed signs of suffering great
pain. MM. Gibert, Crequi, &c, were present at this
seance? (Signed,) Robouam, Docteur-Medecin.

* The unprofessional reader should be apprised that by moxa
is meant the direct application of fire to the body, as a counter-
irritant. The down of the mugwort (artimisia chinensis), hemp,
flax, any combustible substance, being rolled into a cylindrical form,
is lighted, and the point of the flame, by means of a small canula,
or blow-pipe, directed on the part.

The next proces-verbal I shall cite was deposited at
the office of JVL Dubois, a well-known notary, at Paris,
and refers to a case which was witnessed by MM.
Husson, Bricheteau, Delens, and other eminent phy-
sicians. But before proceeding, it may be necessary
so far to anticipate the psychical details as to observe
that the individual in this somnambulic state will often
exclaim aloud, converse, sing, and perform a variety
of actions, as persons addicted to spontaneous or
natural' somnambulism often do, only in a much more
perfect or lucid manner. There is also a peculiar
relation established between the magnetiser and the
magnetisee ; they are said to be en rapport with each
other ; in other words, the magnetic sleeper, while
absolutely insensible to all other external impressions?
is mentally conscious of every act of the magnetiser ;
he will hear, even at a distance, the slightest modula-
tion of his voice, however inaudible it may be to those
around ; but the power of the magnetiser over the
magnetisee will be hereafter more fully described. To
return, therefore, to the proces-verbal now cited :
" Catherine Samson (a young girl of much natural
timidity) was put to sleep in about fifteen minutes.
Many persons present endeavoured to rouse her by
individually, and then altogether, screaming suddenly
in her ears. They also struck violently with their
clenched fists various pieces of furniture, but could
not obtain any symptom of her hearing the loudest noise.
7th September, 1820. She fell asleep in three minutes ;
M. Recamier opened her eyelids, shook her violently,
grasped her hands violently, struck the table with all
his might, pinched her repeatedly, raised her from her
seat and suddenly let her fall, — still no change was per-
ceptible, nothing which could convey an idea that the
patient either heard or felt. When the magnetiser, how-
ever, spoke, c ;he heard him distinctly. M. Recamier then
alternated his voice with that of the magnetiser, but to
his voice she was insensible. 10th of November. The
patient fell asleep in one minute. Her lips and nos-
trils were tickled with feathers, yet she felt nothing.
They cried out that she was an impostor, that her
conduct was scandalous, and tha f ^they would kick her
out of the room. Some counterfeited the voice of the
magnetiser, but could obtain no answer, nor was any
alteration visible in the expression of her countenance.
10th November ; evening. She was magnetised in her
bed ; in a few minutes fell asleep, and remained
all night in a somnambulic state. The persons ap-
pointed to watch her observed that she never moved ;
they pulled and plucked out the hair of her head by
the roots, but could detect no sign of sensation."

On the 29th December, 1826, in the presence of
the commissioners appointed by the x\cademy of
Medicine, I was again called upon to magnetise this
subject, and her case now attracted considerable at-
tention, inasmuch as during the discussions which took
place in the Academy, in consequence of the proposal
to submit magnetism to a new investigation, M. Reca-
mier alleged that this girl, whom the magnetisers had
professed to have cured, had applied for re-admission
into the hospital, where she died. This was not the
fact. Six years after her pretended death, she re-
appeared, and from the report drawn up by the com-
missioners, I subjoin the following particulars : —

" We were first of all desirous of ascertaining whe-
ther the individual presented to us by M. Dupotet,
whose good faith was perfectly well known to us, was
the identical person who, nine years before, had been
magnetised at the Hotel-Dieu. MM. Bricheteau and
Patissier, who had been present at those experiments,
had the goodness to comply with the request of the
committee, and, conjointly with the reporter, certified
by a document which they signed, that it was the same
person who had been the subject of the experiments made
in the Hotel-Dieu in 1820, and that they perceived no
change in her beyond that which indicated a sensible
amelioration of her health. The identity having been
thus verified, Mademoiselle Samson was magnetised by
M. Dupotet, in presence of the committee. The ma-
nipulations had scarcely commenced, when Mademoi-
selle Samson became restless, rubbed her eyes, expressed
impatience, complained, coughed with a hoarse voice,
which recalled to the recollection of MM. Bricheteau,
Patissier, and the reporter, the same sound of voice
which had struck them in 1820, and which then, as
upon the present occasion, pointed out to them the
commencement of the magnetic action. Soon after,
she stamped with her foot, supported her head upon
her right hand, which rested upon the elbow-chair,
and appeared to fall asleep. We raised her eyelids,
and perceived, as in 1820, the ball of the eye turned
convulsively upwards. Several questions were ad-
dressed to her, and remained unanswered ; then, when
new ones were put, she exhibited signs of impatience,
and said with ill humour that we ought not to annoy
her. At length, without having intimated his inten-
tion to any one, the reporter threw down upon the
floor a table and a billet of wood which he had placed
upon it. Some of those present uttered a cry of
terror, — Mademoiselle Samson, alone, heard nothing,
made no sort of motion, and continued to sleep after
as before the sudden and violent noise. She was
awakened, four minutes afterwards, by rubbing her
eyes in a circular manner with the thumbs. The same
billet was then suddenly thrown upon the floor ; the
noise made her start now that she was awake, and she
complained bitterly of the fright that had been given
her, although six minutes before she had been insen-
sible to a much greater noise."

The evidence I shall next adduce is that of M.
Bouillet, the Professor of Philosophy at the College
of Sainte-Barbe, whose knowledge of the metaphysical,
as well as the physical sciences, is well known, and
whose moral integrity is above all suspicion. In his
letter, dated September, 1823, which was published
and widely circulated, he gives the following details : —
" Several persons having expressed a desire to witness
some magnetic phenomena, after having collected
about twenty witnesses, I brought the somnambulist
into their presence. This seance was nearly a repeti-
tion of the same boisterous scenes which had before
occurred at the Hdtel-Dieu ; and every possible means
was had recourse to for the purpose of making the
patient hear others, and preventing her hearing me.
She was tormented in a thousand ways without effect,
when a young man who was present, having provided
himself, unknown to me, with a pocket pistol, with the
view of making a decisive experiment, suddenly and
unexpectedly fired it off close to her ear. Every
person present started, and several ladies, taken by
surprise, screamed out violently ; but the somnambu-
list was not interrupted in quietly continuing a sen-
tence which at the moment she was addressing to me.
It should be added that the pistol was fired off so close to
her ear that the bonnet and cap of the poor girl were
scorched, and some of the powder lodged under the
contused cuticle, yet did she remain perfectly insen-
sible, although, on being awakened, the sensibility
which had been temporarily suspended returning, she
felt the most acute pain in the neck, and then disco-
vered, with indignation, the state into which, to my
deep regret, she had been thrown, and from which, for
upwards of a fortnight, she suffered severely."

To this testimony of M. Bouillet, may be added
that of M. Husson, President of the Academy of
Medicine, who, in his address to that learned Society,
observes, — " The operator has succeeded, during this
singular state (somnambulism), in producing paralysis,
or so entirely closing the senses against all external
impressions, that a bottle containing several ounces of
concentrated ammonia was held immediately under
the nostrils, for five, ten, fifteen minutes, or more,
without producing the slightest effect; without im-
peding respiration, or provoking sternutation. The
skin was perfectly insensible, even when pinched so as
to leave black marks ; nay, it was absolutely insensible
to the burning of moxa, and to the acute irritation
of hot water strongly impregnated with mustard, al-
though when the skin recovered its normal state, the
pain thereby caused was intensely felt." The authority
of Dr. Bertrand may be cited to the same effect. " I
saw," he observes, " insensibility so decidedly mani-
fested in certain magnetic somnambules, that it could
be proved by the most conclusive tests. I saw a mag-
netiser who used to put his somnambules to sleep
before a numerous assembly, and entreat every person
present to provide himself with a pin, and thrust them
all unexpectedly, at the same moment, into different
parts of the body. Accordingly, while the somnam-
bulist was on one occasion singing, forty or fifty pins
were thus thrust simultaneously into his flesh without
causing the least appreciable alteration in his voice."

In the Memoirs of the Academie des Sciences, page
409, we find a dissertation from M. Sauvage-de-la-
Croix, on the somnambulism of a girl of Montpellier,
wherein the same phenomenon of insensibility is also
attested. " I was visiting the ward of the hospital,
as usual, at ten o'clock in the morning, and found the
patient in bed. She was talking with more vivacity
and spirit than she was ever known to possess in her
waking state, passing from one subject to another,
and seeming to address several of her friends who stood
round the bed. What she said seemed to have some
connexion with that which she had repeated in her
paroxysm the previous day, in which she recited word
for word, an instruction, in the form of a catechism,
which she had heard the evening before, and in which
she made malicious allusions to the moral conduct of
some of the inmates, whom she designated by fictitious
names, accompanying the whole with the same ges-
tures and motions of her eyes, which were open, which
she would have done in her waking state, yet was
she all the while in a profound sleep. This fact was
well attested — nobody entertained any doubt of it ;
but considering that I could never venture to affirm
it, unless I applied myself to some experimental test, I
made repeated trials on all the organs of the senses
while she was talking uninterruptedly. First. As
this girl had her eyes open, I thought that simulation,
if there were any, could not withstand a violent blow
in the face ; but this experiment, and a repetition of
it, did not make her move a single muscle of the face,
it did not even interrupt the thread of her discourse.
I tried another experiment, which was, to dart my
finger right against her eyeballs, and to hold a lighted
candle so close against her eyelids as to burn the eye-
lashes, but she did not so much as wink. Secondly. A
person who was concealed, suddenly uttered a loud
shriek close upon her ear, and made a noise by knocking
a stone against her bed ; but this girl, who at any other
time would have trembled with fear, shewed not the
slightest sign of hearing. Lastly. I put into her eyes
and mouth some brandy and spirit of sal ammoniac ;
I applied to the eye — the cornea itself — first the tip
of a feather, then my own finger, but without any re-
sult ; snuff blown into her nostrils, pins thrust into
her flesh, the forcible contortion of her fingers, had no
more effect on her than upon a machine ; — she never
gave the slightest sign of sensation."

The tenth volume of the Bibliotheque de Medecine
contains the memoir of a female somnambulist, who was
insensible to the lashes of a whip inflicted on her bare
shoulders ; and once she had her back well besmeared
with honey, and in this state was exposed to the sting-
ing of bees, under a scorching sun, yet although se-
verely blistered, she did not manifest any sign of pain
until she was awakened, when she suffered acute
agony, and complained grievously of the cruel treat-
ment she had experienced.

This state of complete insensibility is also attested
by the Report of the French Academy in 1831, from
which I subjoin the following extract : —

" M. Foissac magnetised Cazot, who fell asleep in
eight minutes. At three different times, a phial full of am-
monia was applied to his nose, but he did not awake. M.
Fouquier thrust a pin, an inch deep, into the fore-arm ;
another was introduced obliquely under the sternum,
to the depth of two lines ; a third, also obliquely,
into the epigastrium ; a fourth perpendicularly into the
sole of his foot. M. Guersent pinched his fore-arm
so as to leave an ecchymosis. M. Itard leaned upon
his thigh with the whole weight of his body. They
endeavoured to excite a tickling sensation by passing
a small piece of paper under his nose, on the lips, the
eyebrows, the eyelids, the neck, and the sole of the
foot ; nothing could awaken him."

It is impossible to conceive any fact more clearly
established by human evidence than this perfect
insensibility during the magnetic sleep ; but it remains
for me to add that painful surgical operations have
been performed on patients in this state, who during
the whole time never manifestid the slightest sign of
consciousness.

In the " Journal de Toulouse," April 5, 1830,
the following case is reported : — " We have already
witnessed the curious experiments performed at
Toulouse, by the Comte de Brivazac ; the document
which has now reached us, gives an account of a case
which occurred in the department of the Gers, at the
house of the justice of peace for the canton of
Condom, in the presence of several persons, among
whom were some of our own acquaintance. Jean
Bordere, in the before-mentioned canton, was suf-
fering from an abscess from congestion on the fore
part of the thigh. His medical attendants declared
that it was necessary to lance it freely, but that
the operation should be conducted with much skill
and prudence, because the crural artery ran through
the tumour, which was very much enlarged. The
Comte de Brivazac, whose power as a magnetiser
is remarkable, proposed to throw the patient into a
magnetic sleep, whereby insensibility might be super-
induced, in order that the pain of the operation,
inevitable in a waking state, might be spared the
sufferer. His proposition was accepted. At the end
of two minutes the patient was thrown into the mag-
netic state. His lucidity was not remarkable. He
answered the magnetiser that it was in vain for him
to try, as he could not perceive his complaint. At
that moment, Dr. Larieu began, with great dexterity,
the operation. He repeatedly plunged the probe into
the opening made by the bistoury, in order to let out
the purulent matter, the flow of which was occasion-
ally impeded by albuminous flakes. A dressing was
immediately afterwards ; applied. During the opera-
tion, the patient remained motionless as a statue ; his
magnetic sleep was in nowise disturbed, and on the
proposal being mooted that he should be brought out
of the magnetic "state, M. de Brivazac spontaneously
awakened him. M. Roc then drawing near, asked him
whether he would submit to the operation, to which
he replied, " I suppose I must, since it is necessary."
M. Roc then informed him that it was unnecessary to
recommence, as the operation had already been per-
formed. The astonishment of the patient was at its
height, when he saw the proofs of it ; for he had seen
nothing, felt nothing, and remembered nothing, ex-
cepting the act of M. de Brivazac laying the palm of
his hand upon his forehead to induce sleep."

On the 16th of April, 1829, the following interest-
ing case was reported to the surgical section of the
French Academy, by M. Jules Cloquet, the eminent
surgeon in Paris, who himself performed the operation.
The commissioners of the French Academy, finding,
from personal investigation, that the case was fully au-
thenticated, considered it their duty to embody it in
their Report. " Madame Plantin, a lady sixty-four
years of age, residing at No. 151, Rue St. -Denis, con-
sulted M. Cloquet, on the 8th of April, 1829, for an
ulcerated cancer in the right breast, which she had for
several years been afflicted with, and which was com-
plicated with a considerable enlargement of the cor-
responding axillary glands. M. Chapelain, her ordi-
nary physician, who had been in the practice of mag-
netising her for some months, with the view, as he said,
of dispersing the swelling of the breast, had not been
able to obtain any other result than that of producing
a very profound sleep ; during which, sensibility ap-
peared to be annihilated, while her ideas still retained
all their clearness. He proposed to M. Cloquet to
operate upon her during this state, and as the latter
considered the operation indispensable, he consented,
and it was fixed for the following Sunday, the 12th
of April. During the two days preceding that of the
operation, the lady was magnetised several times by
M. Chapelain, who, whilst she was in a state of som-
nambulism, prepared her to submit without fear to the
operation, and even brought her to converse upon it
with confidence, although, when awake, she rejected
the idea with horror.

" On the day appointed for the operation, M. Clo-
quet, on his arrival at half-past ten in the morning,
found the patient dressed, and seated in an arm-chair,
in the attitude of a person in a tranquil natural sleep.
She had returned, nearly an hour previously, from
mass, which she was accustomed to attend at that
time. M. Chapelain had thrown her into the mag-
netic sleep after her return and she then spoke with
much composure of the operation she was about to
undergo. All the arrangements being made, she un-
dressed herself, and seated herself in a chair. M.
Chapelain supported the right arm : the left was allowed
to hang down.

" M. Pailloux, Sieve interne of the Hospital St.
Louis, was employed to present the instruments, and
to tie the vessels. The first incision, commencing at
the axilla (armpit), was carried round the upper part
of the tumour as far as the inner border of the breast ;
the second, beginning at the same point, was carried
round the lower part of the tumour till it met the first.
The enlarged glands were then dissected with precau-
tion, on account of their vicinity to the axillary artery,
and the tumour was extirpated. The operation lasted
from ten to twelve minutes, and during the whole time,
the patient continued conversing tranquilly with the
operator, and did not give the slightest indication of
sensibility ; no motion of the limbs, or of the features ;
no change in the respiration, or the voice ; no altera-
tion even in the pulse could be perceived : the patient
never ceased to be in that state of automatic abandon
and passiveness in which she had been for some minutes
before the operation. It was not requisite even to
hold, they only supported her. A ligature was then
applied to the lateral thoracic artery, which was
opened during the extraction of the glands, and the
wound being closed by adhesive plasters and dressed,
the patient was put to bed, still in a state of somnam-
bulism, in which she was allowed to remain forty-eight
hours. An hour after the operation, a slight haemor-
rhage appeared, which, however, proved of no conse-
quence. The first dressings were removed on the fol-
lowing Tuesday (the 14th) ; the wound was cleansed
and again dressed, the patient not testifying any sensi-
bility or pain : the pulse preserved its ordinary cha-
racter. After this dressing, M. Chapelain awakened
her, the somnambulic sleep having lasted from an hour
before the operation — that is, during two days."

In this case it may be observed that the somnam-
bulic state was maintained for an extraordinary length
of time ; and then when the patient was awakened,
she was again thrown into a similar state. How long
this second sleep lasted we are not informed ; but this
practice I do not hesitate to deprecate. The mag-
netic sleep, accompanied by insensibility, is restorative
to the system, if continued for about two hours ; but
when it lasts longer, it becomes the source of great
excitement, and destroys, rather than restores, nervous
energy. From the facts above detailed, it is evident
that surgical science should avail itself of this peculiar
state to mitigate, or rather supersede, the necessity of
inflicting pain during operations ; and thus practically
applied, magnetism would be of the most essential
utility. What is to be the use of this new science? —
what good is it to effect ? are questions daily asked ;
but we may rest assured, that however ignorant we
may be, at the moment of a discovery, of its ultimate
utility, yet every new truth will not fail eventually to
admit of some practical application, which will con-
tribute to the benefit, and the happiness, of mankind.
It may have been exclaimed against Franklin — What
good purpose can be achieved by drawing down the
lightning from Heaven by a paper kite ? Has not
one philosopher been already killed by his presump-
tuous folly ? What advantage can possibly be derived
from these Promethean exploits ? Yet did this disco-
very of the electric fluid not only enlarge our views of
the constitution of the physical universe, but led to
the construction of instruments whereby it admitted
of a direct practical application in the treatment of
disease which all medical men now appreciate. It is
the same with animal magnetism ; its direct utility in
causing— what might indeed be esteemed a blessing, —
an absolute suspension of physical suffering, during
otherwise painful surgical operations is, by the preced-
ing cases, distinctly manifest ; its curative power in alle-
viating and removing distressing chronic affections
which had resisted every other mode of treatment, has
been also clearly established ; but it is not possible for
us, at present, to raise the veil of futurity, and trace
out all the advantages which may hereafter be derived
from it.

Hitherto, my attention has been principally confined
to the phenomena of insensibility ; but the magnetic
action induces other physical phenomena, which are
many of them very remarkable. One of these I shall
here notice. It is this : — The magnetiser in throwing
out the magnetic influence, often causes a sort of
electrical shock to pass through the body of the pa-
tient, who will start as it were convulsively, or a spas-
modic contraction of certain muscles will be visible to
all the by-standers. A young girl, or rather a child,
for she is not twelve years of age, at this moment
attends my demonstrations, who is so susceptible of
the magnetic influence, that she almost instantly falls
asleep, and the approximation of my fingers towards
her, causes a short and quick convulsive start, which
seems to pervade her whole frame. In another case,
a young lady subjected to fits, experiences under the
magnetic action, convulsive motions of the shoulders
and chest, which are, however, unattended with pain.
A gentleman also, who is to me a stranger, has re-
cently attended at my rooms to be magnetised for a
paralysis of the left side of the face, which was caused
by an abscess which he suffered from five years ago.
Under the magnetical action, the muscles of the face,
especially those of the paralysed side, over which he
has no command, are visibly contracted ; the angles
of his lips are drawn upwards, and his face assumes
almost the character of a mask, and this effect is pro-
duced when the magnetic passes are made at a distance
of ten or twelve feet from him, even though a screen
during the operation be interposed between us.* The

* A medical gentleman, who takes considerable interest
in animal magnetism, knowing that Mr. Wright, the patient
referred to, was an highly -educated and intelligent gentleman,
submitted to him a number of questions, which he succinctly an-
swered, concerning the effects produced, the sensations he experi-
enced, &c. With a copy of these he has favoured me, and I here
subjoin them, premising only that I was not at the time acquainted
with the parties, and that none of the questions or answers in any
same magnetic effect was produced by me in the pre-
sence of the French commissioners, who attested it in
their report in the following terms : — " It is chiefly on
M. Petit, thirty-two years of age, school-master at
Athis, that the convulsive movements have been exhi-
bited with the most precision by the approach of the
magnetiser's fingers. M. Dupotet, in introducing him
to the commissioners on the 18th August, 1836, an-
nounced that he was easily thrown into magnetic sleep,
during which state M. Dupotet could at will, without
expressing his intention, by the mere approximation
of his fingers towards those parts which the commis-
sioners would be pleased to name in writing, bring on
way emanated from me. They were, in fact, only communicated
to me while the present sheet was passing through the press.

Q. Are you, independent of the paralysis of the face, in sound
health ? Have you ever been affected with dyspepsia, palpitations
of the heart, or any nervous affection ?

A. At present I am enjoying a very sound state of health. When
my face was paralysed, about five years ago, I had considerable
mental anxiety, and great confinement, with a very high pulse,
beating often 125 to 130 a minute.

Q. When the Baron Dupotet magnetised you for the first time
were you sensible of any immediate effect during the operation?

A. Immediately upon the Baron Dupotet's commencing his
manipulations, I felt physically affected by a stream of coldness.

Q. When the Baron Dupotet commences magnetising you, do
you feel nervous, or possessed of any vague apprehension that some
mysterious or unknown effect is likely to be produced?

A. Having seen the effects produced on other patients, I was
fully prepared to experience the same results, to which I attached
notions of pleasure rather than of apprehension. The real effect was
completely different from what I had expected.

Q. When the Baron Dupotet passes his hands to and fro be-
fore your face, does the monotonous movement before you induce
any feeling of ennui or mental fatigue ?

A. No. The first marked physical sensation is an irritation of
the same convulsive movements. The patient was in
a short time put asleep, after which, in order to remove
every suspicion of any previous understanding between
him and the operator, the commissioners handed to
M. Dupotet a note, written at the moment, wherein
they had specified the parts they wished to be convulsed.
Possessed of this instruction, M. Dupotet first directed
his hand towards the right wrist, which immediately
became convulsed ; he then stood behind the patient
and directed his finger first towards the left thigh,
then towards the left elbow, and lastly, towards the
head. Each of these parts were almost immediately
seized with convulsive movements. M. Dupotet then
the diseased muscles of the face, and, almost at the same time, a
convulsive closing of the eyes. Nearly the same results are ex-
perienced when I am magnetised upon the feet.

Q. During the operation do you appear under an influence,
which, independent of all such manipulations, sensibly affects
you ?

A. Yes, entirely so.

Q. When the Baron Dupotet communicates this influence
what effect has it on your physical sensations? Do you appear to
acquire any new element or principle from without?

A. I appear, as I have before said, to receive a coldness, which
quickly operates to the expulsion of heat from the interior ; being
magnetised for some time, and all things being quiet, this heat is
accompanied by great perspiration at all the extremities; for
instance, the hands and the feet.

Q. During the operation, and while the paralysed muscles of
your face are contracting, are you perfectly conscious of every,
thing which surrounds you ?

A. I am nearly as conscious as a man ordinarily is with his eyes
closed. I cannot speak. Once or twice my consciousness has
been much confined to myself and the magnetiser, having forgotten
— I do not mean forgotten, but rather being abstracted from —
all other objects.

Q. Do the objects and persons about you appear just the same
directed his left leg against that of the patient, which
became immediately so much agitated that he nearly
fell off his seat. He then directed his foot towards
the right elbow of M. Petit, which became violently
agitated ; he then stretched his foot towards the left
hand and elbow, and violent convulsive movements de-
veloped themselves in the upper limbs. One of the
commissioners, M. Marc, with the intention of obviat-
ing more effectually every possibility of deception,
blindfolded the patient, and the preceding experiments
were repeated, with a slight difference in the result.
MM. Thillay and Marc directed their fingers toward
different parts of the body, and provoked some con-
as when you are not under the magnetic influence, or do they
appear as if seen through some different or new medium?

A. I cannot answer this question experimentally. All I have
to remark upon it is, that I can for the most part see, although
dimly, the magnetiser's hand ; this sight being rather that of
feeling, than what we ordinarily term sight.

Q. During the operation, while under the magnetic influence,
are you sensible of any exaltation of your mental faculties, either
in respect to your perceptions or apprehensions of pleasure or
pain ?

A. I know of no intellectual exaltation. I am quieted, and the
longer the influence is continued, the more calm I become.

Q. When the Baron Dupotet magnetizes you at a distance of
six, eight, or twelve feet, or through a screen, is the effect which
he produces equal in intensity to that which you experience when
he is immediately before you ?

A. Yes. There seems to be no difference in the effects result- «
ing either from distance or from interposed objects.

Q. When the Baron Dupotet has established the magnetic in-
fluence, are you sensible of any loss of self-command ? do you feel
in a manner subdued and passive under his control ?

A. Partially so. As I have said, I cannot speak, nor when
very powerfully influenced, have I been able to move. This is
the physical influence. Intellectually I do not feel the magne-
vulsive movements ; so that M. Petit always experi-
enced, on the approach of their fingers, some convul-
sive movements, which were, however, less promptly
developed, and more feeble. This occurred whether
his eyes were bandaged or not, and these convulsive
movements were more marked when the parts ope-
rated upon were submitted to the action of a metallic
rod, whether in the shape of a key or the branch of a
pair of spectacles."

Such are some of the more manifest, or outwardly
visible, eifects of the magnetic action ; others of a
more occult nature may also be produced ; but these
tiser more powerful than myself. Morally, or feelingly, I am con-
scious of a sympathetic peacefulness being controlled, but not
forcefully.

Q. Can you describe the kind of power he exerts over you?
Does he in the magnetic state appear to you endowed with any
preternatural influence, which exalts him visibly in your imagina-
tion ?

A. I think I can, though I fear hardly intelligibly. An involun-
tary assent to the propriety of a suggestion, if transferred from
the intellectual to the physical or to the moral, will describe it.
There is a physical and moral passivity to a physical and moral
actor.

Q. You have heard of fascination, in the ordinary sense of the
word ? Does he rivet your attention so that you cannot escape
from the influence ? or do you intentionally yield yourself to it ?

A. The word fascination aptly describes the influence which
the magnetiser exerts. With me it is not an intellectual fascina-
tion, but only physical and moral.

Q. Have you ever tried by a determined effort of will to resist
the operation ? and if so, what has been the result ?

A. Yes; and the result has been very painful ; great exhaus-
tion being produced, and prostration of the energies. The
breathing was painfully affected, and a cold clammy sweat ejected
from the extremities, very different from the glowing perspiration
that I am ordinarily sensible of. I felt considerable agitation and
are so evident to every observer, that, when duly
authenticated, their existence cannot reasonably be
disputed. It is, after all, be it again observed, only a
simple appeal to facts, and that, too, a description of
fact so distinct and tangible, that their validity may be
tested by every conscientious mind. Finally, it is
desirable that these physical manifestations should be
thoroughly sifted and determined before proceeding
further in this investigation, because they are initia-
tory to phenomena of a much higher order, which cer-
tainly cannot be appreciated if the more subordinate
steps of the induction be left imperfect.

Q. How many times have you submitted to the operation ? Do
you think the effect of the magnetic influence increases with every
successive sitting ?

A. Sixteen times, I think. The influence perceptibly increases,
affecting me now more radically, while in the first instance my
face was really pained by external contortions. The muscles are
now more moved, but less apparently on the surface.

Q. Has the magnetic treatment at all affected your general
health ? Does it invigorate the system, or induce lassitude ?

A. I am not sensible of any difference in my general health.
I have not slept very well for a few nights, but that might per-
haps be attributable to other causes. My friends have remarked
a degree of nervous irritation which is not altogether natural
to me.

Q. Do you think the paralytic affection of your face better for
the magnetic treatment you have undergone?

A. Apparently there is but little difference. I seem to think
there is a little more vitality in it.

Q. Has the operation of animal magnetism ever given rise to
any unpleasant or disagreeable sensations ? How do you feel after
it has terminated ? *

A. I am generally affected with a most comfortable perspira-
tion. I am pleased to be magnetised rather than otherwise.


CHAPTER III.

THE PSYCHICAL PHENOMENA OF ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

In all ages, the human mind has been a perplexing
problem for the study of philosophers, who have nar-
rowly watched its development in health, its aberra-
tions in sickness, and its occasional unclouding in the
hour of approaching death.* Still, its laws are only
imperfectly appreciated, because the phases through
which it passes are constantly obscured by implica-
tion with mere physical effects, inasmuch as the im-
material is so intimately blended with the material
portion of human existence, that the most discrimina-
ting observer can scarcely distinguish between phe-
nomena that are in themselves purely mental, and
phenomena which result from organic action. In
other words, man is a being partly physical and partly
psychical, — that is to say, an admirably-adjusted phy-
sical structure is imbued with a fine spiritual power,
which controls all its movements ; sustainsan exquisite
harmony between its different parts ; and establishes,
through the media of the senses, an almost infinite va-
riety of relations with the surrounding world. The mere
automatic mechanism of human existence is thus ani-
mated by a spirit-breathing intelligence within, which
is necessarily embarrassed and restricted in all its
manifestations by the obstruction of those physical
Conditions under which it is constrained to develop
itself. Hence the conflict or antagonism so continu-
ally observed between mind and matter. Such is man
in the ordinary or waking state. But during sleep he
is presented to us under another aspect. His athletic
limbs are thrown into repose, the organs of his senses
are closed against all external impressions, and in pro-
portion as his physical being sinks into deeper and
deeper unconsciousness, the psychical power appears
to awaken and energise itself within ; dreams, which
memory fails to register, now crowd upon his brain
— he becomes restless, speaks, moves, and performs
a variety of actions, with a precision and even intelli-
gence which he could not in his waking state have
commanded.

* The unclouding of the mind previous to death, or the prevision
of the dying, is a phenomenon manifestly identical with the clair-
voyance, or lucidity, of the magnetic somnambulist. Thus does
the study of animal magnetism, as we go deeper and deeper into
its apparent mysteries, assume a peculiarly sacred interest ; it is
the unveiling to us of our spiritual nature, and leads us onward
even to the verge of that future state of existence, which all men,
as they approach, even the most shallow Pyrrhonists, contemplate
with a feeling of awe, not unmingled with apprehension.

Such is the natural somnambulist. It may be a
mysterious state of being, but it often occurs, nav, all
persons are more or less somnambulists ; we all during
sleep occasionally shift our positions, carefully adjust
the pillow or bed-clothes to make ourselves comfort-
able, and perform a variety of trifling actions, of which,
at the time, we are perfectly unconscious ; yet these
are, in reality, only incipient degrees of somnam-
bulism. Again, many of us talk in our sleep, suddenly
start up, hold long discourses, and converse familiarly
with those who are supposed to be present, and as the
somnambulic state becomes more perfect, phenomena
of a more remarkable character appear.

Hence sleep, the repose of our physical being, is
always a state bordering on somnambulism, and as it
gradually developes itself, the organs of the senses be-
come insensible to all external impressions ; the eyelids
are generally closed, or if open, which often happens,
the pupil is insensible to light ; the ear, too, may admit
the undulations of air, yet it remains deaf to every
sound excepting to the voice of the persons with whom
the somnambulist may be en rapport, or in direct mental
communication ; but notwithstanding all this, the mind,
independent of the instrumentality of its physical organs,
takes a clear and direct cognizance of the relations of
surrounding objects. Hence, such persons will in
profound darkness, rise, dress themselves, sit down to
study, and perform a variety of actions requiring much
dexterity and skill, with unerring precision.

A somnambulist mentioned by Gassendi used to rise,
dress himself in his sleep, go down to the cellar, and
draw wine from a cask. He appeared to see as well
in the dark as in daylight ; but if he awoke in the
cellar, or elsewhere, he had to grope his way back again.
One night he carried on his head a table covered with
decanters, up a very narrow staircase, threading his way
along to the intended spot without coming in contact
with surrounding obstacles ; and this he did with
more dexterity than he could have done when awake.
In the Bibliotheque de Medecine we meet with the
case of a natural somnambulist, who got out of bed in
the middle of the night, and went into a house in the
neighbourhood, which was in ruins, and of which the
bare walls, with a few insecure rafters running be-
tween them, alone remained. He, however, climbed
to the top of the house, and clambered about from
one beam to another, without once missing his hold.
In the same work, another somnambulist is described,
who dressed himself during the night, put on his
boots, fastened his spurs, sprung astride the ledge of a
window five stories high, and, fancying himself on
horseback, exerted all the energies, motions, and
gestures, of a postilion. In this state, persons have
been observed to expose themselves in the most pe-
rilous positions with impunity ; for when the somnam-
bulic state is perfect, there is no apprehension of
danger, the gravitation of the body is maintained on
the most slender basis, and every motion is determined
by a precision so exact and unerring that no unhappy
consequences may be apprehended ; but if the som-
nambulist be suddenly awakened this self-possession is
entirely lost, and the result proves fatal.

Only recently, at Dresden, a young lady was observed
walking in a somnambulic state on the roof of a house,
and an alarm being given, crowds of people assembled
in the street, and beds, mattrasses, &c, were laid in the
street in the hope of saving her life, in case of her
anticipated fall. The poor girl, unconscious of danger,
repeatedly came forward to the very edge of the roof,
smiling, and bowing to the multitude below, and occa-
sionally arranging her hair and dress. The spectators
watched her movements with intense interest and
painful anxiety, and after thus moving along uncon-
cernedly for some time, she proceeded towards the
window from which she had made her exit ; but as
she approached it, a light, which had been placed there
by her distressed family, startled, and suddenly awak-
ened her ; upon which, losing all self-command, she
fell instantly into the street, and was killed on the spot.

The psychical phenomena manifested during natural
somnambulism may be all of them curious ; but one,
which has been already adverted to, and which is
perhaps more remarkable than any other, is that of
the transference of the functions of the organs of
sense ; thus the faculty of vision is proved most dis-
tinctly to exist independent of the eye itself, — that is to
say, while the eyes are closed, nay, through intervening
opaque substances the mind of the somnambulist still
perceives the most minute relations of material objects.
In the thirty-eighth volume of the encyclopedia
edited by Diderot d'Alembert, &c, an interesting case,
in illustration of this fact, is reported, on the authority
of the Archbishop of Bordeaux. It is that of a young
ecclesiastic who was in the habit of rising during the
night, in a state of somnambulism, and writing his
sermons. When he had finished one page of his
manuscript, he would read what he had written aloud,
and revise it. In so doing he made use of the
expression " Ce divin enfant" and in reading over the
passage he changed the word divin for adorable, and then
observing that the pronoun ce could not correctly stand
before adorable, he added to it the letter t. In order
to ascertain whether he made any use of his eyes, the
archbishop held a piece of pasteboard under his chin
to prevent his seeing the paper before him ; but he
continued to write on without being at all incom-
moded. He copied pieces of music while in this state,
during which his eyes were observed to be perfectly
closed. It also happened that the words were
written in too large a character, and did not stand
over the corresponding notes ; he soon perceived
the error, blotted them out, and wrote them over again
with great exactness. Another somnambulist was
observed by his physician, Francesco Soave, during
sleep, in the act of translating from Italian into
French ; he looked out for the words, of which he
required the meaning, in a dictionary, with as much
attention as if awake. On one occasion, his candle
was blown out by some of those who watched him, upon
which, although other lights were in the room, he im-
mediately rose and went into the kitchen to light it
again, for he could not see excepting with the candle
he had himself lighted. This is a curious fact, shew-
ing that he was insensible to every other light ex-
cepting that upon which his attention was engaged.

The sense of hearing in natural somnambulism
undergoes a similar abolition ; or rather, is equally
abnormal. Such persons are insensible to the loudest
noises, and yet hear at a considerable distance the
voices of those with whom they are in communication.
It is related by Soave, that the somnambulist just re-
ferred to, heard the conversation, which appeared to
be in conformity with the train of his ideas ; but he
heard nothing of the discourse which even the same
persons held on other subjects. In the transactions
of the medical society, at Breslau, the case of a som-
nambulist is reported, who, during the paroxysm,
could not see when his eyes were forced open — could
not smell the most volatile spirit, nor even hear the
report of a pistol fired close to him. The sense of
feeling would also appear to undergo a similar modi-
fication. It is stated by Muratori, that Negretti, a
remarkable somnambulist, when struck a blow with a
stick on the leg, fancied a dog had touched him, and
scolded the animal. On being again struck, he threw
a bit of bread to the supposed hound, and called to
him by his name. It is further reported of Signor
Augustin, an Italian nobleman, who was given to som-
nambulism, that his servants could not arouse him
from his paroxysm by tickling the soles of his feet, or
blowing a trumpet in his ear.

Hence, during natural somnambulism, it would ap-
pear that the ordinary channels of sensation are en-
tirely closed ; the somnambulists see not with their
eyes, they hear not with their ears ; but a peculiar
and new mode of perception exists. It is also well
known that such persons, during their somnambulism,
often manifest a knowledge and an intellectual acti-
vity which they do not at other times possess.
Operas have been composed, and poems written,
during this state,* and it is a matter of common ob-
servation that school-boys will often rise in their sleep,
proceed to the school-room, and succeed in making
translations and solving problems which they could
not in their waking state accomplish. Henricus ab
Heer relates the case of a student, at one of the
universities in Germany, who having been very intent
on the composition of some verses which he could not
complete to his satisfaction, rose in his sleep, and
opening his desk, sat down to renew the attempt. He
succeeded, and after repeating them aloud, returned to
his bed. The faculties, says Richeraud, brought into
action by dreams, can lead to a certain series of ideas
which we never could have reached in our waking
state, and hence mathematicians have, during their
sleep, worked out the most intricate calculations, and
solved the most difficult problems.

An English physician, Dr. Sibley, relates the follow-
ing case : — " It lately happened," says he, " that a young
gentleman, about fifteen years of age, from one of the
public schools, slept in the same room with me. He
chose to go to bed early, and when I came into the
same apartment about two hours after, he appeared
remarkably intent upon his studies though fast locked
in the arms of sleep. I stood some time at his bed
side and heard him repeat several lines from Homel-
and Virgil, after this, he repeated, with a bold and
nervous accent, the whole of the Hebrew alphabet, then
turning, seemed to fall into a more composed sleep.
The next morning, at breakfast, I related this circum-
stance to the company in the presence of the young
gentleman, and all were instantly commending the
great progress he had made in his studies. The
young man instantly declared, that however conver-
sant he might be with Virgil and Homer, he had
never heard the Hebrew alphabet repeated, nor did
he ever know the name of any one of its characters."*
" It is very remarkable," says Stelling, in his Pneuma-
tology, " that somnambulists who have often been in this
state at length attain great clearness of vision ; arise,
perform all sorts of work, play on an instrument, if
they have been taught music, go out to walk, &c.,
without their bodily senses having the smallest percep-
tion of the visible world ; they are then in the state of
common sleep-walkers. Thus it happened that while
I was at Bremen, in the autumn of 1798, a young
woman came to ask advice of me respecting her eyes ;
she was a somnambulist, and had herself decided upon
consulting me in the crisis ; her mother accompanied
her, but she awoke in my presence, and I was there-
fore obliged to prescribe the appropriate medicines
without her assistance."

" We are," observes Sir Thomas Brown, " somewhat
more than ourselves during our sleep, and the slumber
of the body seems but to be the waking of the soul. It
is the ligation of sense, but the liberty of reason and our
waking conceptions do not match the fancies of our
sleep. I am no way facetious, nor disposed for the
mirth and galliardize of company, yet in one dream, I
can compose a whole comedy, apprehend the jests, and
laugh myself awake at the conceits thereof. Were
my memory as faithful as my reason is then fruitful,
T should never study but in my dreams, and this time
also would I choose for my devotions. But our grosser
memories have then so little hold of our abstracted
understandings, that they forget the story, and can
only relate to our awakened souls a confused and
broken tale of that which hath passed. Aristotle, who
hath written a singular tract on sleep, hath not,
methinks, thoroughly defined it ; nor yet Galen, though
he seems to have corrected it, for those noctambules,
or night-walkers, in their sleep do yet enjoy the action
of their senses ; we must therefore say that there is
something in us that is not under the jurisdiction of
Morpheus, and these abstracted and ecstatic souls do
walk about in their own corpse, as spirits with the
bodies they assume, wherein they seem to hear, see,
and feel, though, indeed, the organs are destitute of
those faculties which should inform them. Thus it is
observed, that men sometimes before the hour of their
departure do speak and reason above themselves, for
then the soul begins to be freed from the ligaments of
the body, and to reason like herself, and discourse in
a strain above mortality. They term sleep a death,
yet it is waking that kills us. It is that death by
which we may be said to literally die daily ; a death,
which Adam died before his mortality ; a death,
whereby we live a middle and moderating point
between life and death ; in fine, so like death that I
dare not trust it without my prayers."*

When natural somnambulists are awakened from
this state, it is a curious fact, that they remember
nothing which has taken place during their somnam-
bulism ; but when they again fall into the same state,
they then recollect everything which occurred in their
former fits. The links of the chain are, as it were,
re-united, and the memory of one somnambulic state
is as continuous with that of the next as if no interval
had elapsed between them. In Moritz' Psychological
Magazine, Ritter relates the case of a boy ten years
of age, who became subject to fits of drowsiness, and
fell suddenly asleep whether standing or sitting. In
this state he would converse with persons around him,
and although his eyes were completely closed, he was
able to see and discriminate all objects presented to
him. When awakened, he would recollect nothing
that had occurred during his sleep, but would talk of
other matters. On his again falling asleep, he would
resume the thread of his discourse where it had been
previously interrupted ; and again, when he awoke,
remembered nothing of the conversation which had
taken place during his sleep, although he recollected
what had been last said to him when awake. The rule
indeed, is, that if somnambulists remember, either dis-
tinctly or indistinctly, anything which occurred during
their somnambulic state, their somnambulism has
been imperfect; and so also in ordinary sleep, the
non-recollection or the recollection of our dreams may
be esteemed a criterion of our sleep having been more
or less profound.

It would be easy to adduce many other interesting
and well-attested cases of natural somnambulism; but
it is superfluous to accumulate further evidence. From
the facts which have been already detailed, it will
appear that the following are some of the more obvious
psychical phenomena which natural somnambulists
exhibit : —

1st. They converse clearly and intelligently with
all those persons with whom they are en rapport, or in
mental relation.

2nd. They perceive the relations of external objects
through some other channel than the organs of sense,
through which such impressions are usually conveyed.

3rd. Their perceptions in regard to the objects of
their attention are more than ordinarily acute ; but
the organs of the senses are closed against other im-
pressions.

4th. They manifest a clearness or lucidity of ideas,
and a temporary knowledge and intellectual activity,
beyond that which they possess in their ordinary
waking state.

5th. They forget when they are awakened every
thing which may have taken place during their som-
nambulism ; but on returning into the same state, they
recollect everything which occurred during their
former fits.

These, be it observed, are the characteristic pheno-
mena of natural somnambulism, deduced from cases
which are thoroughly well authenticated : true, they
may be startling, but it should be remembered that such
are not to be repudiated because they appear extraordi-
nary, nor are they to be disputed because they cannot
at once be satisfactorily explained. It is essentially
necessary to distinguish between facts and the expla-
nation of facts ; the one is purely a matter of evi-
dence, the other is an affair of theory. Yet are persons
generally inclined — nay, some conceive it an intellectual
virtue, to deny the existence of the facts which they
do not comprehend. This is a manifest absurdity.
We believe in our own existence, yet how little do
we in reality understand about it. We speak learnedly
of the organs which compose the structure of the ani-
mal economy, yet how little is known of the mode in
which any one of them performs its functions. Fur-
thermore, we discourse in a lofty, philosophical tone,
about the attraction of the heavenly bodies, and the
laws of gravitation ; yet if the astronomer, in his pride
of science, will only bend his eye from heaven to earth,
he will find himself unable to explain the simple fact,
that one piece of inert matter shall affect another.
He may observe accurately enough the conditions
under which the phenomenon may appear, but in what
the attraction itself consists, he cannot explain. In truth,
almost the whole amount of human knowledge rests
on the existence of facts which are not understood :
we may arrange them with admirable precision, in the
order of their development, but the intrinsic relation
that subsists between them ; the connecting link be-
tween cause and effect, cannot be demonstrated. Here
our researches end. The inquiring mind, in endea-
vouring to ascertain a something beyond the sphere
of its comprehension, becomes embarrassed ; — a finite
being cannot understand that which is infinite, but
must recoil on the brink of that gulf which appears
to divide the Creator from the created.

But to return. It was the Marquis de Puysegur,
who first induced, or rather, observed particularly,
that peculiar state of being which, in contradistinction
to natural, is termed magnetic somnambulism. He
had been a pupil of Mesmer, and having retired to
his estate at Busancy, near Soissons, practically adopted
the instructions of his preceptor, and treated mag-
netically the sick persons who applied to him. He was
a man universally esteemed for his integrity and phi-
lanthropy ; he was also a powerful and efficient mag-
netiser, and the cures which he wrought were so
marked, and so numerous, that the peasantry thronged
from all parts of the neighbouring country to consult
him. On one of these occasions, he discovered the
psychical phenomena referred to ; and so marvellous
did they appear, even to him, that in transmitting his
memoir to the secretary of the Harmonic Society, at
Strasburg, he could not refrain from observing, " The
time is not yet ripe for the publication of the facts I
have witnessed ; they are difficult to believe, notwith-
standing the mass of evidence which attests them ; I
therefore beg you will not lend this memoir to any one,
for I confide my account of these cases to you only, in
order that they may assist you in your reflections, and
facilitate you in the means of curing, even more success-
fully than I have done, during your magnetic trials."
It appears, that while magnetising his gardener, he ob-
served him fall into a deep and tranquil sleep ; and
it then occurred to him, that he would address some
questions to him, as he might have done to a natural
somnambulist. He did so ; and the man immediately
answered him with much intelligence and clearness,
upon which he persevered in the magnetic operation,
and soon found that he possessed an extraordinary
psychical influence over him ; that all further manual
movements were unnecessary ; and that without speak-
ing he could mentally communicate with, and control,
his ideas. " It is from this simple man," says he,
" this tall and stout rustic, twenty-three years of age,
enfeebled by disease, or rather, by sorrow, and, there-
fore, the more pre-disposed to be affected by any great
natural agent, — it is from this man, I repeat, that I
derive instruction and knowledge. He is no longer,
when in the magnetic state, a peasant, who can hardly
utter a single sentence, — he is a being, to describe
whom I cannot find a name. I need not speak, I
have only to think before him, when he instantly
hears, and answers me. Should anybody come into
the room, he sees him, if I desire it, and addresses him,
and says what I wish him to say ; not, indeed, exactly
as I dictate to him, but as truth requires. When he
wants to add more than I deem it prudent stran-
gers should hear, I stop the flow of his ideas, and of
his conversation, in the middle of a word, and give his
thoughts quite a different turn." He then adds : " I
know of no subject more profound, more lucid, than
this peasant in his crisis. I have several patients ap-
proaching his state of lucidity, but none equal him."

His delight and enthusiasm on making this discovery
were indescribable ; " J'etois exalte au dernier point,"
says he, and he adds, that he might have fancied himself
almost favoured of Heaven, had he not recollected the
ungenerous opposition which all the scientific academies
in Europe had urged against Mesmer and those who
had embraced his doctrine. In a letter to his brother,
dated May 17, 1784, he observes — " If you do not
come, my dear friend, you will not see my extraordinary
man ; for his health is almost quite restored. He has,
however, told me, when in a crisis, that he should still
need to be touched, and pointed out to me the days,
Thursday, Saturday, and Monday, for the last time, &c.
I continue to make use of the happy power which
I owe to M. Mesmer ; and every day I bless him, for
I am very useful, and produce many salutary effects
on all the sick in the neighbourhood. They flock
round my tree ; there were more than one hundred and
thirty of them this morning. There is a continual
procession in the country. I pass two hours at my
tree every morning. It is the best baquet possible ;
not a leaf of it but communicates health ; all feel more
or less good effects from it. You will be delighted to
see the picture of humanity which this presents. I
have only one regret ; it is, that I cannot touch all who
come. But my man, or rather my intelligence, sets me
at ease. He teaches me what conduct I should adopt.
According to him, it is not necessary for me to touch
every one ; a look, a gesture, a wish, is sufficient ; and
it is one of the most limited peasants of the country that
teaches me this. When he is in a crisis, I know nothing
more profound, more prudent, and more clearsighted
(clairvoyant) than he."

The Marquis de Puysegur was now anxious to com-
municate his discovery to all those who were interested
in the science ; and among others, M. Cloquet, the
receiver of finance, attended to witness his experi-
ments. (i Attracted, like others," says he, " to this spec-
tacle, I went, prepared to be a calm and impartial ob-
server, determined to be on my guard against the
illusions of novelty and wonder, and firmly resolved
both to look and to listen well."

He then describes the proceedings employed by
M. de Puysegur for acting upon the patients ; and
having related various scenes of magnetisation, adds —
" The consummation of this state (the magnetic state)
is an appearance of sleep, during which the physical
faculties seem to be suspended, but to the advantage
of the intellectual faculties. The eyes of the subject
are closed ; his sense of hearing is abolished ; he wakes
only at the sight of the master {du mattre.) No one should
touch the patient during a crisis, not even the chair on
which he is seated ; it would cause him much suffering
and convulsions, which the master only can calm."

" These patients, during the crisis, possess an ex-
traordinary {surnaturel) power, by which, on touching
a patient presented to them, on passing their hand
even over the clothes, they feel which is the affected
viscus — the suffering part ; they point it out, and indi-
cate pretty nearly the suitable remedies."

" I was touched by a woman of about fifty. I had
certainly informed nobody of my particular complaint.
When she had looked attentively at my head for some
time, she told me that I had frequent head-aches and
a buzzing noise in my ears, which is perfectly true. A
young man, one of the incredulous spectators of this
experiment, submitted to it, and he was told that his
complaint was pains in the stomach, and obstructions
in the abdomen, that this was in consequence of a dis-
ease which he had some years previously, which he con-
fessed to be in accordance with truth. Not satisfied
with this divination, he went to another sleeping phy-
sician, about twenty yards from the first, and here he
was told the very same thing. I never saw any per-
son so completely confounded, for he had evidently
come for the purpose of scoffing and contradicting, and
not with a view of being convinced/'

" Another singularity, not less remarkable than all
that I have just disclosed, is, that these sleepers, who
during four hours have touched patients, have rea-
soned with them, remember nothing — absolutely no-
thing, after the magnetiser has thought proper to
disenchant them — to restore them to their natural
state. The time that has elapsed between their en-
tering into the crisis and that of their coming out of
it, is, as it were, obliterated. Not only has the mag-
netiser the power, as I have already said, of making
himself heard by these somnambulists, but I have fre-
quently seen him point his finger from a distance to
individuals while in the crisis, and in a state of spas-
modic sleep, and make them follow him wherever he
chose ; or send them from him, either to their own
homes, or to different places which he designed, with-
out telling them, — the somnambulists, it should be
remembered, having their eyes the whole time com-
pletely closed. I have forgotten to mention, that the
intelligence of these patients is singularly susceptible.
If, at distances by no means inconsiderable, conversa-
tion be held offensive to propriety, they hear it, as it
were, internally, their minds are disagreeably affected
by it, and complain of the circumstance ; and this has
several times occasioned scenes of confusion to ill-
witted jesters (jpour les mauvais plaisants), who in-
dulged, at M. de Puysegur's residence, in inconsiderate
and misplaced sarcasms."

The discovery of magnetic somnambulism, instead
of advancing, rather retarded than otherwise the pro-
gress of the science, inasmuch as the facts above
stated appeared so startling and incredible, that many
held it superfluous even to entertain any consideration
of them ; and dismissed them, at once, as idle fictions
and knavish impositions. The concurrent testimony,
however, of so many individuals, who had no interest
whatever in the matter, and whose integrity and powers
of judgment could not be impugned, induced many
who were incredulous to examine the facts ; and hence
observations on this phenomenon have, during the last
fifty years, been accumulated in all parts of Europe,
even by those very individuals who were originally the
most determined and perverse sceptics. I now, there-
fore, proceed to describe the phenomena which mag-
netic somnambulists exhibit ; but it is proper to observe,
that no criterion of comparison can be established be-
tween different cases, because men differ as much from
one another in somnambulism as they do in their ha-
bitual waking state. The Count de Redern, a distin-
guished savant, who devoted much attention to animal
magnetism, observes, —

" The body is more erect than in the waking state ;
there is a marked acceleration of the pulse, and an
augmentation of irritability in the nervous system ; the
touch, taste, and smell, have become more delicate ;
the sense of hearing is affected only by sounds pro-
ceeding from the bodies with which the somnambulist
happens to be in direct or indirect relation, — that is to
say, which are in communication through the vital
fluid, from having been touched by him and his mag-
netiser. His eyes are closed, and have no longer the
power of vision ; but he has a kind of sight, which may
be called internal, — that of the organisation of his own
body, of that of his magnetiser, and of the persons with
whom he is placed in relation ; he perceives the dif-
ferent parts of them, but in succession only, and ac-
cording as he directs his attention to them ; he distin-
guishes their structure, form, and colour. He has
sometimes the faculty of perceiving external objects
by a peculiar kind of sight : they appear to him more
luminous, more brilliant, than in the waking state.
He experiences a painful reaction of the sufferings of
the persons with whom he is in relation ; he perceives
their diseases, foresees their crises, has a perception of
the suitable remedies, and not unfrequently that of the
medicinal properties of substances presented to him.
His imagination has a tendency to exaltation ; he is
jealous, full of vanity and self-love, and disposed to
make use of little artifices to give himself importance.
His will is not inactive, but it is easily influenced by
the magnetiser. Very striking contradictions are ob-
servable between his ordinary opinions and those in
his state of somnambulism ; he condemns his own ac-
tions, and sometimes speaks of himself as he would of
a third person quite a stranger to him. He expresses
himself better, has more intelligence, greater powers of
combinations, possesses more reason, more morality,
than in his waking condition, all the ideas of which are
present to him. When the somnambulist returns to
the waking state, he has entirely forgotten all that he
had said, done, and heard, during the fit of somnam-
bulism," &c.

" When magnetism produces somnambulism (says
M. Husson,) the individual in that state acquires a
prodigious extension of the power of sensation. Se-
veral of his exterior organs are, so to speak, put to
sleep, especially those of sight and hearing, and all the
operations dependent on them are performed inter-
nally."

The somnambulist has his eyes closed ; he neither
sees with his eyes, nor hears with his ears : yet he sees
and hears better than a waking person. He sees and
hears only those with whom he is in relation. He sees
only that at which he looks ; and he usually looks at
those objects only to which his attention is directed.
He is submissive to the will of his magnetiser in all
things which cannot injure himself, and in all that does
not oppose his own ideas of justice and truth. He
feels the will of his magnetiser. He sees, or rather he
has a perception of, the interior of his own body, and
of that of others ; but he usually remarks those parts
only which are not in the natural state, and which dis-
turb the harmony of it. He recals to his memory
things which he had forgotten in his waking state.
He has previsions and presentiments, which may be
erroneous in several circumstances, and which are
limited in their extent. He expresses himself with
surprising facility. He is not free from vanity ; his
self-improvement is progressive (il se perfectionne de
lui-meme) for a certain time, if guided with discretion ;
but if ill directed, he goes astray. When returned to
his natural condition, he entirely loses the recollection
of all the sensations and ideas he had during his state
of somnambulism ; so that these two states are as en-
tirely strangers to one another as if the somnambulist
and the waking man were two different persons."

M. Deleuze, whose important Critical History of
Animal Magnetism has been already noticed, gives
the following summary of the phenomena of magnetic
somnambulism : —

" When magnetism produces somnambulism, the
being who is in this condition acquires a prodigious
extension in the faculty of sensation ; several of his
external organs, generally those of sight and hearing,
are inactive, and all the sensations which depend
upon them take place internally. Of this state there
is an infinite number of shades and varieties ; but in
order to form a right judgment of it, we must ex-
amine it in its greatest difference from the state of
waking, passing over in silence all that has not been
confirmed by experience.

" The somnambulist has his eyes shut, and does
not see with his eyes ; he does not hear with his ears ;
but he sees and hears better than one who is awake.

" He sees and hears only those with whom he is in
communication, (en rapport). He sees nothing but
what he looks at, (ce quil regarde), and he generally
looks only at the objects to which his attention is
directed.

" He is under the will of his magnetiser in regard
to everything that cannot hurt him, and that he does
not feel contrary to his ideas of justice and truth.

" He feels the will of his magnetiser.

" He perceives the magnetic fluid.

" He sees, or rather he feels, the interior of his
body, and that of others ; but he commonly observes
only those parts of it which are not in their natural
state, and disturb the harmony of the whole.

" He recovers the recollection of things he had
forgot when awake.

" He has prophetic visions and sensations, which
may be erroneous in some circumstances, and which
are limited in their extent.

" He expresses himself with astonishing facility.

" He is not free from vanity.

" He becomes more perfect of his own accord for a
certain time, if guided wisely. He wanders when he
is ill directed.

" When he returns to the natural state, he entirely
loses the recollection of all the sensations, and all the
ideas which he has had in the state of somnambulism, so
that these two conditions are as foreign to one an-
other as if the somnambulist and the waking man
were two different beings.

" Generally speaking," adds M. Deleuze, " the
magnetic somnambule perceives innumerable relations
in all objects ; he perceives them with an extreme
rapidity, and in one minute runs through a train of
ideas which to us would require many hours. Time
seems to vanish before him ; he himself wonders at
the variety and rapidity of his perceptions ; he is in-
clined to ascribe them to the inspiration of another
intelligence. He now sees this new being within him-
self ; he considers himself, while in somnambulism, as
a different being from himself when awake ; he speaks
of himself in the third person, as of somebody whom
he knows, submits to his remarks, — to whom he gives
advice, and for whom he feels more or less sym-
pathy. He now hears an intelligence, a soul speaking
to him, and revealing what he wishes to know."*

In the Cours de Matiere Medicale, by Desbois de
Rochefort, published by M. Lullier Winslow, we find
a chapter containing sufficient evidence to enable us
to form an opinion on magnetism. The following are
some few of the author's observations : —

* Virgil represents the Sybil speaking to iEneas, in the same
state in which we now see certain somnambules.

" ' Deus, ecce Deus !' cui talia fanti

Ante fores, subito non vultus, non color unus,
Non comptEe mansere comas, sed pectus anhelum
Et rabie fera corda tument, majorque videri,
Nec mortale sonans afflata est numine quando
Jam propiore Dei,'' &c. — .ZEneidos, lib. vi., v. 47.

" ' He comes ! behold the god !' Thus while she said,
(And shivering at the entry staid,)
Her colour changed ; her face was not the same ;
And hollow groans from her deep spirit came.
Her hair stood up ; convulsing rage possessed
Her trembling limbs, and heaved her lab'ring breast.
Greater than human kind she seemed to look ;
And with an accent more than mortal, spoke.
Her staring eyes with sparkling fury roll ;
When all the god came rushing on her soul." — Dryden.

The spirit, it is said, moved with so much force those who slept
in ancient temples, that they were ravished out of themselves ;
so that they had divine visions of the most extraordinary nature,
and could understand various mysteries. When the spirit began
to move them, their countenances gradually altered ; their limbs
were convulsed; they dropped down as if they had been seized
with some falling fit. When lying on the ground, they remained
in death-like stillness : sometimes their whole bodies shook in a
dreadful manner, at other times they lay still, as if their bodies
had lost all power of motion. On awaking from this ecstatic
sleep, they related the astounding visions which the spirit had
unfolded to them.

" When the Laplanders wish to know what occurs in places
" It is proved," says he, " that magnetism is a
principle entirely unknown in its essence, but demon-
strated by its astonishing effects ; that this impal-
pable, imponderable principle, the nature of which is
unknown to us, though it appears to have some
affinity with electricity, is so extremely subtile, that it
seems to be transmitted from one individual to an-
other by the mere act of volition ; and that, when it
remote from their habitations, they send out their familiar spirit
in search of intelligence ; and when they have sufficiently excited
their own imaginations by the sound of drums and other musical
instruments, they feel a kind of intoxication, during which certain
things are revealed to them, which they never could have known
in their natural state."

Many similar instances may be found in profane history.
Among others, the following, taken from a Treatise on the Rites,
Ceremonies, and Mysteries, in use among the Brahmins, written
long before the expedition of Alexander in Hindostan. Therein
it is recorded that, by a common custom of the country, called
matricha machow, they acquire a new life. They consider the
epigastric region as the habitual seat of the soul. They move
their hands from this part of the body up to the head ; they
squeeze and rub certain nerves which, they imagine, correspond with
those parts, and pretend that, by such manipulations, the soul is
transferred to the brain. As soon as the Brahmin thinks he has
reached this state, he believes that his body and soul are reunited
to the Deity, and that he has become part of the divine essence.

" Whenever I wish it," says Cardan, f< I come out of my body
so as to feel no sensation whatever, as if I were in ecstacy. When
I enter this state, or, more properly speaking, when I plunge
myself into ecstacy, I feel my soui issuing out of my heart, and,
as it were, quitting it as well as the rest of my body through a
small aperture formed at first in the head, and particularly in the
cerebellum. This aperture, which runs down the spinal column,
can only be kept open by very great efforts. In this situation, I
feel nothing but the bare consciousness of existing out of my own
body, from which I am distinctly separated. But I cannot
remain in this state more than a very few moments.

" It is this somnambulism, an extreme result of
animal magnetism, which allows of, and promises suc-
cess, through its known efficacy in the diagnosis and
treatment of diseases. It is by means of this incom-
prehensible, undefinable development of the general
sensibility, that magnetic somnambules acquire, without
the help of the senses, not only a knowledge of
the surrounding objects on which their attention is
directed, either spontaneously or by the will of an-
other, but also the faculty of distinguishing objects
removed at a distance, or placed, with regard to the
somnambule, beyond opaque bodies ; and, by conse-
quence, to know the economy and functions of their
own system, or the systems of the individuals pre-
sented to them. The most positive, the most au-
thentic, and incontrovertible facts, justify, establish,
and guarantee all these phenomena of magnetic som-
nambulism, and prove that, under certain circum-
stances, the lucidity of somnambules may be of great
succour to determine the seat and the nature of
diseases, particularly those which come under the
denomination of organic diseases." He then gives the
nomenclature of those affections in which it has been
applied with success.

Here, also, I may cite a passage from the speech of
M. Chardel, a member of the Academie de Medecine,
who, in addressing the Academie during the discussion
on magnetism, made the following remarks : —

" Among the phenomena most frequently elicited by
the magnetic agency, we reckon, — 1. A profound
and protracted sleep, constantly preceding and fol-
lowing the production of somnambulism. — 2. The
exaltation of the intellectual faculties. — 3. A perfec-
tion of the sight, which enables the somnambule to
perceive the magnetic fluid. — 4. The faculty of
acquiring information on the state of the internal
organs," &c. &c.

In a memoir addressed to the Academie de Mede-
cine, with the view of inducing that body to take an
interest in magnetism, a physician observes, — "By
laying the hand successively on the chest and abdomen
of a stranger, my somnambulists immediately discover
his or her malady ; they moreover indicate whether
the cure be possible, easy, or very remote, and what
means are to be used, in order to obtain this result
by the safest and readiest method, in doing which
they never deviate from the established rules of sound
medical doctrine. Notwithstanding the apparent mag-
nitude of the promise, I am confident that there is no
disease, whether of an acute or chronic character, of
a simple or compound nature, not one of those the
seat of which lies in one of the three splanchnic ca-
vities, which cannot be detected, and properly treated
by lucid somnambules. I have already made a suc-
cessful application of animal magnetism in the treat-
ment of many diseases which had hitherto been en-
tirely misunderstood, or considered as incurable. I
applied it with equal success in ordinary diseases,
usually known by their symptoms, progress, and ter-
mination j and I invariably found that the information
supplied by the somnambules bore the stamp of great
sagacity, precision, and unerring judgment."

The most extraordinary phenomenon of magnetic, as
well as of natural somnambulism, is clairvoyance, or
vision without the use of the eyes ; yet no fact has ever
been more clearly and indisputably established. It has
been already seen, nay, it is a notorious fact, that natural
somnambulists enjoy this faculty. It is inexplicable in
them — it is equally so in the magnetic somnambulist; but,
as I have before stated, we must abide by the evidence
of the fact being conclusive, and not wander Out of
the path of positive observation to pursue any ignis
fatuus theory which imagination may suggest to ex-
plain the mystery. It may, indeed, appear tiresome,
my adducing so many authorities, and citing so many
facts of the same description ; but I have no alter-
native ; I am anxious to show clearly that the weight
of evidence in proof of their existence is irresistible ;
and when I reiterate that I am myself prepared to
reproduce the same phenomena, the conditions of the
operation being, ceteris paribus, similar, surely the most
perverse of my antagonists will allow that no fairer
appeal can be made to the common sense and judg-
ment of mankind. The cases of vision during mag-
netic somnambulism without the instrumentality of
the eyes are very numerous, and those which I shall
here adduce are selected principally on account of
their being attested by living authorities — men who
hold a distinguished rank in the faculty of medicine,
at Paris, and in other enlightened cities.

The first fact I shall adduce is taken from the
Gazette de Sante, and recorded in the Journal de Paris
of the 24th Brumaire, an. xiv.

" The public journals," says the editor, " are now
re-echoing the prodigies of a female somnambule of
Lyons, who with her eyes shut can read a sealed letter,
tell the thoughts, and give an account of the sensa-
tions, &c, of another person. The most singular cir-
cumstance is, that this woman is of genteel extraction,
and that on account of her superior education and
independent fortune, she is far above the suspicion of
simulating those extraordinary scenes; in addition
to which, the most eminent personages, the most
learned physicians and scientific men of Lyons, ap-
pear perfectly convinced of the reality of these pro-
digies."

M. Deleuze, in his memoir on the Lucidity of Som-
nambules, gives the following relation : —

" A young patient had read to me, with great
fluency, seven or eight lines, notwithstanding her
eyes were so covered as to be of no use to her,
after which she was obliged to stop, saying she
felt much fatigued. Some days after, wishing to
convince a few sceptics, whom he could not take
with him to the somnambule's residence, he pre-
sented to her a box of pasteboard, perfectly shut,,
and in which were written these words — amitie
sante, bonheur. She held the box in her hand for a
long time, experienced much fatigue, and said that
the first word was amitie ; but that she could not
read the others. On being urged to make fresh at-
tempts, she consented, and said, as she returned the
box, I cannot see it plainly ; however, I think that the
next two words are bonte, douceur. She made a mis-
take in these two words ; but, as we see, these words
had a very great resemblance with those that were
written, so striking a coincidence could not be at-
tributed to mere chance the three written words
being, amitie, sante, bonheur, — and those mentioned by
the patient — amitie, bonte, douceur."

The next are more recent, and perhaps, therefore,
more conclusive attestations.

M. Rostan, professor of the faculty of medicine,
well known by his various writings, which have
satisfied public opinion as to his merit, might have
apprehended a partial loss of the esteem he enjoyed^
by acknowledging the phenomena of somnambulic
lucidity. He, however, did not hesitate to do so ; and
the article Magnetisine, in the Dictionnaire des Sciences
Medicales, contains several extremely curious facts,
similar to those I have now adduced. He quotes the
observations made upon a somnambule, who told him
accurately and repeatedly, the exact hour, by a watch
held at the back of her head. The following is an ac-
count of this experiment. After having treated of
the somnambulic faculties in general, M. Rostan thus
proceeds : —

" But if sight be obliterated in its natural organ,
it is satisfactorily demonstrated by me that it may
exist in various parts of the body. The following is
an experiment I have often repeated. It was performed
in the presence of M. Ferrus. I took my watch and
held it at the back of the head, at a distance of three
or four inches from the occiput. I asked the som-
nambule whether she saw anything. 4 Certainly,'
said she, ' I see something shining ; it gives me pain.'
Her countenance was expressive of pain ; and ours
bespoke our astonishment. We stared at each other,
and M. Ferrus at last broke silence, by observing to
me, that if she could see something shine she could
probably tell what it was.

" What do you see shining ? ' Oh, I do not know
I cannot tell.' Look well. 6 Why, it fatigues me so...
Why, it is a watch.' Fresh surprise on our part. But
if she can see that it is a watch, again said M. Ferrus,
she will probably tell us the time. Can you tell what
time it is ? i Oh, no, that is too difficult.' Pay attention,
and look well. ' Why, I will try...I can, perhaps, tell
the hour, but I can never see the minutes.' When she
had looked with the utmost attention, she said, < It is
ten minutes to eight,' which was then the exact time.
M. Ferrus wished to repeat the experiment himself,
which he did, with similar success. He altered several
times the direction of the hands on his watch ; and
when it was presented to her, without our having looked
at it, she was right every time."*

M. Georget, another colleague of M. Rostan, af-
firms that he observed a somnambulist who exhibited
very astonishing phenomena of prevision and lucidity ;
" so much so," says he, " that in no work on mag-
netism, not even in Petetin's, nor among all the phe-
nomena that occurred to my observation, have I ever
met with anything more extraordinary."

" All the facts," says Dr. Rostan, " that M. Georget
published, I have seen with my own eyes ; many of
those experiments were performed at my own house ;
we had both no other end in view beyond that of ob-
taining information. We were both inclined to doubt."

M. Chardel, also, whom I have already quoted, has
recorded, in a work on magnetism published by him
four years ago, several instances of the function of
sight without the assistance of the eyes.

The following is one of the facts he adduces : —
" The somnambule having recovered her senses (for
she had just been seized by syncope), called for some
water ; I went to take a decanter from the mantle-
piece, but it was empty. I took it, for the purpose of
filling it, into the dining-room, where I had observed
a filtering tank ; I turned the cock, but no water came ;
and yet the tank was full. I thought that the cock should
first be unstopped, and I did it with a piece of wood
which I split off ; but still the water did not come out.
I then supposed that the air-hole of the reservoir was
obstructed, and as it was very narrow, it was necessary
again to split the piece of wood in order to introduce
it : but I was not more successful than before. At
last I resolved upon filling my decanter with unfiltered
water. My somnambule was still in the same attitude
in which I left her. She had seen me all the time, had
followed all my movements, and detailed them to me
without omitting a single circumstance, notwithstand-
ing there was between her and me two walls and a
parlour, — and my actions included a number of minute
details which nobody could have imagined."* M.
Chardel proceeds : — " I might adduce many more in-
stances of similar sight, and even at considerably
greater distances ; but the circumstances would not
be more conclusive."

Here also I shall subjoin additional attestations by
men no less worthy of credit. — M. Francceur, a distin-
guished mathematician, read in 1826 to the Societe Phi-
lomatique a memoir, wherein he stated that " He
had been at Aix in company with respectable phy-
sicians, — namely, with Dr. Despine, chief physician
of the watering establishment, who informed him
that he (Dr. Despine) had witnessed, for months to-
gether, the singular phenomenon of the transference
of the senses, and he thought he would serve the cause
of truth by making it known to the Society."

In the first observation of this memoir, we read that
the patient had the power of seeing, hearing, and
smelling, with her fingers. The second is much more
curious ; it was made on the daughter of a certain
gentleman, who enjoys the esteem of the whole town
of Grenoble, where he lives in retirement. He did all
in his power to conceal the malady of his daughter,
which gave him great pain, and constantly refused to
admit visitors inquiring after her.

Among the various states presented by this malady
and minutely described by Dr. Despine, he insists, in
particular, on somnambulism ; and I shall here trans-
cribe, verbatim, the most positive passage on the trans-
position of the function of sight.

" Not only did our patient hear with the palm of
her hands, but we saw her read, without the help of
her eyes, and with the extremities of her fingers, which
she rapidly agitated over the page which she intended
to read, and without touching it, as if to multiply the
feeling surfaces ; she thus read a whole page of a
novel by Montholieu.

At other times we saw her single out of a parcel
containing upwards of thirty letters, one which had
been pointed out to her, and read on the dial, and
through the glass of a watch the hour indicated by
the hands ; she also wrote several letters, corrected
them by a second reading, marking the mistakes as she
went on, and recopied one of them, word for word.
During all these operations, a thick pasteboard screen
intercepted in the most effectual manner every visual
ray that might have reached the eye.

The same phenomenon took place at the sole of the
feet, and at the epigastrium ; and the patient seemed
to experience a painful sensation when simply touched."

Other minutely detailed accounts of sight without
the assistance of the eyes, will be found in a memoir
by Dr. Delpit, on two nervous affections.* " One of
the patients read," says the author, " and that very dis-
tinctly, when her eyes were hermetically closed, and
by running her fingers over the letters. I made her
read printed characters in this manner, both in the
open day -light or in the most profound darkness, on
opening the first book that came into my hand ; and
oftentimes written characters, by giving her sundry
notes, which I had prepared previous to my coming.
Whether the sense of sight was in her case supplied by
that of touch, I cannot tell ; but I affirm that she read
fluently by running her fingers over the letters."

Here is assuredly conclusive evidence, given by a
man under whose observation the facts unexpectedly
fell, without his seeking them, or even suspecting the
possibility of their existence, and who, being struck by
their inconceivable singularity, took up his pen to re-
cord what he had seen.

In the very short remarks affixed to the preceding
observations of M. Delpit, he refers the reader to the
authority of many well known writers, and particularly
to M. Dumas. " Five years ago," says this celebrated
author, " a young female, who came from the de-
partment of Ardeche to Montpellier to consult the
physician about an hysterical affection, accompanied
by catalepsy, exhibited a most extraordinary pheno-
menon. She experienced, during the whole period of
her attacks, so great a concentration of sensibility to-
wards the precordial region, that her organs of sense
seemed as if they had been transported to that part.'
She referred to the stomach all the sensations of sight,
hearing, and smelling, which were then no longer pro-
duced through the usual organs." This rare pheno-
menon, observed in a subject highly interesting in
every respect, was a matter of serious attention for the
medical profession, and of intense curiosity for the
public at large.

" I am fully aware," says M. Delpit, " that facts of
this nature, in direct opposition to all the known laws
of physical science, could not obtain, without much
difficulty and restriction, the sanction of prudent men,
who apprehend being led into error. But if we mul-
tiply observations on this subject, if we ascertain with
scrupulous exactness the least circumstances of each
observation, we must finally acknowledge, not only
the possibility, but the existence, of a phenomenon
which appears so marvellous merely from our not
having seen many facts with which it could bear
comparison."

These are recent facts, and of such a nature as to
preclude the possibility of our being deceived ; they
are testimonials furnished by living writers, men far
above every suspicion of imposture.

It would be difficult, indeed, to discover any mo-
tives which could lead to such assertions, had not the
facts stated been quite evident. Besides, they are of
daily occurrence. The following is an observation
published in the Gazette de Sante, of September 1829 :
" There is now, in M. Fouquier's wards, a patient
in whose case animal magnetism has developed the
most curious and, in some points, incredible pheno-
mena. Without siding with the lovers of the mar-
vellous, it is incumbent upon us to record individual
facts when duly authenticated. Now, the facts which
we are about to relate having been witnessed by a
large number of spectators, we presume we may pre-
sent them to our readers as being entitled to their
confidence.

" Petronille Leclerc, twenty-six years of age, seam-
stress, entered the Charite to be treated for a spas-
modic cerebral affection bordering on epilepsy. She
was of an exceedingly nervous temperament, very
pale, exhausted by former sufferings, and extremely
irritable. She had been seized, after a violent fit of
anger, with a turning upwards of the eyeballs, in
which position they remained fixed, and resisted all
sorts of remedies. The idea occurred to M. Sbire,
her medical attendant, of trying the application of
magnetism. He made the first trial on the 29th
of August last, and subsequently repeated it many
times. The most remarkable circumstances of this
treatment were noted down, and some of them oc-
curred in our own presence. The following is an
account of them : —

" At the first sitting, the somnambule gave several
proofs of lucidity. The gentleman who had mag-
netised her presented to her various objects, such as a
flask, some sugar, and bread, which she perfectly dis-
criminated without seeing them, for her eyes were
bandaged ; and, moreover, in order to answer the ques-
tions put to her, she generally turned her head on the
opposite side, and buried her face in her pillow. Once,
without being questioned, she said to the same person,
who was holding her hand, 4 You have a head-ache,'
which was really the fact ; but, with the view of per-
plexing her, the student told her she had made a mis-
take. 4 That is very singular,' said she, 4 then I must
have touched somebody who has a head-ache, for I felt
it well.' She also distinguished several individuals pre-
sent by certain peculiarities in their dress. One of the
most remarkable circumstances is this : — The mag-
netiser, on retiring, had promised that he would return
at about half-past five to wake her. He came before the
appointed time, and the somnambule observed to him,
that it was not yet half-past five ; but he replied, that a
letter which he had just received obliged him to return
to her. 4 O yes,' said she immediately, 4 it is the letter
now in your pocket-book, between a blue and yellow
card ;' which fact proved to be perfectly correct.

A watch was placed at the back of her head, and
on being requested to tell the time, she said, 4 Six
minutes past four;' it was then seven minutes past
four."

The 17th number of the same journal contains a
note, stating that the same patient had, according to
her own prediction, a rather intense inflammation of
the mouth and fauces, with ptyalism. It was accom-
panied by constipation, as she had previously fore-
told.

These assertions should have some weight, when it
is added, that the editors of this paper had long been
opposed to magnetism. In their eyes, magnetisers
were little better than poisoners.

Here, also, is another extract from the Gazette Me-
dicale de Paris, dated October 2, 1832 : — " There is
now observed, at the Hospital Delia Vitta, in Bo-
logna, a very extraordinary phenomenon of animal
magnetism. In this hospital is a patient, who is
seized every third day, precisely at eleven in the
morning, with a convulsion so violent that he loses
entirely the faculty of perceiving sensations. Sight,
hearing, and smelling, totally disappear ; the organs of
the senses cease their functions ; both his hands are so
firmly clenched that it is impossible to open them,
and by using more force the fingers would certainly
break. But Dr. Cini, son of the artist of that name,
under whose care he was placed, discovered, after long
and attentive observations, that the epigastrium,* at
about one inch above the umbilicus, received, during
the convulsive fit, all the perceptions of the senses, so
as to replace them to a certain extent. If we speak
to the patient, touching the epigastrium with the
finger, he answers immediately ; and if requested to
do so, he will of his own accord open his hands ; if a
body be placed upon the epigastrium the patient de-
scribes its shape, smell, quality, and colour. During
the contact of the finger the convulsion gradually
diminishes, and seems to die away ; but if the finger
be placed upon the heart, the convulsion revives, and
lasts as long as the finger remains in this position. If
a flute be played upon while touching the epigastrium,
the patient hears the music, and when, without inter-
rupting the performance on the instrument, the finger
leaves the epigastrium to touch the precordial region,
and then returns to the epigastrium, the patient in-
quires why the musical performance is now and then
interrupted. These experiments were performed in
the beginning of September, in the presence of both
professors and students ; and they excited the greatest
surprise."

In a curious work, printed in Germany some years
ago, another interesting case of the same description is
related. The author was an eye-witness himself of the
facts, and in addition he brings forward the experi-
ments of three eminent physicians, whose accounts
of the effects they produced agree in every respect
with his own. In the case he treated, the somnambu-
list saw a paper written by the Baron de Strombeck ;
and stated that the writing consisted of two paragraphs,
containing a certain number of lines. (i I went for the
paper," says he, " and counted the lines, and I shud-
dered as if I had seen a supernatural being." The
same ecstatic patient saw in a room, in an upper story, a
proof sheet from the printer laid on M. Strombeck's
bureau, when he himself was not aware of its having
been brought. She pointed out the particular situation
of objects placed behind her, although they had been
purposely deranged from their usual position. She
told to a minute the hour indicated by Dr. Schmidt's
watch, which differed from every other in the room.
She said that Dr. Marcard had some money about
him in a long green purse, such as were then quite
out of fashion, upon which it appeared that he had
been wearing this purse a very few days, and he
affirmed that he had never taken it out of his pocket,
excepting when at home.

The clairvoyance of magnetic somnambulists was
also unequivocally attested by the conjoint evidence of
the commissioners of the French Academy. They
carefully examined the fact, and in their report give
the following details. I was, it will be observed, in
the first case, myself the operator. On the 18th of
March, 1826, at half -past eight in the evening, M.
Petit was set asleep in one minute.

" The president of the committee, M. Bourdois,
ascertained that the number of pulsations diminished
at the rate of twenty-two in a minute, and that there
was even some irregularity in the pulse. M. Dupotet
after having put a bandage upon the eyes of the som-
nambulist, repeatedly directed towards him the points
of his fingers, at the distance of about two feet. Im-
mediately a violent contraction was perceived in the
hands and arms towards which the action was directed.
M. Dupotet having, in a similar manner, approxi-
mated his feet to those of M. Petit, always without
contact, the latter quickly withdrew his. He com-
plained of great pain and a burning heat in the limbs,
towards which the action had been directed. M.
Bourdois endeavoured to produce the same effects ;
and he succeeded, but less promptly, and in a more
feeble degree. This point being established, we pro-
ceeded to ascertain the lucidity (clairvoyance) of the
somnambulist. He having declared that he could not
see with the bandage, it was taken off ; but then we
determined to assure ourselves that the eyelids were
exactly closed. For this purpose, a candle was almost
constantly held, during the experiments, before the
eyes of M. Petit, at a distance of one or two inches ;
and several persons had their eyes continually fixed
upon his. None of us could perceive the slightest
separation of the eyelids. Mr. Ribes, indeed, re-
marked that their edges were super-imposed, so that
the eye-lashes crossed each other.

We also examined the state of the eyes, which
were forcibly opened without awakening the somnam-
bulist ; and we remarked that the pupil was turned
downwards, and directed towards the great angle of
the eye. After these preliminary observations, we
proceeded to verify the phenomena of vision with the
eyes closed.

" Mr. Ribes, member of the Academy, presented a
catalogue, which he took from his pocket. The som-
nambulist, after some efforts which seemed to fatigue
him, read very distinctly the words, Lavater. II est
Men difficile de connaitre les hommes. The last words
were printed in very small characters. A passport
was placed under his eyes ; he recognised it, and
called it a passe-homme. Some moments afterwards,
a port-d'armes was substituted, which we all know to
be in almost all respects similar to a passport, and the
blank side of it was presented to him. M. Petit, at
first, could only recognise that it was of a particular
figure, and very like the former. A few moments
afterwards, he told us what it was, and read distinctly
the words, De par le roi, and on the left, Port-d'armes.
Again, he was shewn an open letter ; he declared that
he could not read it, as he did not understand English.
In fact, it was an English letter.

" M. Bourdois took from his pocket a snuff-box,
upon which there was a cameo set in gold. At first
the somnambulist could not see it distinctly ; he said
that the gold setting dazzled him. When the setting
was covered with the fingers, he said that he saw the
emblem of fidelity. When pressed to tell what this
emblem was, he added, < I see a dog, he is as if on his
hind legs before an altar.' This, in fact, was what
was represented. A closed letter was presented to
him. He could not discover any of its contents. He
only followed the direction of the lines with his finger ;
but he easily read the address, although it contained
a pretty difficult name : A. M. de Kockenstroh.

" All these experiments were exceedingly fatiguing
to M. Petit. He was allowed to repose for an instant.
Then, as he was very fond of play, a game at cards
was proposed for his relaxation. As much as the
experiments of pure curiosity seemed to annoy him,
with so much the more ease and dexterity did he per-
form whatever gave him pleasure, and this he entered
into of his own accord. One of the gentlemen
present, M. Raynal, formerly inspector of the uni-
versity, played a game at piquet with M. Petit and
lost it. The latter handled his cards with the greatest
dexterity, and without making any mistake. We
attempted several times in vain to set him at fault, by
taking away or changing some of his cards. He
counted with surprising facility the points marked
upon his adversary's marking card.

" During all this time, we never ceased to examine
the eyes, and to hold a candle near them ; and we
always found them exactly closed. We remarked,
however, that the ball of the eye seemed to move
under the eyelids, and to follow the different motions
of the hands. Finally, M. Bourdois declared, that,
according to all human probability, and as far as it
was possible to judge by the senses, the eyelids were
exactly closed.

" While M. Petit was engaged in a second game at
piquet, M. Dupotet, upon the suggestion of M. Ribes,
directed his hand, from behind, towards the patient's
elbow, and the contraction previously observed again
took place. Afterwards, upon the suggestion of M.
Bourdois, he magnetised him from behind, and always
at the distance of more than a foot, with the intention
of awakening him. The keenness with which the
somnambulist was engaged in play, resisted this ac-
tion, which, without awakening, seemed to annoy and
disconcert him. He carried his hand several times to
the back of his head, as if he suffered pain in that
part. At length he fell into a state of somnolency,
which seemed like a slight natural sleep ; and some
one having spoken to him when in this state> he awoke
as if with a start. A few moments afterwards, M.
Dupotet, always placed near him, but at a certain dis-
tance, set him again asleep, and we recommenced our
experiments. M. Dupotet being desirous that not the
slightest shadow of doubt should remain with regard
to the nature of the physical influence exerted at will
upon the somnambulist, proposed to place upon M.
Petit as many bandages as we might think proper, and
to operate upon him while in this state. In fact, we
covered his face down to the nostrils with several
neckcloths ; we stopped up with gloves the cavities
formed by the prominence of the nose, and we covered
the whole with a black handkerchief, which descended,
in the form of a veil, as far as the neck. The attempts
to excite the magnetic susceptibility, by operating at
a distance in every way, were then renewed; and,
invariably, the same motions were perceived in the
parts towards which the hand or the foot were di-
rected.

" After these new experiments, M. Dupotet having
taken the bandages off, M. Petit played a game at
ecarte with him, in order to divert him. He played
with the same facility as before, and continued suc-
cessful. He became so eager at his game, that he
remained insensible to the influence of M. Bourdois,
who, while he was engaged in play, vainly attempted
to operate upon him from behind, and to make him
perform a command intimated merely by the will.

" After his game, the somnambulist rose, walked
across the room, putting aside the chairs, which he
found in his way, and went to sit down apart, in order
to take some repose at a distance from the inquisitive
experimentalists, who had fatigued him. There M.
Dupotet awakened him at the distance of several feet ;
but it seemed that he was not completely awake, for
some moments afterwards he again fell asleep, and it
was necessary to make fresh efforts in order to rouse
him effectually. When awake, he said he had no
recollection of anything that took place during his
sleep."

The commissioners also attest other cases of the
same kind. I quote, as before, the words of the re-
port.*

" Upon the 12th of January, your committee met
again at the house of M. Foissac, where there were
present M. E. Lascase, deputy, M. De ■ , aide-de-
camp to the king, and M. Segalas, member of the
Academy. M. Foissac told us that he was going to
set Paul asleep, that, in this state of somnambulism, a
finger should be applied to each of his closed eyes,
and that, in spite of this complete occlusion of the
eyelids, he should distinguish the colour of cards, that
he should read the title of a work, and even some
words or lines pointed out at random in the body of
the work. At the end of two minutes of magnetic
manipulations, Paul fell asleep. The eyelids being
kept closed, constantly and alternately by MM. Fou-
quier, Itard, Marc, and the Reporter, there was pre-
sented to him a pack of new cards,, from which the
paper covering bearing the government stamp was
torn off. The cards were shuffled, and Paul easily
and successively recognised the king of spades, the
ace of clubs, the queen of spades, the nine of clubs,
the seven of diamonds, the queen of diamonds, and
the eight of diamonds.

" While his eyelids were kept closed by M. Segalas,
there was presented to him a volume which the Re-
porter had brought along with him. He read upon
the title-page : Histoire de France.* He could not
read the two intermediate lines, and upon the fifth he
read only the name, Anquetil, which is preceded by
the preposition par. The book was opened at the
89th page, and he read in the first line — le nornhre de
ses — he passed over the word troupes, and continued :
au moment ou on le croyait occupe des plaisirs du car-
naval. He also read the running title Louis, but
could not read the Roman cypher which follows it.
A piece of paper was presented to him, upon which
were written the words, Agglutination and Magnetisme
Animal. He spelt the first, and pronounced the two
others. Finally, the proces-verbal of this sitting was
presented to him, and he read very distinctly the date,
and some words which were more legibly written than
the others. In all these experiments, the fingers were
applied to the whole of the commissure of both eyes,
by pressing down the upper upon the under eyelid ;
and we remarked that the ball of the eye was in a
constant rotatory motion, and seemed directed towards
the object presented to his vision.

" Upon the 2nd of February, Paul was placed in a
state of somnambulism in the house of Messrs. Scribe
and Bremard, merchants, Rue St.-Honore. The Re-
porter of the committee was the only member present
at this experiment. The eyelids were closed as before,
and Paul read, in the work entitled Les mille-et-
une nuits, the title-page, the word preface, and the
first line of the preface, with the exception of the
word pen. There was also presented to him a volume
entitled, Lettres de deux amies, par Madame Campan.
He distinguished on a print the figure of Napoleon ;
he pointed out the boots, and said that he also saw two
female figures. He then read currently the four first
lines of the third page, with the exception of the word
raviver. Finally, he recognised, without touching
them, four cards, which were successively presented
to him two and two, — these were, the king of spades
and the eight of hearts, the king and queen of
clubs.

" At another sitting, which took place upon the
13th of March following, Paul attempted in vain to
distinguish different cards which were applied to the
pit of the stomach ; but he read, with his eyes still
closed, in a book opened at random ; and at this time
it was M. Jules Cloquet who kept his eyes shut. The
reporter also wrote upon a slip of paper the words,
Maximilien Robespierre, which he read equally well."

Hitherto I have preferred adducing evidence
which does not rest altogether on my own authority ;
cases operated upon by other physicians, and witnessed
by careful and competent observers. It remains
for me, however, to state, that I have repeatedly
produced the same phenomena. Only a few years
ago, I magnetised a young woman who had been, for a
distressing complaint, under the treatment of almost
all the physicians in Paris. She was attended more
particularly by M. Fouquier, but after all was only
cured by magnetism in the somnambulic state. Any-
thing intended for her to read was applied to her sto-
mach, taking care to cover the paper with the hand,
upon which she told first one letter, then another, and
so on throughout the reading. But by an unaccount-
able bizarrerie, she always began to read a word by its
termination, and it was necessary to recompose every
word in order to understand it ; but, notwithstanding,
all the letters and words she named were perfectly
correct. She said that she felt during the operation
the presence of a weight at her stomach, which
fatigued her very much. Being questioned how she
could see, she could not distinctly state ; it seemed to
her neither like seeing nor feeling, but like something
between the two. One day a snuff-box, perfectly
closed, was put into her hands ; after having examined
it with much attention, she said that it contained in
its interior a very small bit of paper. Nobody pre-
sent was aware of the circumstance ; for the box had
not been opened since it had been bought, and the
gentleman to whom it belonged was by no means pre-
pared for this experiment. But the somnambule, con-
tinuing her observations, said that she saw something
written on the paper, and she then drew with her
finger the figures, of 2 and 5. On opening the
box the paper was found, in size one line and a half,
and upon it the two small figures which she had de-
scribed.

A host of additional facts of the same description are
in my possession, but the evidence already brought for-
ward will be considered conclusive to every impartial
mind. Not only does the magnetic somnambulist enjoy,
in this state of clairvoyance, a lucidity respecting sur-
rounding objects and passing events, but it extends still
further, inasmuch as they foresee, and distinctly foretell,
the day, the hour, even the minute, when certain events
will happen. This is termed the faculty of prevision,
and occurs only in the very highest degree of mag-
netic exaltation. It may appear incredible ; but let us
look to the facts. In the treatise on somnambulism by
Dr. Bertrand, we find that this physician witnessed
upwards of sixty convulsive fits of the most aggravated
nature, which it was absolutely impossible the patient
could have simulated, all of which, and their duration
to a minute, had been foretold during the magnetic
sleep. The same physician assures us that a somnam-
bulist told him a fortnight previously, that she should
be seized with a delirium which would last forty-three
hours, which happened according to her prediction ;
and he further satisfied himself that this somnambule
when awake had not the slightest recollection of what
she had said in her sleep. This prevision was also
noticed by Drs. Rostan and Georget, one of whom
observes : — " I have seen, positively seen, and repeat-
edly, somnambulists foretell, several hours or days —
even twenty days in advance, the precise hour and
minute of the accession of epileptic or hysterical
fits, and describe what would be their duration and in-
tensity, which came to pass in exact accordance with
the prediction." I have myself witnessed innumerable
instances of this faculty of prevision being developed
during the magnetic somnambulism, but, as my autho-
rity would doubtless be impugned as ex parte evidence,
I prefer again appealing to the report of the French
Academicians, the validity of whose testimony cannot
reasonably be challenged.

In the case of Paul, already cited, the commissioners
attest — " 1st, that he was cured, after every ordinary
medicinal resource had failed, of a paralysis, by the
treatment being adopted which he himself pre-
scribed during his somnambulism ; 2nd, that his
strength in the somnambulic state was remarkably in-
creased ; 3rd, that he gave us the most undoubted
proofs that he read with his eyes closed ; 4th, he pre-
dicted the period of his cure, and this cure took place.

" In the following case, we shall see this foresight
still more fully developed in a man belonging to the
lower class, quite ignorant, and who, assuredly, had
never heard of animal magnetism.

" Pierre Cazot, aged twenty years, by trade a hatter,
born of an epileptic mother, had been subject for ten
years to attacks of epilepsy, which occurred five or
six times a week, when he was admitted into the
Hopital de la Charite, about the beginning of the month
of August, 1827. He was immediately subjected to
the magnetic treatment, was set asleep at the third
sitting, and became somnambulist at the tenth, which
took place upon the 19th of August. It was then, at
nine o'clock in the morning, that he announced to us
that at four o'clock of the afternoon of that day he
should have an attack of epilepsy, but that it might
be prevented by magnetising him a little previously.
We preferred verifying the exactness of his prediction,
and no precaution was taken to prevent its fulfilment.
We contented ourselves with observing him, without
exciting in him any suspicion. At one o'clock, he
was seized with a violent head-ache. At three, he was
obliged to go to bed, and precisely at four the fit came
on. It lasted five minutes."

On many other occasions Cazot also foretold the
time, even to the minute, when his next fit would
occur. He was narrowly watched ; the Academicians
tried to deceive, and prevaricated with him, but
in vain, his prediction was always verified. Hence,
in the summary of the facts they witnessed, the
commissioners observe, towards the conclusion of their
report : —

" In two somnambulists we found the faculty of
foreseeing the acts of the organism more or less re-
mote, more or less complicated. One of them an-
nounced, repeatedly, several months previously, the
day, the hour, the minute, of the access, and of the
return of epileptic fits. The other announced the
period of his cure. Their previsions were realised
with remarkable exactness. They appeared to us to
apply only to acts or injuries of their organism."

The phenomena of magnetic somnambulism, it will
be observed, are thus very similar to those which
occur during natural somnambulism. Both states of
being arc equally mysterious and perplexing. — The
Baron Massias draws between them the following
diagnosis : —

" Artificial or magnetic somnambulism," says he,
" is the result of certain processes, consisting in ges-
tures, manipulations, and acts of volition, operating on
persons susceptible of exhibiting its phenomena ; it is,
as it were, inoculated by the magnetiser. The natural
state of the patient submitted to his action when sus-
ceptible of receiving it, is generally separated from
the subsequent magnetic state by a somnolence of a
few minutes. In the crisis a great number of faculties
lie dormant, which has caused animal magnetism to
retain the name of somnambulism, although magnet-
ism may sometimes be induced without sleep.

" Whereas natural somnambulism is exclusively
organic and personal, and places the somnambule in
connexion with no one but himself ; artificial som-
nambulism brings the somnambule in magnetic report
with the magnetiser, as well as those persons with
whom the latter establishes the communication.

" A part only of the intellectual faculties of the
somnambule remain awake ; they are all so in the
magnetic somnambule with regard to those with
whom he is in contact en rapport. The natural som-
nambule is impelled by his own imagination, and cer-
tain corporeal impressions ; the magnetic somnambule
wholly depends on the will and faculties of his mag-
netiser. The organisation of the magnetic somnam-
bule, that of his magnetiser, and of those persons
whom the latter brings in report with him by means
of a slight contact, are all, as it were, identified as one
and the same being ; so that the somnambule knows
inwardly what takes place in the system of another
person ; feels diseases which are not his own, and has
an intuitive instinct of the remedies applicable to
them. This it is which, to the unspeakable scandal
and indignation of classic medicine, gave birth to her
rival sister, under the name of magnetic medicine. The
magnetic somnambule is conscious of the state and
organisation of an absent person on merely touching
a vestment which has been worn, or an object which
has been touched, by the same person. He can either
recal or forget, at the will of his magnetiser, what he
has felt during the fit of somnambulism. His sensa-
tions and perceptions may, at the will of the magnet-
iser, be changed ; or, in other words, he will find
sweet that which is bitter, and vice versa. He may
also change his predilections and habitual dispositions.

" Sometimes, when the action of magnetism over-
powers the strength of the somnambule, or through
a certain predisposition of his own organs, he collapses
into a profound lethargy, bordering upon death.

" It might be thought that the intellectual faculties
of the somnambule, plunged in this state of complete
lethargy, are as inert and void as his bodily powers :
no such thing. There are thoughts, dreams, and
somnambulism, in somnambulism. On recovering
from his lethargy, and being replaced into his pre-
vious state of somnambulism, the crisiac relates all
the delightful and marvellous thoughts and sensations
lie has had during his apparent state of absolute insen-
sibility. What to the spectator was a scene of death,
to him was a new life, a hundredfold more intense
and spiritual than his ordinary mode of existence. A
reiteration of the same fit brings on a recurrence of
the same visions. When restored to the state of sim-
ple somnambulism, its individual memory returns
with it, to be only obliterated by a restoration to the
perfect waking state," &c*

But notwithstanding these observations of the
learned Baron, the psychical phenomena exhibited by
natural somnambulists are often of so high and lucid
a character, that the two states appear almost identi-
cal with each other ; in illustration of which I shall
here quote the case of a girl named Arron, a remark-
able natural somnambulist, which will be found in the
Journal de laMeuse for the 20th of September, 1835.

tt w e readily grant," says the account, « that most
of the statements circulated on the subject of natural
somnambulism are generally exaggerated. With the
view of ministering to the public taste for the mar-
vellous, truth has too often been clothed with most
absurd fables, exceeding by far the utmost boundary
of our belief. "But notwithstanding this, truth is
sometimes stranger than fiction ; and if the limits of
our intelligence do not allow us to comprehend what
to us appears supernatural, we should not on that
account reject as a mere fabrication any series of facts
supported by the testimony of grave and conscien-
tious observers coming forward and vouching for
their truth."

" Therefore, however wonderful the details respect-
ing the somnambulism of Arron, we cannot entertain
the least doubt of its authenticity, for we ourselves
derived it from a source entitled to our utmost and
most unlimited confidence."

" This girl, when plunged in a state of somnambulism,
answers with precision the questions put to her.
Though she be asleep, she perceives not only such
external objects as are around her, but also those
which are concealed ; and, what is still more surprising,
objects removed to a very great distance. Nay, she
does more, she can divine the thoughts of those who
put questions to her. Many physicians in this de-
partment went to pay her a visit, and they were all
amazed on witnessing a phenomenon which all their
science cannot explain."

A physician from Chartres saw her some time ago.
On being introduced to her, in company with several
other gentlemen, he questioned her, without being
able to obtain an answer. Thinking that if he was
alone with her, she might perhaps be induced to
speak, he requested the spectators to withdraw.
When they were both in private, the following con-
versation took place : —

" Marie," said he, " do you know me ? " — " Yes,
sir." "Who am I?" — "You are a physician."
" Whence do I come ? " — " From Chartres." " Where
is my house at Chartres ?" — "In a small street run-
ning down a declivity." " Can you see my house?"
— " Yes, sir." " Is there any company in it ? " —
" Yes, sir ; four ladies, one old, two middle-aged, and
one young lady." " For what purpose have I come
in this part of the country ? " — " To see a female
patient." "Where is her complaint?" — (Here she
pointed to the part affected, which we cannot just
now recollect.) " Where did I dine ? " — " At M.'s."
" Was there a good dinner ? " — " Yes, sir." " Could
you tell me what dishes we had?" — "Certainly."
(She names every dish and its particular place on the
table.) " What do I hold in my hand ? " — " A small
wooden box." " What does it contain ?" — " Sharp
little iron tools." " Now what have I in my hand ? "
— "Some money." "How much?" — (She names
the sum.) "In what coins?" — (She specifies the
various coins.) " Can you tell me my thought at
this moment ?"—-" Yes, sir." "Say it." — " I dare
not ; I must not tell you." " Well, I will tell you :
I think of giving you this money." — " So you do, sir ;
but I could not say so." All these answers were per-
fectly correct. Other answers no less surprising than
the preceding have been reported to us, but we shall
confine ourselves to these.

" Sceptics (and less would suffice to provoke scepti-
cism) will, no doubt, exclaim that it is impossible to
credit such assertions ; but let them inquire into the
evidence, and they will then come to the conviction
that we state nothing but the truth."

Hence from the facts above adduced, which I
hold to be incontrovertibly established, it will appear
that the following are some of the more ostensible
psychical phenomena which magnetic somnambulists
exhibit.

1st. While the organs of the senses are in a state of
complete insensibility, unexcitable by any external
stimuli, they mentally take cognizance of the condi-
tions and relations of surrounding objects, through
some other channel than the organs through which
such impressions are usually conveyed.

2nd. There is in many cases an obvious vicarious
transference of the senses from their appropriate or-
gans to other parts of the nervous system, as to the
tips of the fingers, epigastrium, and other parts of the
body.

3rd. The lucidity of their vision penetrates through
intervening opaque objects, and even takes cognizance
of events passing at a distance.

4th. They possess the faculty of self-intuition, that
is to say, a clear insight into the normal or abnormal
condition of their own organisation, and they perceive
and describe with exactness the internal condition also
of those with v/hom they may be en rapport.

5th. They appear endowed with a knowledge be-
yond that which they ordinarily possess, and prescribe
for themselves, as well as for those with whom they
are en rapport, remedies for such complaints as they
may be afflicted with ; and these are generally found
successful.

6th. Their lucid vision often extends beyond the
present existence, and they foretell, with circumstantial
minuteness, events which will happen in connexion
with their own organisation ; even the day and hour —
the very moment — when such predictions will be veri-
fied is accurately specified.

Lastly. On recovering from their somnambulism,
they remember nothing which occurred during the
magnetic state ; but when again thrown into somnam-
bulism, the memory between the two magnetic states
is continuous.

These may appear extraordinary assertions, but the
apparent incredibility of the facts will be very much
diminished when it is found that analogous, if not
identical, phenomena are often developed in abnormal
conditions of the human body. To these states I can
only briefly advert.

I. Physical insensibility. — In many diseases, in cata-
lepsy, epilepsy, apoplexy, paralysis, syncope, &c, a
complete state of insensibility is observed ; but
whether persons in such apparent states of insensibility
may not possess some internal consciousness, can-
not possibly be determined. As a general principle, in
proportion as the mind energises itself within, the
sensibility of the body becomes diminished. The
soldier, on the field of battle, feels not his wounds ;
the exulting martyr, in the hour of execution, knows
not the death-pang that rends his heart ; the excited
mother saves her child by rushing herself through the
flames unhurt. There is a mastery here, a triumph of
mind over matter which bears down and annihilates
the very apprehension of physical suffering. Even
the poor maniac, whom madness is supposed to torture
in proportion as his mind is excited, manifests insen-
sibility to pain ; he may be flagellated while he raves,
but feels not the stripes which are inflicted until the
paroxysm is over. He then complains of soreness, and
is often at a loss to explain how it has occurred. The
ordeal of torture to which religious enthusiasts volun-
tarily subject themselves, without manifesting the
slightest sign of pain, proves the insensibility which
may be superinduced by the sustained energy of the
will. This state is finely described by Schlegel, in
his admirable work on the Philosophy of History. He
there presents us with a graphic picture of the Indian
Yogi, or penitent, who, absorbed in mystic contem-
plation, remains for years often fixed immovably to
a single spot. (i In order," says he, "to give a lively
representation of a phenomenon so strange to us, which
appears totally incredible, and almost impossible,
although it has been repeatedly attested by eye-wit-
nesses, and is a well-ascertained historical fact, I shall
extract from the Drama of Sacontala, by the Poet
Calidas, a description of a Yogi, remarkable for its
vivid accuracy, or, to use the expression of the Ger-
man Commentator, its ' fearful beauty.' King Dush-
manta inquires of Indras Charioteer the sacred abode
of him whom he seeks, and to this the charioteer re-
plies — < A little beyond the grove you see a pious
Yogi, motionless as a pollard, holding his thick bushy
hair, and fixing his eyes on the solar orb. Mark ! His
body is half covered with white ant's edifices, made of
raised clay ; the skin of a snake supplies the place of the
sacerdotal thread, and part of it girds his loins ; a
number of knotty plants encircle and wound his neck,
and surrounding birds' nests conceal his shoulders.' "
" We must not," continues Schlegel, " take this for
the invention of fancy, or the exaggeration of the
poet ; the accuracy of this testimony is confirmed by
innumerable eye-witnesses, who recount the same fact,
and in precisely the same colours. In the Indian
forests and deserts there are many hundreds of these
hermits, — these strange human phenomena of the
highest intellectual abstraction and delusion. For-
merly such accounts would have been regarded as in-
credible, and beyond the bounds of possibility ; but
such conjectures can be of no avail against historical
facts, repeatedly attested, and undeniably proved.
Now that men are better acquainted with the won-
derful flexibility of the human organisation, and with
those marvellous powers which slumber concealed
within it, they are less disposed to form light and
hasty decisions on phenomena of this description. The
whole is indeed a magical, intellectual, self-exaltation,
accomplished by the energy of the will ; and this con-
centration of the mind, when carried to excess, may
lead, not merely to a figurative, but to a real self-
annihilation."*

The state of intellectual exstase, accompanied by
an absolute extinction of physical sensibility, induced
by animal magnetism, is precisely analogous to this
mysterious state of being. Here also I may observe
that the criteria of this profound insensibility de-
mand attention, inasmuch as it is quite true that
needles may, as in the operation of acupuncturation,
be plunged into the muscles of a limb without
exciting pain ; that the sensibility of some persons
with a slow circulation, or leuco-phlegmatic habit,
may be often remarkably obtuse ; that some may be
sensible of pain, and yet command sufficient energy
of mind to suppress any outward manifestation of it.
Yet, notwithstanding all this, when we find that a
glare of light thrown suddenly upon the eye excites
no contraction of the pupil ; that fuming ammonia
introduced into the nasal passages does not excite
sneezing ; that the report of a pistol unexpectedly
fired close upon the ear does not induce even a shud-
der, or any appearance of sensation ; it is impossible
to resist the evidence of there being in these organs
a complete extinction of all physical sensibility.

This state of insensibility, accompanied by som-
nambulic phenomena, sometimes arises spontaneously,
and without any ostensible magnetic intervention.
" I lately," says Dr. Abercrombie, the present emi-
nent physician in Edinburgh, had u under my care a
lady who is liable to an affection of this kind (somnam-
bulism), which comes on repeatedly during the day,
and continues from ten minutes to an hour at a time.
Without any warning, her body becomes motionless,
her eyes open, fixed, and entirely insensible, and she
becomes totally unconscious of any external impres-
sion. She has been frequently seized while playing
on the piano, and has continued to play over and over
a part of a tune with perfect correctness, but without
advancing beyond a certain point. On one occasion
she was seized after she had begun to play from the
book a piece of music which was new to her. During
the paroxysm she continued the part she had played,
and repeated it five or six times with perfect correct-
ness ; but on coming out of the attack, she could not
play it without her book.*

II. Clairvoyance, or vision without the eyes. — In
the most simple cases of natural somnambulism this
phenomenon occurs. The person who rises in the
night, dresses himself, moves from room to room, and
performs with nicety and precision a variety of minute
actions, presents us with this anomaly in its most
familiar form. There are few sceptics who do not
acknowledge cases of this kind ; for after all, somnam-
bulism is a very common occurrence, and is observed
to be hereditary in many families. Yet when this
faculty becomes more perfectly developed, manifest-
ing itself by finer discriminations, the very same phi-
losophers, forgetting the fact which is universally
accredited in domestic life, open their eyes with as-
tonishment, and declare the whole thing utterly in-
credible. This is unreasonable. It is a notorious fact,
that all sleep-walkers are clairvoyants.

It has been said, however, that this mode of per-
ception cannot exactly be called seeing, inasmuch as
when such somnambulists are closely examined how
it is that they perceive the relations of external ob-
jects, they all agree in answering that it is by a kind
of inward feeling which they are unable to explain.
A somnambulist of Fischer assured him that he saw
his internal organs, not as with the eyes, but he could
not describe the manner in which he perceived them.
A patient of Hufeland's said, " I see" when she was in
the highest degree of lucidity only, at other times she
generally used the expression " I feel," this or that
part, or this or that change, &c. A patient of Gmelin's
said she did not see, but feel, and with great delicacy,
both internally and externally. In the magnetic
sleep, Scherb's patient also declared that her sensations
were rather those of feeling than of sight, and that this
peculiar feeling during that state was much more
acute and delicate than when awake. A cataleptic
patient of Despine's said to those who were en rapport
with her, " You think that I do not know what passes
around me, but you are mistaken ; I see nothing, yet
I feel something which makes an impression upon me,
but which I cannot explain."* These are curious facts.
How far the sense of feeling may, under a peculiar
state of exaltation, take cognizance of the outward
forms and conditions of material objects remains yet
to be determined ; certain it is, that in well-authen-
ticated cases, both of natural and magnetic somnam-
bulism, individuals, through some other channel than
the eye itself, perceive, discriminate, and perform a
variety of actions which could not be accomplished
without vision being in some way or other engaged.
In the animal economy it is a physiological law
that one organ shall assume a preternatural activity
in order to supply the function of another whose
structure may be deranged ; thus it is clearly proved
that the liver acts vicariously with the lungs ; the
skin with the kidneys. It is the office of the lungs to
throw out of the system, during expiration, carbon-
aceous matter ; and when, therefore, this organ is dis-
eased, the liver assumes, in a manner, its function,
and throws off the surplus carbon with the biliary
secretion. Hence the frequency of diseases of the
liver in those persons who have resided in tropical
countries, where, owing to the climate, the lungs may
have become affected. In like manner the vessels of
the skin, acting vicariously with those of the kidneys,
throw off the watery parts of the blood when the
secretion of this organ has, from any cause, been ob-
structed. Here there is an unquestionable trans-
ference of function between the grosser organs of
organic life — and why should not the higher organs
of sense, under certain abnormal conditions, act
on a similar principle, vicariously with each other ?
It is well known that persons who unhappily are
blind and deaf acquire a preternaturally acute sense
of touch, so that they are able to discriminate by feel-
ing, properties of bodies which could not be so appre-
ciated by other persons. This, however, is only a
very subordinate physical manifestation of that law of
derivation to which I here allude ; it may, neverthe-
less, be the initiatory condition of that transference
of the senses which is in the magnetic state much
more perfected.

III. Transference of the senses. — The clairvoyant
faculty sometimes develops itself locally, requiring
that the object to be perceived shall be placed in juxta-
position with certain parts of the body, as with the
epigastrium, the tips of the fingers, the forehead, or
even back part of the head. It is not during the
magnetic somnambulism only that this extraordinary
mode of perception develops itself ; it occurs often
in catalepsy and hysterical affections. A cataleptic
patient of Petetin distinguished in succession several
cards which had been slipped under the bed-clothes,
and laid upon her stomach ; she told the hour of a
watch held in the closed hand of an inquirer ; and
recognised, in like manner, an ancient medal grasped
in the hand of one of the spectators. Another day
the same patient recognised a letter placed under the
waistcoat of M. Petetin, then a purse which had been
slipped there by a sceptic ; she also indicated the
number of gold and silver coins contained in each
end of the purse. After this experiment, she an-
nounced that she was about to tell successively what
each person present possessed about him most remark-
able, which she actually did. She also perceived,
through a screen, that Madame Petetin on going out
took her husband's cloak, and made him discover the
mistake.

Jourdain Guibelet relates the case of a young lady
labouring under hysteria, who, during her fits, which
lasted upwards of twenty-four hours, lay to all appear-
ance in a state of absolute insensibility ; yet were the
organs of speech under no impediment ; she discoursed
with so much judgment and refined wit, that it seemed
as if her disease had sharpened her intellect, and been
more liberal to her than health itself. No one could
have reasoned with so much precision, or discoursed
with so much fluency. It might be said that the body
being as it were dead, under the violence of the dis-
ease, the soul retired into her chamber, where she
fully enjoyed all her privileges. The conceptions of
the soul in that state are the more accurate and re-
fined in proportion as she is more free from the tram-
mels of the body and of matter.

Bertrand relates the case of a lady, Mademoiselle A.,
who exhibited a remarkable singularity as to the way
in which she received sensations either by the pit of the
stomach, fingers, or toes. When an odorous substance
was applied to the tips of the fingers, she cried " Ah
que cela sent bon !" and at the same time she inhaled
the air with her nostrils. It was the same in respect
to sight ; when an object was placed on the palm of
the hand, the soles of the feet, or the epigastrium,
if she said, " Je ne vois pas bien," she rubbed her
eyes with her hand, as if awake.*

IV. Exaltation of knowledge. — That persons dur-
ing magnetic somnambulism possess a knowledge
beyond that which they possess in their waking state,
is also certain. It is a repetition of the same pheno-
menon which occurs in natural somnambulism ; fur-
thermore, it has been observed that on the accession
of certain diseases, especially fever attended with head
symptoms, the intellectual faculties are preternaturally
acute. This is an old observation of physicians. It
is stated by Levinus Lemnius, (lib. 2, cap. 2, Collect,
de Occult Nat. Miraculis), that he himself healed
some sick persons who in their fits of fever pronounced
an oration as if it were deeply studied, and were in
all respects most accomplished, yet who in health were
little better than idiots. Cardan (De Rerum Variet.,
lib. 8, cap. 43), relates that Phliarius Poletanus, an
Italian, distempered in body, spoke the Dutch tongue,
which he had never learned ; and that after passing several
worms, and recovering, he lost that ability, and could
then only speak his own language. Petrus Apponensis
(Comment, at Problem 1, sect. 3, de Aristot.), men-
tions a woman who in a melancholy sickness spoke
Latin ; yet on recovering could not speak a word
of it. Sigebertus Continuator says, that Norbert of
Nigella, when grievously sick, did, from the devil,
repeat the Canticles from one end to the other. A
host of authorities might be cited to the same
effect.

Bertrand mentions two female somnambulists who
expressed themselves, during the paroxysm, very dis-
tinctly in Latin ; they had in their waking state, how-
ever, only a very imperfect knowledge of it. An
ignorant servant girl, mentioned by Dr. Dewar, during
paroxysms of this kind shewed an astonishing know-
ledge of geography and astronomy ; and expressed
herself in her own language in a manner which,
though often ludicrous, shewed an understanding of
the subject. The alternations of the seasons, for ex-
ample, she explained, by saying that the earth was set
agee ; it was afterwards discovered that her notions
on these subjects had been derived from overhearing a
tutor giving instructions to the young people of the
family. A woman who was some time ago in the infir-
mary of Edinburgh, on account of an affection of this
kind, during the paroxysms mimicked the manner of
the physicians, and repeated correctly some of their
prescriptions in Latin.*

V. Prevision. — This, which is the highest degree of
clairvoyance, has been occasionally observed by phy-
sicians to occur on approaching death. " In dying,"
says Dr. Stellung, " the person loses his consciousness ;
he falls into a perfect trance — a profound sleep. As
long as the mass of the blood is warm, and not con-
gealed, all the members of the body continue pliant,
and as long as this is the case the soul remains in it ;
but as soon as the brain and nerves lose their warmth
and become frigid, they can no longer attract the
etherial part of the soul, or retain it any longer ; it
therefore disengages itself, divests itself of its earthly
bonds, and awakes. It is now in the state of a clear-
seeing magnetic sleeper, and being entirely separated
from the body, its state is much more perfect ; it has
a complete recollection of its earthly state from begin-
ning to end ; it remembers those it has left behind,
and can form to itself a very clear idea of the visible
world and its objects ; viz., that part of it to which it
belongs, or to which it has here adapted itself. The
candid inquirer will easily find that all this follows
logically and justly from magnetic experiments, if he
be acquainted with them, and duly consider them."

Aretceus, in his chapter on the Causes of Ardent
Fever, notices this faculty in the following terms : —
" The mind is serene, every sense clear, the under-
standing subtle, the judgment prophetic ; for the pa-
tients see, in the first place, that their end is approach-
ing, and then they predict to the bystanders coming
events. Sometimes people think them talking deli-
riously, but when their predictions come to pass,
are amazed. Some hold converse with the dead, whom
they alone perceive as present, from a subtle and fine
perception, or perhaps from a prescient spirit which
announces to them the men in whose company they
will shortly be ; for though previously in the thick of
humours and darkness, the disease having drawn them
out and cleared the mist from their eyes, they describe
these airy visions, and with a spirit unencumbered
(leur ame ctant, pour ainsi dire, mise a nud), become
infallibly prophetic. They who have arrived at this
pitch of subtlety of the humours and understanding,
rarely recover, for the vital power is already melting
into air."*

Lucidity and prevision, occurring as symptomatic of
disease, were noticed by Hippocrates, who therefore
called melancholia, monomania, phrensy, and certain
other diseases of the same class, divine, because " in
them," said he, "men without any learning speak Latin,
make verses, discourse with eloquence and wisdom,
predict secret and future events ; and this they do,
albeit, they are ignorant rustics, or even idiots ; and
after being cured they return to their former state."
" In ecstacy," says Aristotle, " the mind darts forward
through the relations of causes and effects, seizes the
whole concatenation with the quickest glance, and
submits it to the imagination in order to infer from it
the probability of future events. Melancholy persons,
on account of the vehemence of their imagination, are
generally fittest for such conjectural operations." Sau-
vage, in his Nosologie, quotes a passage of Descartes,
in which he relates that two hysterical young females
used to foretel to each other the various crises of their
respective disease. He also refers to Cavaliers, who
states that he saw, in Frejus, " four hydrophobic pa-
tients, who had foretold the day, and even the hour, of
their death, and who died on the very day and hour
predicted. I, myself," says he, " saw a sexagenarian
predicting the day of his death one month in advance ;
and he died of an epial fever on the day predicated."
Other facts of the same description have been attested
by Deseze ; and recently by Professor Moreau de la
Sarthe, in an article headed Medecine Mentale.

During ordinary sleep, or natural somnambulism,
this same faculty often developes itself ; hence it is
well observed by Hippocrates, that " he who could
obtain a perfect knowledge of the various conjectures
that may be inferred from dreams, might reap from it
considerable benefit in his intercourse with mankind.
When the body is at rest, the soul begins to move of
her own accord, and, receding gradually from the dif-
ferent parts of the body, retires and concentrates her-
self in her own seat. Here she performs all the func-
tions of the body ; for the body, when overcome by
sleep, feels nothing ; it is then the soul that wakes,
knows, sees what is to be seen, hears what is to be
heard, feels, grieves, and reasons more readily, and
with greater facility. During sleep she performs all
the functions, her own as well as those of the body.
If, therefore, any one could comprehend with a sound
judgment this peculiar state of the soul in sleep, he
might flatter himself of having made an immense
stride in the knowledge of wisdom."

" We should not wonder," says Plutarch, " if the
soul which can grasp that which is no more, is also
able to foresee that which lies unborn in futurity.
The future is even much more interesting and con-
genial to the soul ; she longs after the future, and is
already grasping it at the point of transition from the
past, to which she is connected only by retrospection.
Souls, therefore, have this innate faculty, but it is
feeble and obscure, and acts but with difficulty. How-
ever, in some individuals, she suddenly unfolds her
powers, either in dreams, or when the body happens
to be in a favourable position for enthusiasm, and
when the rational and contemplative part of its essence,
freed from the impression of present scenes by which
her action is disturbed, directs the imagination towards
the prevision of the future." He then adds, " Men
when they are awake have but one and the same world
common to them all ; but in their sleep, each has a
private world of his own." " During sleep," observes
Tertullian, " is revealed to us, not only what pertains
to honour and riches, but likewise what pertains to
diseases, remedies, and cures." So also Jamblichus,
who, in his chapter on dreams, remarks, — " When we
are in a perfect state of sleep, we cannot observe so
clearly and distinctly what occurs to us in our com-
mon dreams, as when the Deity sends them to us in a
sort of unconscious sleep ; for then we perceive much
more clearly the truth and reality of those things
which we have been accustomed to do when awake ;
by which means such visions constitute the principal
species of divination. And, in fact, the soul has then
a double existence ; the one connected with the body,
and the other abstracted from all corporeality. When
we awake, we spend most of our time in that life which
is inherent in the body, except sometimes when we
are totally separated therefrom ; but in sleep, our
mind may be entirely freed from the corporeal fetters,
which keep it, as it were, a prisoner."

Hence this faculty of prevision has been in all ages
observed, and is attested by a concurrence of evi-
dence which is irresistible. Whether it arise, as these
philosophers conjectured, from any exaltation, or un-
folding of the soul, or psychical power which animates
the breast of every human being ; or whether it pro-
ceed from the nervous fluid, is of little consequence
in respect to the result ; but it appears to me evident,
that in every case it is owing to an accumulation of
the magnetic fluid in the brain, — in the concatenation
of the nerves of the solar plexus ;* or in some other
part of the nervous system, and this may occur na-
turally during the progress of certain diseases, as
mania, fever, hysteria, 8cc, or during sleep, or it may
be produced by magnetisation. However the cause
may vary, a similar pathognomonic state being induced,
the effects are identical.

Lastly. The continuity of memory between the
paroxysms. — This anomaly often occurs in disease.
It is thus noticed by Dr. Abercrombie, whose acute
powers of observation and veracity are universally
esteemed : —

* It may be proper to apprise unprofessional readers of what
is meant by the solar plexus. The nervous system of vertebrate
animals is composed of the brain, the spinal cord, and nerves pro-
ceeding from, or, more properly speaking, in connexion with them.
But besides these there is a system of nerves called the sympathetic,
which supply the interior organs of the body. The interlacing, or
great concatenation, of these in the neighbourhood of the stomach,
or epigastrium, is the solar plexus here referred to. It should be
added, that the functions of these nerves are not understood, and
magnetisers have observed, that the effects of animal magnetism
are more speedily marked in this than in any other region of the
body.

" Another very singular phenomenon presented by
some instances . of this affection, is what has been
called, rather incorrectly, a state of double conscious-
ness. It consists in the individual recollecting, during
a paroxysm, circumstances which occurred in a former
attack, though there was no remembrance of them
during the interval. This, as well as various other
phenomena connected with the affection, is strikingly
illustrated in a case described by Dr. Dyce, of Aber-
deen, in the Edinburgh Philosophical Transactions.
The patient was a servant girl, and the affection began
with fits of somnolency, which came upon her sud-
denly during the day, and from which she could at
first be roused by shaking, or by being taken out
into the open air. She soon began to talk a great
deal during the attacks regarding things which seemed
to be passing before her as a dream ; and she was not,
at this time, sensible of anything that was said to her.

In her subsequent paroxysms, she began
to understand what was said to her, and to answer
with a considerable degree of consistency," &c. " She
also became capable of following her usual employments
during the paroxysm ; at one time she laid out the table
correctly for breakfast, and repeatedly dressed herself
and the children of the family, her eyes remaining
shut the whole time. The remarkable circumstance
was now discovered, that, during the paroxysm, she
had a distinct recollection of what took place in former
paroxysms, though she had no remembrance of it
during the intervals. At one time, she was taken to
church while under the attack, and there behaved with
propriety, evidently attending to the preacher ; and she
was at one time so much affected as to shed tears. In
the interval, she had no recollection of having been at
church ; but, in the next paroxysm, she gave a most
distinct account of the sermon, and mentioned par-
ticularly the part of it by which she had been so much
affected." — "During the attack, her eye-lids were
generally half shut ; her eyes sometimes resembled
those of a person affected with amaurosis, — that is,
with a dilated and insensible state of the pupil ; but
sometimes they were quite natural." — " At one time,
during the attack, she read distinctly a portion of a
book which was presented to her : and she often sung,
both sacred and common pieces, incomparably better,
Dr. Dyce affirms, than she could do in the waking
state."*

Dr. Abercrombie also relates the following analo-
gous history. " A girl aged seven years, an orphan
of the lowest rank, residing in the house of a farmer,
by whom she was employed in tending cattle, was
accustomed to sleep in an apartment separated by a
very thin partition from one which was frequently
occupied by an itinerant fiddler. This person was a
musician of very considerable skill, and often spent a
part of the night in performing pieces of a refined
description ; but his performance was not taken notice
of by the child except as a disagreeable noise. After
a residence of six months in this family, she fell into
bad health, and was removed to the house of a bene-
volent lady, where, on her recovery, after a protracted
illness, she was employed as a servant. Some years
after she came to reside with this lady, the most beau-
tiful music was often heard in the house during the
night, which excited no small interest and wonder in
the family ; and many a waking hour was spent in
endeavours to discover the invisible minstrel. At
length, the sound was traced to the sleeping-room of
the girl, who was found fast asleep, but uttering from
her lips a sound exactly resembling the sweetest sounds
of a small violin. On further observation it was found,
that, after being about two hours in bed, she became
restless and began to mutter to herself; — she then
uttered sounds precisely resembling the tuning of a
violin, and at length, after some prelude, dashed off
into elaborate pieces of music, which she performed
in a clear and accurate manner, and with a sound
exactly resembling the most delicate modulations of
that instrument. During the performance she some-
times stopped, made the sound of re-tuning her in-
strument, and then began exactly where she had
stopped in the most correct manner."

" After a year or two, her music was not confined
to the imitation of the violin, but was often exchanged
for that of a piano of a very old description, which
she was accustomed to hear in the house where she
now lived ; and she then also began to sing, imitating
exactly the voices of several ladies of the family. In
another year from this time, she began to talk a great
deal in her sleep, in which she seemed to fancy herself
instructing a younger companion. She often descanted
with the utmost fluency and correctness on a variety
of topics, both political and religious, the news of the
day, the historical parts of scripture, public characters,
and particularly the characters of members of the
family and their visitors. In these discussions she
shewed the most wonderful discrimination, often com-
bined with sarcasm, and astonishing powers of mi-
micry. Her language through the whole was fluent
and correct, and her illustrations often forcible and
even eloquent. She was fond of illustrating her sub-
jects by what she called a fable, and in these her
imagery was both appropriate and elegant. She was
by no means, says my informant, limited in her range,
— Bonaparte, Wellington, Blucher, and all the kings
of the earth, figured among the phantasmagoria of her
brain ; and all were animadverted upon with such
freedom from restraint, as often made me think poor
Nancy had been transported into Madame Genlis'
Palace of Truth. The justness and truth of her re-
marks on all subjects, excited the utmost astonish-
ment in those who were acquainted with her limited
means of acquiring information. She has been known
to conjugate correctly Latin verbs, which she had pro-
bably heard in the school-room of the family ; and she
was once heard to speak several sentences very cor-
rectly in French, — at the same time stating that she
heard them from a foreign gentleman, whom she had
met accidently in a shop. Being questioned on this
subject when awake, she remembered having seen the
gentleman, but could not repeat a word of what he
said. During her paroxysms, it was almost impossible
to awake her, and when her eyelids were raised, and
a candle brought near the eye, the pupil seemed in-
sensible to the light. For several years, she was,
during the paroxysms, entirely unconscious of the
presence of other persons ; but, about the age of six-
teen, she began to observe those who were in the
apartment, and she could tell correctly their numbers,
though the utmost care was taken to have the room
darkened. She now also became capable of answer-
ing questions that were put to her, and of noticing
remarks made in her presence ; and with regard to
both, she shewed astonishing acuteness. Her obser-
vations, indeed, were often of such a nature, and cor-
responded so accurately with characters and events,
that by the country-people she was believed to be en-
dowed with supernatural powers.

" During the whole period of this remarkable affec-
tion, which seems to have gone on for ten or eleven
years, she was, when awake, a dull, awkward girl, very
slow in receiving any kind of instruction, though
much care was bestowed upon her ; and, in point of
intellect, she was much inferior to the other servants
of the family. In particular, she shewed no kind of
turn for music. She did not appear to have any re-
collection of what had passed during her sleep ; but,
during her nocturnal ramblings, she was more than
once heard to lament her infirmity of speaking in her
sleep, adding, how fortunate it was that she did not
sleep among the other servants, as they teased her
enough about it as it was."

Here, also, I may adduce the following interesting
case, which occurred in a small town in Germany, and
is thus related by the late S. T. Coleridge : — « A
young woman, of four or five and twenty, who could
neither read nor write, was seized with a nervous
fever, during which, according to the asseverations of
all the priests and monks of the neighbourhood, she
became possessed, and as it appeared, by a very
learned devil. She continued incessantly talking
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, in very pompous tones,
and with most distinct enunciation. This possession
was rendered more probable by the known fact that
she was or had been an heretic. Voltaire humorously
advises the Devil to decline all acquaintance with
medical men ; and it would have been more to his
reputation if he had taken this advice in the present
instance. The case had attracted the particular at-
tention of a young physician, and by his statement
many eminent physiologists and psychologists visited
the town and cross-examined the case on the spot.
Sheets full of her ravings were taken down from her
own mouth, and were found to consist of sentences
coherent, intelligible each for itself, but with little or
no connexion with each other. Of the Hebrew a small
portion only could be traced to the Bible ; the re-
mainder seemed to be in the Rabbinical dialect. All
trick or conspiracy was out of the question. Not only
had the young woman ever been an harmless simple
creature ; but she was evidently labouring under a
nervous fever. In the town in which she had been
resident for many years as a servant in different
families, no solution presented itself. The young
physician, however, determined to trace her past life
step by step ; for the patient herself was incapable of
returning a rational answer. He at length succeeded
in discovering the place where her parents lived ;
travelled thither, found them dead, but an uncle sur-
viving, and from him learned that the patient had
been charitably taken by an old protestant pastor at
nine years old, and had remained with him some
years, even until the old man's death. Of this pastor
the uncle knew nothing, but that he was a very good
man. With great difficulty, and after much search,
our young medical philosopher discovered a niece of
the pastor's, who had lived with him as his house-
keeper, and had inherited his effects. She remem-
bered the girl related that her venerable uncle had
been too indulgent, and could not bear to hear the girl
scolded; that she was willing to have kept her, but
that after her patron's death she herself refused to
stay. Anxious inquiries were then, of course, made
concerning the pastor's habits, and the solution of the
phenomenon was soon obtained. For it appeared that
it had been the old man's custom for years to walk
up and down a passage of his house into which the
kitchen door opened, and to read to himself with a
loud voice out of his favourite books. A consider-
able number of these were still in the niece's posses-
sion. She added that he was a very learned man,
and a great Hebraist. Among the books were found
a collection of Rabbinical writings, together with
several of the Greek and Latin fathers ; and the
physician succeeded in identifying so many passages
with those taken down at the young woman's bed-
side, that no doubt could remain in any rational mind
concerning the true origin of the impressions made
on her nervous system.

" This authenticated case," continues Coleridge,
" furnishes both proof and instance, that reliques of sen-
sation may exist for an indefinite time in a latent state
in the very same order in which they were originally
impressed ; and as we cannot rationally suppose the
feverish state of the brain to act in any other way than
as a stimulus, this fact (and it would not be difficult
to adduce several of the same kind) contributes to
make it even probable that all thoughts are in them-
selves imperishable ; and that if the intelligent faculty
should be rendered more comprehensive, it would re-
quire only a different and apportioned organisation,
the body celestial instead of the body terrestrial, to
bring before every human soul the collective expe-
rience of its whole past experience. And this per-
chance is the dread book of judgment, in whose mys-
terious hieroglyphics every idle word is recorded ;*
yea, in the very nature of a living spirit it may be
more possible that heaven and earth should pass
away, than a single thought should be loosened or
lost from that living chain of causes to all whose
links, conscious or unconscious, the free-will our only
absolute itself is co-extensive and co-present. But not
now dare I longer discourse of this, waiting for a
loftier mood and a nobler subject, warned from within
and from without that it is profanation to speak of
these mysteries."*

* This same idea is thus beautifully expressed by Mr. De
Quincy, in his " Opium Eater;" where, in describing his dreams,
he observes : — The minutest incidents of childhood, or forgotten
scenes of later years, were often revived : I could not be said to
recollect them ; for if I had been told of them when waking, I
should not have been able to acknowledge them as parts of my
past experience. But placed as they were before me, in dreams
like intuitions, and clothed in all their evanescent circumstances
and accompanying feelings, I recognised them instantaneously. I
was once told by a near relative of mine, that having in her child-
hood fallen into a river, and being on the very verge of death
but for the critical assistance which reached her, she saw in a
moment her whole life, in its minutest incidents, arrayed before
her simultaneously as in a mirror ; and she had a faculty de-
veloped as suddenly for comprehending the whole and every part.
This, from some opium experiences of mine, I can believe ; I
have, indeed, seen the same thing asserted twice in modern books,
and accompanied by a remark which I am convinced is true; viz.,
that the dread book of account, which the Scriptures speak of,
is, in fact, the mind itself of each individual. Of this, at least, I
feel assured, that there is no such thing as forgetting possible to
the mind ; a thousand accidents may and will interpose a veil
between our present consciousness and the secret inscriptions on
the mind ; accidents of the same sort will also rend away
this veil; but alike, whether veiled or unveiled, the inscription
remains for ever ; just as the stars seem to withdraw before the
common light of day, whereas, in fact, we all know that it is
the light which is drawn over them as a veil — and that they are
waiting to be revealed, when the obscuring daylight shall have
withdrawn.

From the facts which I have now adduced, it is
evident that, however extraordinary they may appear,
phenomena are developed in certain abnormal con-
ditions of the body which are similar to those that
occur during magnetic somnambulism, and this cir-
cumstance alone should suspend the summary judg-
ment of those who are inclined to disbelieve in the
possibility of such facts ever occurring ; for it is not
more marvellous that an utter extinction of physical
sensibility, somniloquism, clairvoyance, prevision, &c.
should appear during magnetic than during natural
somnambulism. Both states are extraordinary, but
neither incredible ; and after all, it should be remem-
bered that life, mind, the soul, our existence in all
its relations, is a mystery, in the very shadow and per-
plexity of which it is our duty to watch with attention
and diligence every fact which, when well attested,
forms a part of that induction which may eventually
relieve us from the embarrassment of our ignorance.
The principle upon which we estimate that which is
possible or impossible is erroneous ; the experience of
the past ought not to impose boundaries on the ex-
perience of the future. Our eyes are daily closed to
an infinite number of sublime truths, which revolve
around us in the simplest occurrences of nature ; and
he who would unseal them ought not to be repudiated
as a visionary or impostor. We forget that every
grain of sand on the sea shore has its position de-
termined by laws as immutable as those which main-
tain the heavenly bodies in their orbits ; the one may
appear an insignificant, the other a sublime object of
contemplation ; but the wonder and mystery of the
one is not greater than the wonder and mystery of
the other. Our philosophers restrict their attention
too much to the material, to the total neglect of the
immaterial, portion of their being ; they forget that
mind must be governed by laws as fixed and con-
stant as those which govern the physical universe.
" All the organs of sense," says Coleridge, " are framed
for a corresponding world of sense, and we have it.
All the organs of spirit are framed for a correspond-
ing world of spirit, though the latter organs are not
developed in all alike."* This is perfectly true, and I
am persuaded that the study of animal magnetism is
alone the path which will lead us to any just concep-
tion of the laws of our spiritual existence. Let the
facts of animal magnetism be sifted and weighed
with as much suspicion and care as any other evi-
dence which might be brought into a court of justice ;
they will, I am satisfied, be thoroughly substantiated,
and it will then be found that the consequences to
which they lead are of the highest and most sacred
importance to the moral government and happiness of
mankind.


CHAPTER IV.

METHOD OF CONDUCTING THE MAGNETIC OPERATION.

The method of inducing the phenomena of animal
magnetism may easily be acquired ; there is no mystic
art or secresy in the operation ; but it should be con-
ducted, for reasons which I shall hereafter explain, with
great caution, and strictly upon the principles which
the magnetisers have laid down. In the infancy of the
science, ceremonies, processes, and precautions were
observed, which are now regarded as unnecessary ;
but in order that the subject may be fairly compre-
hended, I conceive it right to return to the time of
Mesmer, and describe the method he adopted. It
should, however, be premised that he believed that
the magnetic phenomena were produced by the inter-
vention of agents which we now consider entirely
foreign to their causation ; that he never mentioned
the will as being essential to the production of the
results ; and that the most curious phenomenon re-
sulting from magnetisation, somnambulism itself, was
entirely unknown to him, although every circumstance
would lead to the inference that he was not altogether
unacquainted with it.

The following is a description of the magnetic
process and apparatus which he employed, and which
were submitted to the examination of the commis-
own words, from the instructions, which he gave in
confidence to his pupils. They are arranged in the
form of a catechism :

" Q. — How are the effects of the animal fluid de-
monstrated ?

" A. — When a healthy person is brought into im-
mediate contact with a sick person, in whom one or
more functions are disordered, the latter feels, in the
morbid part, sensations more or less acute,

" Q. — How must a patient be touched to make him
feel the effects of magnetism ?

" A. — You must place yourself opposite to him,
with your back turned towards the north, and draw
your own close against his feet ; you must then place,
without pressure, both your thumbs on the plexus of
the nerves in the epigastrium, and stretch your fingers
towards the hypochondria. It is beneficial occasionally
to move your fingers on the sides, and especially in
the region of the spleen. After having continued
this exercise for about a quarter of an hour, you
should change your mode of operating, according to
the state of the patient.

« Q. — What ought to be done before we cease
magnetising ?

" A. — You must endeavour to put the magnetic
fluid in equilibrium in every part of the body. This
may be done by presenting the index finger of the
right hand at the summit of the head on the left side,
and then drawing it down the face to the breast and
over the lower extremities. In this manoeuvre an
iron rod may be used instead of the finger.

» Q. — Can we not augment the force, or the quan-
tity, of the magnetic fluid on individuals ?

« A. — The power of magnetism is augmented by
establishing a direct communication between several
persons.

" Q. — How is this communication established ?

" A. — In two ways ; the more simple is to form a
chain, with a certain number of persons made to hold
each other's hands ; it can also be done by means of
the baquet," &c.

The effects produced by such processes were not
less strange than the processes themselves. 1 have
already described certain extraordinary phenomena
arising from this action, and shall here subjoin
a few more equally curious. The patients submitted
to this kind of magnetisation experienced various un-
usual sensations, such as undefinable pains in the
body, particularly in the head and stomach ; an in-
crease or suppression of cutaneous perspiration ; pal-
pitation of the heart, and a momentary obstruction of
breathing. Sometimes a certain exaltation of the
mind, and a lively sense of comfort was experienced ;
the nervous system in particular was often powerfully
affected. The organs of the senses also underwent
unusual modifications ; ringing in the ears, vertigo,
and sometimes somnolency of a peculiar character,
supervened. These effects, which were diversified
according to the nature of the diseases and idiosyn-
cracies of the patients, became more and more deve-
loped as the operation proceeded ; and this series of
phenomena terminated by convulsions. This convul-
sive state being established in one patient, soon mani-
fested itself in all the rest. It was designated, as I
have already explained, by the name of the magnetic
crisis ; and as this usually was the ultimatum of the
results produced, it was looked upon as the chief ob-
ject of the magnetic influence, and as the means em-
own words, from the instructions, which he gave in
confidence to his pupils. They are arranged in the
form of a catechism :

" Q. — How are the effects of the animal fluid de-
monstrated ?

" A. — When a healthy person is brought into im-
mediate contact with a sick person, in whom one or
more functions are disordered, the latter feels, in the
morbid part, sensations more or less acute»

" Q. — How must a patient be touched to make him
feel the effects of magnetism ?

" A. — You must place yourself opposite to him,
with your back turned towards the north, and draw
your own close against his feet ; you must then place,
without pressure, both your thumbs on the plexus of
the nerves in the epigastrium, and stretch your fingers
towards the hypochondria. It is beneficial occasionally
to move your fingers on the sides, and especially in
the region of the spleen. After having continued
this exercise for about a quarter of an hour, you
should change your mode of operating, according to
the state of the patient.

" Q. — What ought to be done before we cease
magnetising ?

" A. — You must endeavour to put the magnetic
fluid in equilibrium in every part of the body. This
may be done by presenting the index finger of the
right hand at the summit of the head on the left side,
and then drawing it down the face to the breast and
over the lower extremities. In this manoeuvre an
iron rod may be used instead of the finger.

» Q. — Can we not augment the force, or the quan-
tity, of the magnetic fluid on individuals ?

« A. — The power of magnetism is augmented by
establishing a direct communication between several
persons.

" Q. — How is this communication established ?

" A. — In two ways ; the more simple is to form a
chain, with a certain number of persons made to hold
each other's hands ; it can also be done by means of
the baquet," &c.

The effects produced by such processes were not
less strange than the processes themselves. 1 have
already described certain extraordinary phenomena
arising from this action, and shall here subjoin
a few more equally curious. The patients submitted
to this kind of magnetisation experienced various un-
usual sensations, such as undefinable pains in the
body, particularly in the head and stomach ; an in-
crease or suppression of cutaneous perspiration ; pal-
pitation of the heart, and a momentary obstruction of
breathing. Sometimes a certain exaltation of the
mind, and a lively sense of comfort was experienced ;
the nervous system in particular was often powerfully
affected. The organs of the senses also underwent
unusual modifications ; ringing in the ears, vertigo,
and sometimes somnolency of a peculiar character,
supervened. These effects, which were diversified
according to the nature of the diseases and idiosyn-
cracies of the patients, became more and more deve-
loped as the operation proceeded ; and this series of
phenomena terminated by convulsions. This convul-
sive state being established in one patient, soon mani-
fested itself in all the rest. It was designated, as I
have already explained, by the name of the magnetic
crisis ; and as this usually was the ultimatum of the
results produced, it was looked upon as the chief ob-
ject of the magnetic influence, and as the means em-
ployed by nature to effect a cure. Sometimes these
convulsions were of remarkable violence and duration,
and on this account patients seized by them were
carried into an adjoining room, called salle des crises,
where they gradually recovered their senses; and
then, which is a remarkable circumstance, they ex-
perienced no inconvenience, excepting a slight sensa-
tion of fatigue; many even stated that they felt de-
cidedly relieved. To these physiological, were often
added very extraordinary moral, phenomena ; some of
the patients burst into immoderate fits of laughter,
others melted into tears ; they often appeared mutu-
ally attracted by irresistible impulses of sympathy,
and seemed to entertain the most lively affection for
each other. But the most surprising circumstance
was the prodigious influence which the magnetiser
exercised over his patients. The least sign of his will
excited or calmed the convulsions, commanded love
or hatred. He thus stood before them like a magi-
cian with his wand, under the waving of which their
souls and bodies were kept in submissive obedience.
Such were the results of the magnetic operations as
conducted by Mesmer, which the ancient commis-
sioners verified, and minutely described in their re-
ports.

But as the science progressed, these processes were
discovered to be superfluous, and the theory of the
universal fluid underwent a considerable modification ;
inasmuch as the agent was soon believed by the mag-
netisers to be a peculiar vital fluid, secreted or accu-
mulated more or less in the brain, and of which the
nerves acted as the conductors. This fluid was de-
scribed as being subservient to the will of the mag-
netiser, who, by his act of volition, could control its
influence, propel it externally or internally, and direct
it so as to accumulate in any part of the living body.

In accordance with these views, the following are
the directions which the Marquis de Puysegur gave for
conducting the operation : " You are," said he, " to
consider yourself as a magnet ; your arms, and par-
ticularly your hands, being its poles ; and, when you
touch a patient by laying one of your hands on his
back and the other in direct opposition upon his
stomach, you are to imagine that the magnetic fluid
has a tendency to circulate from one hand to the
other through the body of the patient. You may vary
this position by placing one hand upon the head and
the other upon the stomach, still with the same inten-
tion, the same desire of doing good. The circulation
from one hand to the other will continue, the head
and stomach being the parts of the body where the
greatest number of nerves converge, these are, there-
fore, the two centres to which your action ought to be
mostly directed. Friction is quite unnecessary ; it is
sufficient to touch with great attention, endeavouring
to produce an increase of heat in the palms of the
hands, &c. All the magnetic effects are more or less
beneficial ; one of the most satisfactory is somnam-
bulism, but it is not the most frequent, and some
patients may be perfectly cured without entering into
this particular state. We should not always be intent
upon producing somnambulism, for the desire of ob-
taining any particular result is frequently the cause of
no effect whatever being produced. No magnetiser
should blindly rely upon nature for the proper regu-
lation and control of the effects which he expects will
result from his magnetic operation."

M. de Puysegur further adds, " If, when magnetis-
ing a patient, you perceive that he experiences a cer-
tain numbness, or slight spasm, attended with nervous
shocks ; and should you then observe that he closes
his eyes, you must rub them lightly with your thumbs
to prevent the convulsive winking of the eyelids.
You will know that your patient is in the magnetic
sleep when you see him sensible to your action when
you hold your thumb opposite to the plexus. A pa-
tient, in his crisis, should answer no one but his mag-
netiser, and allow nobody else to touch him."

" The somnambulic state requires the greatest cau-
tion. Man in the magnetic state is to be considered
as the most interesting being in existence. With
regard to his magnetiser, it is through his unbounded
confidence in you that you have been enabled to bring
him completely under vour control. It is, therefore,
for no other purpose but that of benefiting him, that
you have any right to exert your power. Attempting
to deceive him, or abuse his confidence, while in this
state, is to commit a dishonest action, having a ten-
dency contrary to his benefit ; whence it follows that
a contrary result is produced to that originally con-
templated. The patient must not be annoyed with
questions ; he must be allowed to take cognizance of
his new state. As it is by an act of your will that you
put him to sleep, so it is by an act of your will that
you can awaken him. It may happen sometimes
that the patient will experience trembling, or slightly
convulsive motions ; in that case, you must imme-
diately stop your first operation, and give all your
attention to the alleviation of his sufferings. There
are various degrees of somnambulism. Sometimes
nothing but a simple somnolency can be obtained
from one patient ; in another, the effect of magnetism
is to close his eyelids so that he cannot open them of
his own accord ; he then hears everybody, and is not
completely in the magnetic state. This intermediate state
is very common. These effects are not so beneficial
as complete somnambulism, for the magnetiser cannot
learn anything from the patient ; but they are as
favourable to health. Some precautions are to be
taken with a patient passing into somnambulism. As
soon as you perceive that the patient has closed his
eyes, and otherwise manifested some sensibility to the
magnetic emanation, you must not at first tease him
with questions, and, least of all, endeavour to make
him do anything requiring muscular exertion. The
state in which he is plunged is new to him : you must
let him, as it were, take cognizance of it. The first
question should be, 6 How do you find yourself?' and
then, 6 Do you feel any benefit from what I am doing ?'
You may then express the pleasure you feel by giving
him relief. Hence you gradually come to the details
of his malady, and the subject of your first questions
should never go beyond the state of his health. You
ought not to act in opposition to the desire of your
somnambulist ; you should consult him about the time
when he wishes to be magnetised and drawn out of
his crisis, likewise respecting the medicaments he re-
quires ; and always follow his advice with the utmost
punctuality. However remote a somnambulist's pre-
scription may be from the general notions previously
adopted in medicine, his own sensation is a safer
guide than all the data resulting from observation.
He is, as it were, the interpreter of nature ; he follows
the dictates of a lucid instinct ; not to obey them in
every particular would be missing the aim we have
in view, — namely, his restoration to health." M. de
Puyscgur concludes his instructions by reminding his
pupils that " man, being ever actuated by the considera-
tion of his own interest, seldom performs a good action
without at the same time serving his own private ends.
In other words, it is only by discovering in himself a
spiritual principle of a higher order, emanating di-
rectly from the Creator of the universe, that he can
feel the necessity of gratifying the desires of his soul,
who, like her own divine Original, can delight in no-
thing but that which is in harmony with goodness
and truth. This intimate conviction increases to a
considerable degree the magnetiser's power."

This new method of magnetising modifies, in a
very remarkable manner, the effects produced. The
dreadful crises before alluded to almost entirely dis-
appeared, the coughing, hiccup, and immoderate laugh-
ter, so frequently brought on by Mesmer's treatment,
now seldom occurred ; and when they did appear
were easily subdued. All magnetisers, however, did
not agree in the adoption of the new method. Some
maintained that gestures performed without the con-
currence of the will to act, and even when accom-
panied by a contrary volition, were nevertheless per-
fectly magnetic, and actually produced the usual
effects. Others, on the contrary, insisted that the
will to act should always accompany the gestures ;
and that these without the will were absolutely power-
less. There were even some who looked upon the
gestures as a useless accompaniment to the operation,
and saw nothing more in them than a mechanical con-
trivance, calculated to fix the attention and sustain
the will of the magnetiser, the latter being considered
as the sole cause of the magnetic phenomena. But
notwithstanding this conflict of opinions, the manipu-
lations continued to form a principal part of the ope-
ration, and the instructions of M. de Puysegur were
generally followed. He also observed that the patients
who did not fall into crises were sooner cured than those
who did ; and from his numerous observations, he
thought he could establish, in contradiction to the
theory of Mesmer, that the convulsions were an unna-
tural state ; that, far from being conducive to the cure
of diseases, they had an opposite tendency ; and,
finally, that it was the magnetiser's duty to calm
rather than provoke them.

Thus a new doctrine was promulgated, which,
unfortunately for animal magnetism, was as little
satisfactory as that of Mesmer ; nor was it until long
after the publication of his memoirs that M. de Puy-
segur discovered the fallacy of his explanations. The
experiment which led him to this discovery I shall
here adduce. It gave rise to the doctrines which are
at present entertained. "According to my usual
practice," says he, " I was magnetising a young man
by laying one of my hands on his head, and the other
on his stomach. After a quarter of an hour's atten-
tion and concentration on my part, and perfect tran-
quillity on his, he told me that he felt nothing. As
he had no complaint, this appeared to me quite na-
tural. I however again pressed him between both my
hands, merely to try whether I would be more suc-
cessful; but he felt no more this second time than he
had the first. I was at length about to leave him,
when, on slowly removing my hand from his stomach,
he fetched a sigh, and complained that I was hurting
him. As I did not then touch him, I could not at first
believe it ; but he hastily took my hand and lowered
it, saying that it stopped his breath. I quickly brought
myself again into contact with him, expecting that he
would now feel a more decided sensation, but it proved
quite the contrary ; the pressure of my hand had no
effect whatever. On removing it to a distance of
about one foot from him, he again complained ; at two
feet distance, he felt a weight on his breast, and desired
me to withdraw. I then drew myself back by degrees.,
and stopped only when he told me his pain was gone
and he felt nothing. I was then five paces from him ;
I magnetised him at that distance by a slow and cir-
cular oscillation of my hand; and immediately his
head reclined on his shoulder, and somnambulism
supervened."

From the time of this experiment, which was per-
formed in 1811, M. de Puysegur magnetised at a dis-
tance ; and, in his last memoir, he asserts that a great
number of facts left no doubt on his mind of the su-
perior advantage of this new mode of operating. But 3
notwithstanding all this, I am persuaded that the doc-
trines which have hitherto been taught are premature,,
and that, although they are supported by a great num-
ber of facts, yet most of those facts have been but im-
perfectly observed, and the theories based upon them
are of necessity erroneous. The absurd statements
and extravagant theories which have been put forth
on the subject of animal magnetism are almost in-
credible ; and it is by no means wonderful that many
conscientious individuals have, on the very threshold
of the inquiry, turned away in disgust. It has even
been alleged that, in order to be successful, the mag-
netiser should possess the cardinal virtues of faith,
hope, and charity, — that magnetism can take no effect
on any patient in the presence of a sceptic ; in fact,
no discovery has ever been more exposed by its own
advocates to the ridicule and satire of its opponents.

Here I might cite a variety of directions for con-
ducting the magnetic operation by the Count de
Lutzelburg, the Chevalier Barbarin, M. de Mont-
Ferrier, &c. ; but those which are most in accordance
with the present state of the science are given by M.
Deleuze. "When a patient," he observes, "wishes
you to cure him by magnetism, and when his friends and
medical attendants are not opposed to it, should you
feel disposed to comply with his desire, and be deter-
mined to continue the treatment so long as it may be
necessary, you must agree with him as to the time of
each sitting, and impress on him that his promise must
be punctual, and that he must not be satisfied with a
few day's trial, but must follow your advice respecting
his diet," &c.

" Having thus conferred together, and resolved upon
treating the subject seriously, remove from the patient
all such persons as might annoy you, and keep none
but the necessary witnesses (one only, if possible,) in
the room. Then prepare yourself so as to be neither
too warm nor too cold, and to enjoy perfect freedom
in your gestures ; you should also take your precau-
tions not to be interrupted during the sitting. These
preliminaries arranged, seat your patient as conve-
niently as possible, and place yourself opposite to him,
on a seat rather more elevated than his, so as to hold
his knees between yours, and to touch your feet with his
own. Request him to give himself up, to think of no-
thing, and not to distract his attention by examining
the effects he may experience ; to be full of hope, and
not to be uneasy or alarmed, should the magnetic in-
fluence produce in him momentary pains. After hav-
ing composed yourself, hold his thumbs between your
fingers, so that the inside of your thumbs may touch
the inside of his, and fix your eyes upon him. You
may remain from two to five minutes in this position,
or until you feel that your thumbs and his are at the
same temperature. This being done, you must with-
draw your hands, by moving them outwardly right
and left, so that the inward surface be turned out-
wards, and raise them as high as the head ; you must
then lay them on both shoulders, and leave them there
for about one minute ; then bring them down along
the arms to the extremity of the fingers, touching
slightly all the way. You will repeat this manipula-
tion five or six times, keeping your hands off the body
when you raise them. You will then hold your hands
above the head for a moment, and draw them down
before the face, at a distance of about two inches, as
low as the pit of the stomach. Here you will stop
again for about two minutes, laying your thumbs on
the pit of the stomach, and your fingers under the
ribs. You will then slowly come down the body as
low as the knees. These manipulations should be re-
peated during the greater part of the sitting. You
will also occasionally come nearer to the patient, so as
to lay your hands behind his shoulders, and bring
them slowly down the spine, and thence over the hips
and along the thighs, down to the knees or to the feet.
When you wish to bring the sitting to a close, you
must take care to draw the magnetic fluid to the ex-
tremities of the hands and feet, by lengthening your
line of motion beyond these extremities, each time
shaking your fingers. Lastly, you will make before
the face, and even before the breast, a few transverse
manipulations, at a distance of three or four inches.
It is essential to magnetise invariably downward from
the head toward the extremities, and never upwards
from the extremities towards the head. The down-
ward manipulations are magnetic, — that is, they are
accompanied with the intention of magnetising. The
movements made upwards are not so. When the mag-
netiser operates upon the magnetisee, they are said to
be en rapport — which means a peculiar and acquired
disposition, by virtue of which the magnetiser exerts
an influence upon the magnetisee ; in other words, a
communication of vital principle is^established between
them ; and when this has once taken place, the mag-
netic action is renewed at every subsequent sitting, the
instant the operation begins."

It would not be easy to give a better description of
the mode of conducting the magnetic operation than
this of M. Deleuze ; but from his very minute account
of the manipulations, it might be supposed that the
operation consisted principally in them. This would
be a grievous error. It is important to remember that
the magnetic power does not consist in mere gestures ;
another medium is necessary, which the manipulations
merely bring into play at the command of the will.
This medium may be termed the vital principle, life
spiritualised, universal, magnetic, or nervous fluid — it
matters not. But most assuredly there is an emanation
of a peculiar agent, for out of nothing nothing comes ;
and manipulations alone, performed with the greatest
care, could never produce the slightest magnetic re-
sults. The operation may be said to be almost purely
intellectual — its success depending on the energy of the
will ; and we must learn to exercise this faculty before
we can educe its latent energies. Hence we observe
some magnetisers readily obtain results by processes
much less complicated. They merely move their
hands in a certain direction, as taught by Dr. Rostan.
They excite the course of the nerves by slightly touch-
ing the individual alternately on the head and epigas-
trium. I know many who never touch their patients ;
they act at a distance of some inches, and have a par-
ticular rule of conduct to control the effects produced ;
and in the cure of diseases this method appears to be
more successful than that accompanied by complex
manual movements. The error of magnetisers in
general is, that they pursue the arbitrary dictates of
their own fancy, instead of being guided by observa-
tion. They aver, with much self-confidence, that if
we wish to produce a certain effect, we must magnetise
in such or such a manner ; that if we would obtain
another result, we must operate differently. If, taking
their rules for our guidance, we wish to produce som-
nambulism, it is necessary to magnetise the patient's
brain ; but, far from increasing the tendency to sleep,
this very manoeuvre often prevents it altogether, by
producing an over-excitement, which keeps the indi-
vidual in a state of greater watchfulness than that
which preceded the operation ;* whereas, had the same
individual been magnetised without exciting the head
more than any other part of his body, sleep might have
been induced. Nay, it is even sometimes necessary to
magnetise organs remote from the brain ; for they ex-
ercise a sympathetic influence on this organ, which
brings on the crisis more speedily and certainly than
if it were itself magnetised.

The same thing happens with a certain secretion,
which is supposed to be facilitated or retarded by cer-
tain processes, whereas the result often proves the re-
verse of what was intended. So, also, in endeavouring
to awake a somnambule, I remember often having been
much perplexed ; for it is an established rule among
magnetisers, that a somnambulist be awakened by
transverse manipulations over his eyes and face. But
it has often occurred to me that I have been unable to
awaken, and obliged to leave the somnambulist in
his sleep, notwithstanding I had employed all the
means prescribed in similar cases. In vain have I
rubbed the eyelids, even so much as to produce ecchy-
mosis on this very sensible part ; still sleep continued
much beyond the period I had assigned ; and what is
still more remarkable, its intensity was greater than
when the regular magnetic sleep had not been dis-
turbed.

The wisest magnetisers are those who unassumingly
follow the course of nature, and do not presume to
control her by laws of their own fabrication ; but they
are few, indeed, compared with those who strive to
outvie each other by feats of skill, and unlimited ex-
aggeration of their own individual power ; but this
vaunted power has nevertheless its boundaries, which
cannot be overstepped, for, were it otherwise, man
would at once become a Deity. The practice of
magnetism has, however, improved : we now seldom
witness, in the treatment of diseases, the exhibition of
those dreadful crises formerly considered critical, and
deemed necessary. They are now confined to a very
few cases, and calmed as soon as they appear, which,
generally speaking, is the most proper course.

Every magnetiser ought, as a physician, to know
that their intensity should in some cases be increased,
in some diminished, in others provoked, when nature,
sinking under the weight of disease, is almost powerless
to effect a reaction. It is by observations of this kind
that we can alone assist nature in her struggles against
the morbid action which is lighted up by disease ; but
this power of directing the crises can only be practised
by one who has made magnetism his exclusive study,
which is the case with few magnetisers, many of whom
do not know whether they are doing good or evil.

But to return. It is a great mistake to suppose that
magnetism only acts on weak and nervous persons. I
have often magnetised men of the most robust habit,
and produced on them more remarkable effects than on
persons of debilitated constitutions. No one should ever
be considered an unfit subject ; and no person an in-
competent observer of the magnetic operations. The
unbelief of one individual is no more an impediment
to the production of the magnetic effects upon him-
self than upon a third person. I have often magne-
tised sceptics themselves, while they were surrounded
by none but sceptics ; so true it is, that when we take
up the defence of truth we must overcome our natural
timidity, and follow the maxim of Epictetus, who
observes, — " When you have come to the conviction
that a thing can be done, do not fear being seen when
doing it, notwithstanding everybody should say that
you are in the wrong. If you do not act thus, avoid
doing it at all ; but if you will do it, you should never
fear the unreasonable censure of men."

Were it necessary to unite all the qualifications re-
quired by some theorists to be a good magnetiser,
there would be few such indeed. It is by no means
essential even that he should be of a good physical
and moral constitution, perfectly healthy, or of a gentle
disposition, &c. ; for, however, good and desirable
may be these qualities, they are not indispensable. I
have seen individuals of a v ery defective constitution,
who were even deformed, and of delicate health, ob-
tain, by their magnetic power, the production of phe-
nomena which could not always have been elicited by
men of the strongest habit of body, —

" Chacun de cette flarame obtint une etincelle."

Some magnetisers imagine that they possess greater
virtue, and magnetic powers more developed, than
other men ; but this is an absurd notion, which might
revive the idea that some are in a manner pos-
sessed of some supernatural or occult power similar
to that which led to the stake so many wretched
beings whose only crime was that of having discovered
within themselves a faculty possessed by all, but
which had remained latent until certain favourable
circumstances accidentally disclosed it to their obser-
vation. We need not refer to the remotest antiquity
to find numerous instances of these facts ; we have
merely to open the records of the barbarous times
which preceded the revival of letters, and to follow
the subsequent historians of more enlightened days,
in successive order ; and what do we find there ?
Regular indictments and trials on charges brought
before superior courts against pretended sorcerers.
Those indictments were based upon well-attested
facts ; the accused themselves confessed to them ;
witnesses were brought to corroborate them, who
conscientiously stated on oath that which they had
seen ; and these unfortunate beings were then for-
mally condemned, and suffered the penalty of death
in the most excruciating agonies.*

Here I shall perhaps be excused a slight digression
to introduce the following anecdote related by Gre-
goire de Tours, which will doubtless suggest its own
moral : — " A wood-cutter of the vicinity of Bourges,
had entered a forest for the purpose of cutting wood,
when he was suddenly surrounded by a swarm of
bees, and literally covered with their stings, which
left him mad, or in a state bordering upon madness,
in which, for the next two years, he continued. x\fter
this adventure, the woodcutter, having passed through
the neighbouring towns and villages, went to the pro-
vince of Aries. Here he covered his body with skins,
and lived as an hermit, praying night and day ; but in
order to deceive him, Satan transmitted to him the
power of divining. He soon left the province of
Aries, and proceeded through the Gevaudan. Here
the people crowded round him, bringing to him the
sick and infirm, whom he cured by touch. Gold,
silver, and garments, were given to him ; but he dis-
tributed the whole among the poor, prostrating him-
self on the ground, and praying incessantly. He
foretold the future, announcing to some; diseases, to
others, losses. All this he did," says Gregoire de
Tours, " through the Satanic art, and some, unnatural
prestiges. He seduced a great number of people, not
only country people, but even clergymen themselves."

A few baths and bloodlettings might have cured
this man, supposed to be possessed by the devil. Aure-
lius, bishop of Puy, however, contrived that he should
be surprised, and put to death.

But to proceed. It is not, as I have just stated,
necessary that an individual should believe in animal
magnetism, to experience the effects which it induces.
If the patient be perfectly passive, he is generally
more susceptible of being magnetised with success than
in any other condition. Furthermore, contrary to
that which has been often stated, the passes serving
to conduct the magnetic fluid may be made either
perpendicularly or transversely. The sensible or ap-
parent effect, however, seems to be produced only when
there is an incipient or complete saturation of the
nervous system of the patient, by the fluid which ap-
parently issues from the nerves of the operator. The
most favourable condition to receive this magnetic
saturation with benefit, is not yet accurately deter-
mined ; a weakly or abnormal state is, however, gene-
rally speaking, most favourable to its reception. On
the part of the magnetiser, the most important rule he
can adopt is to exert the greatest energy of volition
he can command. As, when the light of the sun is
transmitted through a burning glass, even in the depth
of winter, the solar rays which previously gave little
or no warmth, being concentrated and thus brought to
a focus, ignite the combustible substances exposed to
them: so likewise the human mind, which is the
mirror of the soul, by converging its rays into one
focus, affects the soul brought into juxta-position with
itself. I repeat, the magnetiser must will with the
utmost perseverance ; he must not pity when he
can succour the afflicted ; he need offer no vows ;
but let him believe in his power, and act with
energy. I do not mean with violent mental excite-
ment, for this will neutralise the effects, by absorbing
the principle which ought to produce them. He
should, on the contrary, enjoy perfect ease and free-
dom ; and though he is to send to his extremities a
momentum or force sufficient to raise a considerable
weight, he must have nothing but his own limbs to
raise. It is the excess of this momentum which
strikes the patient, and produces all the magnetic
phenomena. I would even advise him not to divide
his attention by thinking of the manipulations pre-
scribed by M. Deleuze, for by them alone the pheno-
mena cannot be induced ; besides which, when he
looks for instruction, he will be at a loss to determine
whether the effects produced be the result of the mo-
notony of the process. I also recommend the mag-
netiser to stand before his patient instead of sitting.
He should not touch him, but his passes should be
made opposite to him, at a little distance. Every
magnetiser does not, however, obtain the same results.
These impediments in general may arise from a
natural want of power in the magnetiser; and this
may be induced by a lesion or debility of his organs ;
or it may proceed from his mind being unable to act
freely, either through the same vitiated disposition of
his organs, or because his fancy is too quick, and
easily passes from one subject to another.

A greater obstacle to the development of the mag-
netic power is, pride. One of my somnambulists once
observed that a man may possess an independent for-
tune, which may allow of his time being devoted to
the relief of the poor, to which he may add all the
conditions of disinterestedness, persevering application,
strength, charity, &c. ; and yet he may not be entirely
successful, because in his heart the pride of success
unnerves his faculty of doing good. A variety of in-
cidental circumstances, which it is even difficult to
enumerate, an over-anxiety to produce the effects, or
any incidental suggestion that may disturb the atten-
tion of the magnetiser, will often be sufficient to
mar the successful issue of the experiment; and to
some such cause, I doubt not, may be attributed the
recent failure of M. Berna in endeavouring to pro-
duce some of the higher magnetic phenomena before
the French Academy. But we need not a formal
report of the Academy to prove that the operation
of animal magnetism is often unsuccessful ; every
tyro in logic knows that such negative evidence as
this is utterly worthless. In public lecture-rooms the
professors of the physical sciences constantly fail in
a variety of delicate experiments ; but is it ever
argued that such failures invalidate the principles of
the science which they intended to illustrate ? Cer-
tainly not. One positive fact is not to be repudiated
by a thousand negative attempts to reproduce it.
Such an argument as this cannot for a moment be
entertained. He, therefore, who may fail in attempt-
ing to produce the magnetical phenomena, must not
on that account deny their existence ; let him return
to the trial, and I have no hesitation in assuring him,
that if the preliminary conditions required by the
magnetisers be complied with, he will eventually suc-
ceed.*


CHAPTER V.



PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED, AND DANGERS TO BE
APPREHENDED, DURING THE MAGNETIC OPERATION.



Having described the most eligible method of con-
ducting the operation of animal magnetism, I am
anxious to impress on the minds of those who may
feel inclined to try the experiment, that the opera-
tion is not always unattended with danger. Hitherto
I have appealed in a very earnest manner to the in-
tegrity of the evidence in favour of the science ; but
so immediate are the proofs which every individual
can command, that I feel it- incumbent on me to cau-
tion sceptics themselves against trifling with so power-
ful an agency ; for I have known instances of many
who, in endeavouring to induce the magnetic pheno-
mena, have placed themselves in a very painful posi-
tion, and the person operated on in a very alarming
state. Of course animal magnetism, like every other
science, has its own laws, and these should be dili-
gently studied before any individual attempt to prac-
tise it. The constitution of the patient, whether in
health or disease, should also be well understood ; in-
deed, physicians alone should be entrusted with its
application.

When a person magnetises for the first time, he is
generally actuated by a feeling of curiosity, blended
with doubt and apprehension. If the patient he mag-
netise, under the influence of these feelings, happen to
be sensible to his action, he will soon manifest symp-
toms which will greatly surprise him ; and if the mag-
netiser possess no method of controlling them, they
may assume a most alarming character. The patient,
perhaps, will fall into a state of most violent convul-
sions, and the more the ignorant magnetiser endeavours
to relieve them, the more will they increase in their in-
tensity and apparent torture. Such convulsions have
been known to last from six to eight hours without any
intermission ; and the patient thus affected has con-
tinued seriously ill for many successive days after-
wards, feeling a sensation as if his limbs were broken,
accompanied by so profound an aversion for mag-
netism and the magnetiser, that the mere mention of
either superinduces a return of the fits.

M. de S. C, a retired officer, having heard a vague
report of animal magnetism, attempted to make the
experiment upon his own daughter, although she com-
plained of no illness. He merely wished to ascertain
whether he could make her feel the magnetic sensa-
tions. With this view, and without being aware of
the extent of mischief he was provoking, he laid his
hand on the stomach of his daughter, and obeyed the
magnetic injunctions. After a few moments of mag-
netisation, she experienced spasmodic attacks, which,
far from alarming her father, only encouraged him to
proceed. In a very short time, however, Mademoiselle
de C. was seized with the most violent convulsions ;
and her father now, not knowing the proper way to
calm them, only increased their intensity. In much
distress, he was obliged to leave his daughter in this
state, and she spent the following night in incessant
convulsions, and remained a whole week in this dan-
gerous state.

Another case of this kind was transmitted to M. de
Puysegur by M. Segrettier, landowner at Nantes.
The following are the particulars: — " A young lady
of distinguished birth, who seemed to enjoy most ex-
cellent health, happening to be on a visit at the cha-
teau of her relative, the Marquis de B., was indulging
with the rest of the company in passing sundry jokes
upon magnetism. Her uncle, M. de B., who out-
stepped by his sarcastic remarks everybody present,
and was gesticulating with great freedom, began to
direct his pretended influence upon his niece, when
they both set about magnetising each other as fast as
they could. At first the young lady laughed very
heartily, but it was soon discovered that this laughter
was anything but natural ; and the first surprise ex-
cited by this phenomenon soon gave way to un-
speakable terror, when it was manifest that she was
gradually losing her reason and the use of her senses.
Indeed, she could no longer see, nor hear, nor speak ;
her eyes were immoveably fixed ; her neck, out-
stretched, resembled a weaker magnet violently at-
tracted by a stronger one ; she followed her magnetiser
everywhere, and yielded to his sole influence. The
spectators attempted to separate them, but this only
provoked dreadful convulsions. Her magnetiser, on
his part, felt extraordinary sensations, which, in addi-
tion to the shock he had experienced by the alarming
state of his niece, had entirely altered his features, which
became extremely pale and dejected. In the course
of a few hours, the crisis of the magnetised young
lady gradually ceased, and she complained of acute
pains in her stomach. The remainder of the day, and
the following night, were passed alternately in convul-
sions and magnetic sleep ; and this state lasted several
days."

The magnetic operation, under such circumstances,
produces, I repeat, the most alarming results ; the in-
dividual subjected to the experiment feels, by degrees,
a torpor creeping over his limbs ; he loses the con-
sciousness of their position ; and if the magnetiser
persist in his action upon him, the thoracic muscles
may be seized with a temporary paralysis, followed by
an impeded action of the inspiratory muscles, and a
kind of mucous rattle becomes audible. In vain the
patient implores assistance ; and if the operator know
not how to induce a cessation of this state, the patient
may incur the greatest danger. I have seen several
cases of this kind, and I know that in one of the
chief hospitals in Paris a similar instance occurred,
and the physicians present, not being aware of the
existence of so singular a phenomenon, were exceed-
ingly alarmed. They found, on attempting to release
the patient from her oppression, that it was out of their
power, and for about thirty minutes, at least, they
could obtain no cessation of the paralysis. In that
short period the paroxysm had run through every
stage of asphyxia. Respiration at first became inter-
mittent, and then imperceptible ; the skin was dis-
coloured, the veins unusually swelled ; there had been
loss of memory during several minutes. This crisis
happily terminated favourably ; but all those who
witnessed it were of opinion that, if the obstacles by
which the circulation had been impeded, had resisted
a little longer, the patient must inevitably have died.

In the usual magnetic sleep, there sometimes occurs
a peculiar state, seldom observed, and much dreaded
by magnetisers, because very few among them possess
the means of bringing it to a favourable issue. I
will endeavour to describe it. A person plunged in
the magnetic sleep (and it generally occurs in those
individuals whose sleep is most profound) collapses
into an extraordinary state, of which the following are
the chief symptoms : — The somnambulist who heard
his magnetiser perfectly, is suddenly seized with a fit
of deafness ; he neither hears nor feels him any
longer ; and the magnetiser discovers that he has
entirely lost all control over him ; he no longer obeys
his injunctions ; he is as dumb to him as to every body
else ; his jaws are firmly fixed together, and it would
be easier to break than sunder them ; he is motion-
less, yields to the laws of gravitation, and his body
appears powerfully attracted to the ground. The
pulse at the wrist diminishes its beats in number and
intensity ; the temperature of the body perceptibly
lowers, and inevitable death appears to be impending.
If the magnetiser be familiar with this phenomenon,
and do not abandon the patient, he will gradually re-
cover from this state of concentration ; the pulse will
resume its usual cadence, and, returning into the
ordinary state of somnambulism, he will, on being
questioned, state that he has had certain visions
during his lethargic state ; but, by a strange anomaly,
although still in the somnambulic state, he can hardly
recal them, or even describe the sensations he ex-
perienced.

No symptom can indicate the moment when this
crisis supervenes ; I have observed it a great many
times. It has often occurred when I intended to
bring on a cessation of the usual magnetic sleep, that
the somnambulist suddenly, and against my will, col-
lapsed into this singular condition, in which he re-
mained for several hours together. It is the most ex-
traordinary state known in animal magnetism ; it is,
perhaps, the most dangerous, and also the best cal-
culated to afford instruction, when we know how to
question, in proper time, these extatic somnambules.
If we could hit upon the ideas which are uppermost
in their minds, it is probable that we might obtain
the most useful revelations ; there is but one moment
for this ; we must seize the instant of transition from
the ecstatic to the usual somnambulic state, for they
soon lose all recollection of the sensations they ex-
perienced. This state seems to be the limit of an
entirely new order of being ; " it is an unfathomable
mystery, in which the mind is wholly lost ;" and I con-
sider it the most dangerous crisis that can occur, and
the most likely to be attended by fatal consequences,
should the magnetiser leave the patient to himself,
after having plunged him into an ecstatic sleep.

" One day," says M. Chardel, " while magnetising
a somnambulist, and being full of self-confidence, I
allowed her to walk about the room with a friend of
hers ; they were conversing together, and my atten-
tion was then diverted from the extraordinary mode
of existence which I had just produced ; when the
two friends suddenly requested me to rehearse a scene
from Racine's Tragedies. I imprudently entered too
fervently into the spirit and sentiments which the
poet expresses with so much truth, and did not per-
ceive the emotion of my somnambulist until she fell
motionless on the floor. Never was loss of the senses
more complete ; the inanimate body lay stretched on
the floor with all the flaccidity of death ; each limb,
on being lifted up, fell back with all its weight ;
breathing was stopped, the pulse and beatings of the
heart were no longer felt, the lips and gums were dis-
coloured, and the skin, having lost the stimulus of
circulation, assumed a livid and yellowish hue. Every
thing seemed to indicate that I had nothing but a
corpse before me. I happily kept my presence of
mind, for the purity of my intention increased the
calm but resolute energy of my self-devotion, and I
had sufficient control over myself to feel that I could
still exert a great power over my somnambulist. I
began by magnetising the plexus ; I then breathed
into her mouth, nostrils, and ears ; and by degrees she
recovered the use of speech ; this speech was at first
weak, but it was soon distinct, and in answer to my
questions I learned that nothing had injured the health
of my patient," &c.

Those who experience these singular effects, far
from complaining of them, desire that their duration
may be prolonged.

" Why do you call me back to life ?" said a som-
nambulist in her magnetic exaltation : " if you would
only go away, this body which oppresses me would
grow cold, and my soul would no longer be here on
your return. I should then be perfectly happy."

All hold nearly the same language, and suggest the
idea of the soul being partially disencumbered of the
coils of its mortality — seeing, hearing, feeling, taking
cognizance of all things past, present, and future,
through some other channels than the physical organs
of its subordinate manifestations. All, too, agree in
enjoying, in this state, a sort of exquisite elysium of
repose from which they dread to be disturbed ; the
soul, apparently half set free, shrinks from being again
brought back and entangled in the chains which bind
it down to the narrow sphere of suffering humanity.
It is impossible to contemplate a somnambulist in this
state without a feeling of awe, not unmixed with
anxious wonder ; he is a being who appears to belong
more to the world that is to come, than to that in which,
as finite beings, we exist ; he already appears half dis-
robed of his carnal nature, and participating in the sense,
if not the actual. enjoyment, of his immortality : it is
impossible to divine what views of infinity may now
open before him ; all we observe is, a being like our-
selves exalted into a state of temporary beatifaction,
far above our sympathy, and beyond our comprehen-
sion. They invariably beseech us not to awaken them
or bring them back to their ordinary condition ; but
the magnetiser should be cautious how he listens to their
entreaties, and should, rather than otherwise, hasten to
draw them out of this state ; for he should remember
that he is exhausting his own energies, and the
moment may arrive when it might be necessary for
further exertion, and he be unable to command it.
He should regard himself as being the mere organ,
as it were, secreting or throwing out, under the
energy of his volition, the magnetic fluid ; and in pro-
portion as he becomes fatigued, and the secretion
itself exhausted, his influence over the patient, whether
in the magnetic state or not, must diminish or al-
together cease. On this account it is that magnetisers
often fail to induce the effects they anticipate ; they
exert themselves to the utmost ; the patient exhibits
all the premonitory signs of the magnetic state, but a
step is yet wanting — the step itself is not established
—because the operator cannot command the requisite
magnetic power. It is, indeed, wonderful how few
men can command any high degree of sustained
mental energy ; the faculties of the mind, like the
limbs of the human body, require exercise in order
that they may attain their full development ; but so
much are they neglected that the finest susceptibilities
of our nature are often not called into action, and
may be literally said to go down with us into the
grave unborn.

Inexperienced magnetisers are not aware of the dif-
ficulties they have to encounter, and know not the
dangers which are to be apprehended ; they are truly
working in the dark, with a power which sometimes,
to their astonishment, attains an ascendancy over them,
and produces effects beyond their participation or con-
trol. Hence many, in trying their own magnetic powers
as a matter of sheer curiosity, or en badinage, have
found themselves suddenly placed in a most perplexing
and distressing predicament. The voluntary patient
has gradually succumbed under their influence until a
state of collapse, simulating death itself, has super-
vened. In the thesis of M. Fillassier, which was re-
cently quoted in a clinical lecture of M. Andral, a
case of this description is related. It will be found
reported in the Lancet. " In this inaugural thesis,"
says M. Andral, " which was defended before our
faculty of medicine, there is the narrative of an occur-
rence bearing irresistible proof of authenticity. The
facts are particularly curious. The author, then an
interne at the Hotel-Dieu, and totally sceptical regard-
ing the powers ascribed to this mysterious essence, this
asserted magnetic fluid, formed, for amusement, the
plan, with a brother interne equally incredulous, of
submitting this friend to the manoeuvres of the mag-
netisers. The passes were continued for about twenty
minutes without any remarkable effect, but at the ex-
piration of that time the young man began to yawn,
his eyelids grew heavy, and closed involuntarily ; he
attempted to shake off the torpor in vain ; his respira-
tion next became accelerated, his head fell on his
shoulders, and he uttered a sardonic laugh of inde-
scribable expression. We thought," continues M. Fil-
lassier, " that he was amusing himself at our expense ;
but, in a little time, what was my horror when I saw
his fingers turn blue, his head fall powerless forward,
— when I heard his respiration rattling like a dying
man's, and felt his skin as cold as death itself ! I
cannot find words to describe my sufferings. I knew
not what to do. Meanwhile, all these horrid pheno-
mena increased in intensity. I tremble at the recol-
lection of what I saw : there lay my friend, my vic-
tim, devoid of the aspect of life, in a state of complete
and terrible collapse. With his hand clasped in mine,
in a state of agony no tongue could tell of, 1 laid him
on a bed, and waited the result in a state of mind I
never can forget. In a quarter of an hour he reco-
vered, and, exclaiming that in the ecstasy he had expe-
rienced sensations of extreme delight, begged me to
recommence the passes. I did so with less apprehen-
sion, and again the somnolency proceeded. The col-
lapse, however, was less profound and terrific, and in
some minutes he suddenly awoke with the exclama-
tion, ' What happiness is this !' "

As I have already observed, it is sometimes very dif-
ficult to awaken or bring patients out of the magnetic
sleep ; speaking generally, it is more difficult to
conduct the operation after sleep is induced than it
is to produce sleep itself. In most treatises on animal
magnetism, it is stated that magnetisers can at pleasure
restore their patients to the ordinary, or waking state.
This is an error. I have often, in a few minutes,
brought on sleep, and could not for hours afterwards
awaken the patient, notwithstanding that 1 have ener-
getically applied all the processes usually prescribed
in such cases. In vain have I exerted my abilities to
the utmost ; the more I have wished and willed to in-
duce the waking state, the more has the intensity of
the sleep increased. I have passed my fingers over
the eyelids until I have produced ecchymosis, yet all
my efforts have proved unavailing ; and it is a curious
fact, which deserves attention, that when such persons
awake from this indomitable sleep they fall again into
somnambulism, and then the slightest noise will awaken
them. A case of this description was lately commu-
nicated to the Lancet by Dr. Sigmond, the Lec-
turer on Materia Medica and Therapeutics at the
Windmill .street School of Medicine in this city. Un-
like many of his professional brethren, this gentleman
has not disdained to make animal magnetism the sub-
ject of conscientious investigation, and has performed
himself, to confirm his conviction, several experiments.

" The most remarkable case," says he, " that has fallen
under my observation, and which, while it excited in me
great anxiety, and the deepest interest, has taught me
to prosecute my researches with extreme caution, has
occurred to me within the last two days. I was enjoy-
ing the hospitality of a most amiable family in Fitzroy-
square, when animal magnetism became the topic of
conversation, and I related the trials I had already
made. One of the young ladies proposed to become
the subject of experiments, to which I very willingly
assented; for, having on former occasions attended
her during momentary sickness, I was fully aware of
the natural strength of her constitution, and the ab-
sence of that nervous temperament which renders this
system totally inapplicable. I began what are tech-
nically called i the passes/ They, as is not unusual,
excited laughter and incredulity. I proceeded for
about five minutes, and then stopped and inquired if
any sensation was produced, and the answer was, 4 a
slight sleepiness ;' and ridicule was again thrown upon
the subject. 1 recommenced the manipulations ; I
observed the eyelids falling, and at last they closed ;
but, as the same incredulous smile remained, 1 perse-
vered for three or four minutes, when I, almost doubt-
ing whether any influence had been produced, inquired
what the feelings were ; to this no answer was re-
turned. I found my young friend was in the most
complete trance I had ever yet witnessed as the result
of my magnetism. The stupor was most profound ;
and I then tried the usual means to arouse her, but
they were vainly exercised. After a few minutes I
found the hands become icy cold, the face lost its na-
tural hue, and became perfectly pallid ; the extremities
became quite cold ; the respiration was imperceptible ;
the stimulus of light did not affect the eye ; on speak-
ing to her, a faint smile was excited, and a quivering
of the lower jaw, which seemed to indicate a wish but
an incapability of answering ; the pulse became gra-
dually feebler, whilst the external appearance alto-
gether bore such a decidedly deathly cast, that natu-
rally some apprehension was excited amongst her
family, by whom she was surrounded. Of course I
could not but feel a certain degree of anxiety and re-
gret that I had produced such a state, and much un-
easiness at the thought that I had inflicted a moment's
alarm to my kind friends. These feelings were, how-
ever, less acute, from the full knowledge I entertained
that the family had long reposed the most perfect con-
fidence in me, and that no member of it had that nerv-
ous susceptibility which would have embarrassed me
had any untoward accident presented itself.

" I placed the perfectly unconscious subject of this
distressing scene in an horizontal position, and directed
the application of warmth and of friction to the extre-
mities. Circulation and animal heat were gradually
excited, but she presented a most singular appearance
of suspended animation. In this condition she re-
mained more than four hours, for I had commenced a
little after ten in the evening, and it was about half-
past two that, on some slight effort being made to
rouse her, she uttered some of the most piercing
shrieks I have ever heard ; there were convulsive
efforts to raise the limbs ; the face, too, became con-
vulsed ; she opened her eyes, and stared wildly around ;
she was placed in the upright posture, and seemed
sensible. Advantage was taken of this circumstance
to carry her to her apartment ; before, however, she
could reach it, she fell into a profound slumber, but
its character was more natural. She was placed in
her bed, appearing perfectly composed ; the counte-
nance had acquired its natural hue ; the respiration
was perfectly easy, and the pulse natural. In this
state she remained during the whole of the day, until
nine o'clock in the evening, once only opening her
eyes, and addressing a few words to an anxious and
affectionate sister, who never left her side. In the
evening, the young lady joined her family, perfectly
restored to her wonted cheerfulness. She expressed
no complaint whatever. She stated that the feelings
that first came over her were those of extreme quiet
and repose, — a species of ecstasy, — a gradual languor
seemed to steal over her ; that she heard something
passing around her ; felt an inclination, but an utter
impossibility, to reply. The first waking up she, how-
ever, described as almost terrific. It was as if she was
bursting from a narrow and confined space, and as if
she arose from interminable darkness. The lesson
that I have thus learnt will not be lost upon me."*

This fact deserves attention, inasmuch as it eluci-
dates very clearly the impropriety, and even danger,
of sporting with a power which may produce such
alarming, and, for the period, uncontrollable symp-
toms. In vain were physical stimuli here applied ; a
purely psychical series of effects can only be psychically
dealt with ; and what avail frictions applied to the
surface of a body sunk into a state of magnetic insen-
sibility ? Have we not seen the skin and flesh torn,
lacerated, burned, without exciting the slightest con-
sciousness or impression on the nervous system ? As-
suredly ; and magnetism itself is the only therapeutical
agent that could affect a patient in this condition.

Here, also, it should be observed, that, so immediate
and powerful is the magnetic influence, that indi-
viduals placed near those who are being magnetised
sometimes experience all the effects of direct magneti-
sation. I have often produced somnambulism in this
manner. Not long ago, having been called upon to
attend a child, the son of Count de Bastard, I was at
once informed that the patient was very ill, and that my
assistance had been sought as a dernier ressort — as the
only and last resource which promised them a ray of
hope. A young woman, who was much attached to
the infant boy, held him in her lap ; and in this posi-
tion I proceeded to magnetise him, surrounded by a
few anxious relatives, who would have given all they
possessed on earth for him to be restored. A feeble
lamp lighted this melancholy scene, and a profound
silence was observed. My influence directed on the
patient, at a distance of about one foot, soon produced
a salutary effect. The pains which the child had ex-
perienced, and expressed by cries and convulsive mo-
tions, were soon calmed, and he became comparatively
tranquil. It was, however, otherwise with the young
person who held him in her lap. Her eyes having
closed, she fell into a state of complete somnambulism.
Large tears trickled down her cheeks, and she gra-
dually passed into the higher degree of lucidity.
Then, when we attempted to take away the child
from her, she refused to part with him, and only, after
some altercation, gave him up at my request.

The magnetic influence, when thus communi-
cated, instead of inducing sleep, generally gives rise
to spasms, convulsions, and alarming symptoms.
On another occasion, I was magnetising a lady who
was but little sensible of the magnetic influence^ when
a person who stood beside her felt, during the opera-
tion, her limbs benumbed, and pricking pains in her
eyelids. On the following day the same lady was
again magnetised, without the intention of producing
an effect on any one else ; but the same attendant
again experienced symptoms more decided than on
the preceding day, and remained the whole of that
day afterwards in a state of excessive lassitude. Again,
at the next seance she was affected so much that som-
nambulism was brought on, and yet I had no intention
of producing this result. She soon awoke ; but,
yielding to sleep again, she remained in this state for
several hours. A similar incident occurred to me
while operating at the house of a patient of mine, the
wife of a counsellor of state. Her lady's-maid, who
attended the sitting to render assistance if neces-
sary, was seized, while I was magnetising her mistress,
with severe spasms, which soon became very alarming.
I rose to subdue them, but she hurried away, declaring
that I gave her pain, and that she would not allow
me to come near her. She, however, soon recovered,
and I attributed the effects only to an excited imagi-
nation. When perfectly recomposed, she sat down
again near to her mistress, upon whom I recommenced
the magnetic operation as before. But in about five
minutes, and without any intention on my part to
exert any influence on this attendant, she was again
seized with the same description of paroxysm, accom-
panied with considerable pain and difficulty of breath-
ing, from which she did not recover for several days
afterwards.

It is this indirect mode of magnetisation which
doubtless gives rise to anomalies in the effects pro-
duced, which would not appear were the same indi-
vidual subjected to direct magnetisation. The sub-
tlety and power of the magnetic fluid is almost incon-
ceivable. As I have before stated, I believe that no
one ever submits to the operation of magnetism with-
out some change being induced in his organisation.
He may not be sensible of it at the time ; he may rise
from the seance apparently unaffected ; yet some hours
afterwards may the magnetic effects develop them-
selves. This has often occurred to me. I have mag-
netised persons who were not conscious either during
or immediately after the operation, of any results,
yet have a short time afterwards become somnam-
bulic. The subtle and penetrating intensity of the
magnetic fluid, annihilating all relations of space and
time, is, however, more distinctly manifested in the
magnetisation of persons at a distance, or through in-
tervening partitions — as through screens, folding doors,
or thick walls. The success, however, of this experi-
ment will depend, not only on the power of the mag-
netiser, but also on the peculiar susceptibility of the
patient, which should always be taken into considera-
tion. As a general principle, the stronger, speaking
magnetically, magnetises the weaker, — women are
more easily affected than men — persons who are sickly
than persons in robust health.

It was observed by Deleuze, that the difference of
the sex has little or no influence on the magnetic
power ; that women magnetise as efficiently as men.
Their action is, however, more gentle, albeit, not less
salutary ; and when they possess the requisite confi-
dence, they can, he assures us, magnetise their own
sick children with more success than could be done
by the most experienced magnetiser. He relates the
case of a lady who was afflicted with a very serious
complaint, and, despairing of relief from the ordinary
resources of medicine, she applied to a magnetiser,
who agreed to undertake her treatment. He accord-
ingly did magnetise her during three or four months,
and, when visiting her one day, said he was afraid
that he should not be able to magnetise her, as he
was himself very much indisposed. She then proposed
to magnetise him — he consented— and in a quarter of
an hour he became somnambulic. He requested that
his eyes might be bandaged, as he thought he should
then be able to see better. The lady then requested
that he would examine himself, and endeavour to dis-
cover how his sufferings might be relieved. He an-
swered, " I have too little fortitude, and am easily-
affected. My complaint is trifling, and I shall be well
to-morrow. It is you that I must examine. But how
fortunate it is that you have made me somnambulic !
Henceforth, we shall always commence our magnetic
treatment in this manner, and I assure you that you
will be well attended to." From that period the lady
constantly set her magnetiser asleep every day, and in
consequence of following his prescriptions, while in a
state of somnambulism, her complaint (a scirrhus) was
removed. While in this state, too, he predicted that
she should be attacked, some time afterwards, by a
complaint of a different nature. This prediction was
fulfilled, and she was again cured in precisely the
same manner as before. The veracity of this account
is vouched by M. Deleuze himself, who knew the
parties.*

It is laid down as a rule by Deleuze, that women
should magnetise women ; but I am of opinion, with-
out throwing any doubt on their ability to do so, that
they should not magnetise patients susceptible of
passing into the higher degrees of magnetic extase,
because of the dangerous symptoms which may, as I
have above explained, supervene, in which case women
are certainly more liable to lose their self-command
than men.

It is not easy, as I have already premised, to
describe the physiognomy of a powerful mag-
netiser. I have seen men debilitated by disease,
emaciated, labouring almost even in the last stage of
pulmonary consumption, most powerful magnetisers ;
it is a mental rather than a physical exertion, which
demands great concentration of thought and sustained
volition. If his thoughts wander during the opera-
tion ; if his attention be divided, and he become ab-
sent ; if even, from over anxiety to induce magnetic
results, the equable balance, or steady power with
which he should act be disturbed, the effects are more
slowly induced, or perhaps fail to appear. Self-con-
fidence in his magnetic power, on the part of the mag-
netiser is important, if not essential to the success of
the operation ; and a lively faith in his influence on
the part of the patient facilitates very much, and ac-
celerates the development of the effects. This is by
no means surprising. In the most common medical
cases it is notorious that if the patient possess no con-
fidence in the physician, his prescriptions will rarely
prove availing, so direct and powerful an influence
has the mind itself over the action of the most eligible
therapeutical agents. Hence it is well observed by
Burton, in his curiously learned work, the Anatomie
of Melancholy,* that " a third thing to bee required
in a patient is confidence, to bee of good cheare, and
have sure hope that his physician can helpe him.
Damascen, the Arabian, requires likewise in the phy-
sician himselfe that he bee confident he can cure him,
otherwise his physicke will not be effect uall, and pro-
mise withall that he will certainly helpe him — make
him beleeve so at least. Galeotus gives this reason,
because the forme of health is contained in the phy-
sician's minde ; and as Galen holds, confidence and
hope doe more good than physick ; he cures most in
whom most are confident. Axiocus, sicke almost to
death, at the very sight of Socrates recovered his
former health. Paracelsus assigns it for an only cause
why Hippocrates was so fortunate in his cures, not
for any extraordinarie skill he had, but because the
common people had a most strong conceipt of his
worth." So also Avicenna affirmed, that " he preferred
confidence before art, prescriptions, and all precepts
whatever."

There are many persons naturally very susceptible
of the magnetic influence. They cannot endure the
operation when steadily and vigorously conducted ; the
accumulation of the magnetic fluid in their system pro-
duces an alarming disturbance of all the organic func-
tions ; the action of the heart becomes increased,
the breathing hurried, violent convulsive fits super-
vene ; and should such persons be labouring under
any aneurismal affection, disposition to apoplexy, or
far advanced phthisical diseases, the consequences
may be fatal. As a general rule, the susceptibility of
the patient increases with every successive sitting.
He who at first resisted the operation for a consider-
able time, at length speedily, even in a few seconds,
falls into somnambulism ; and when the magnetiser
has invested him with an extreme aptitude to pass
from one state to another, the least gesture from him —
a look indicative of his intention — his will expressed
with energy, is sufficient. It should also be observed,
that during natural sleep persons are magnetised with
as much, or perhaps more, facility than when awake.
Under the magnetic influence they soon become rest-
less and agitated, and the natural passes into the mag-
netic sleep, characterised by all the phenomena which
are so peculiar to this state of being.

When such convulsions as those above described
result from the magnetic operation, the magnetiser
should maintain his self-possession ; he should not,
however much the patient may appear in a state be-
yond his control, suspend the process of magnetisa-
tion, but persevere steadily until he succeed in restor-
ing him to a calmer magnetic state. In some cases
very great cerebral excitement, amounting almost to
temporary mania, is produced ; and he should then
continue operating with the utmost mental energy :
but it is difficult, if not impossible, to anticipate all the
abnormal manifestations which may appear during the
process of magnetisation ; they require to be watched
with vigilance, and at once treated with decision. He,
however, who would be a successful operator, should
possess medical knowledge ; he should know the phy-
siological and pathological condition of the human
body, and be prepared to detect the slightest aberra-
tions in the functions of organic life. He will other-
wise be incompetent to observe the effects of mag-
netisation, which should, in a great measure, prac-
tically guide him in the mode of conducting the
operation, a knowledge which is not to be acquired
without much experience, yet which is very essential
to the safety of the patient. Hence those continental
governments which prohibited the practice of animal
magnetism by all, excepting persons duly qualified,
acted wisely ; for there is no therapeutical agent more
liable to be abused on account of its being under the
command of every individual ; so that the unlearned
as well as the learned, sceptics as well as believers,
for the purpose of satisfying curiosity, or amusing a
group of idle spectators, have frequently produced
the most alarming symptoms. In the hands, how-
ever, of well-informed and skilful magnetic prac-
titioners, such dangers are not to be apprehended ;
and this is no more an argument against the applica-
tion of magnetism, when competently conducted, than
the abuse of the lancet would be an argument against
the use of this important little surgical instrument.
It has been said that the injudicious use of the lancet,
has produced as great a mortality among the sick, as
the sword has in the field of battle ; and every medical
practitioner knows what fatal consequences have en-
sued from the ignorant and empirical administration
of opium, mercury, antimony, arsenic, preparations of
lead, &c. ; but these valuable remedies are not, for
this reason, to be excluded from the pharmacopoeia.
So is it with animal magnetism. From the facts above
stated it is evident that it is a very powerful agent,
which should not be had recourse to excepting by
persons who have studied, and have a practical know-
ledge of the subject. Here, therefore, let me caution
sceptics themselves to beware how, in the midst of
their incredulity, they sport with an agent that may,
when they least expect it, give rise to consequences
which they themselves will not contemplate without
poignant sorrow and alarm. The power of magneti-
sation is common to us all, but the method in which it
is to be efficiently developed, so as to produce salu-
tary results, demands much study and patient in-
vestigation.



CHAPTER VI.



CURATIVE EFFECTS OF ANIMAL MAGNETISM.



If such be the dangers which are to be apprehended
from the misapplication and abuse of animal mag-
netism, what are the advantages to be derived from
this discovery? This question is easily answered.
The most dangerous remedies when misapplied, are.
often the most efficient when judiciously adminis-
tered ; — from the most poisonous plants may vir-
tues be extracted. The earth is not to be regarded
as altogether an howling wilderness of disease and
crime, the paths of which are beset only by noxious
reptiles and deadly weeds. A more cheerful view
opens before the contemplation of the philanthropist,
who will perceive that the current of all things flowing
onwards is redolent of blessings. The value of such
a discovery as animal magnetism is to be estimated,
not by the evils to which its unskilful application may
give rise, but by the positive good which may be
derived from it. Already we have seen that during
the state of magnetic insensibility the most painful
surgical operations may be performed, and the patient
remain the whole time in a state of perfect uncon-
sciousness. Is this not a boon to suffering humanity ?
But this is not all ; the most obstinate and painful
chronic diseases, as well as numerous spasmodic ner-
vous affections, have been relieved and perfectly cured
by its application. It was indeed the cures which were
wrought by the early magnetisers, Mesmer, Puysegur,
Deslon, Bickers, Olbers, Wienholt, &c, which first
attracted the attention of men of science to the dis-
covery : the attestation of these by competent observers,
and the patients themselves, put magnetism in the
first instance on so secure a footing as to make head
against the sea of prejudice by which on every side it
was beset. It was, I repeat, the successful treatment and
cure of diseases, which had notoriously resisted every
other remedy, which compelled the rudest and most
inveterate of our antagonists to recognise the influence
of magnetism ; and when these facts were demonstrated
beyond all reasonable controversy, it remained for
them to seek in the umbrage of their imagination the
solution of the mystery. Hence imagination, imita-
tion, manual contact, and numerous other hypotheses,
equally unsatisfactory, were conjured up ; but no
rational mind could fail to observe that the appeal
was made, not to theory, but to fact ; inasmuch as men
of high intellectual attainment and unimpeachable
moral integrity, who had no interest whatever in the
promulgation of animal magnetism, after subjecting
themselves to its treatment, declared themselves re-
lieved and cured of various distressing affections.
Hereafter I shall prove that medical science is founded
on animal magnetism ; that the whole art and prac-
tice of medicine in the ancient temples consisted in
the magnetic treatment which is even at the present
day practised in India.* Indeed, no manner of doubt
can exist, that even in the hands of unskilful prac-
titioners, in the midst of all their strange and ex-
travagant superstitions, such men have wrought many
very curious and signal cures. It is idle to suppose
that any nation would believe generally in the efficacy
of any therapeutical agent, were it only after all an
errant folly or fiction ; for however uninstructed men
may be, they derive knowledge from experience, and
it is not reasonable to presume that any method of
treatment would for ages be persevered in, if the
sick therefrom derived no description of benefit. But
apart from all argument deduced from the early his-
tory of animal magnetism, we now find that in many
of the great public hospitals, at Berlin, Stockholm,
Vienna, Paris, London, the magnetic treatment has
been successfully adopted in the cure of a variety of
diseases. In epilepsy, paralysis, hysteria, neuralgia,
chronic rheumatism, head-ache, I know of no remedy
so immediate and availing. How often have I seen
the victim of pain writhing in the most acute agony,
sink under its influence into a state of the most placid
composure ! How often have I heard thanksgivings
and prayers breathed in gratitude to the Creator for
the relief which the afflicted have hereby experienced !
Yes ; and albeit the sceptic may smile incredulously,
he may rest assured that I have heard blessings which
might move the heart of the coldest cynic, fall from
the lips of those who under no other treatment could
be relieved from the most intense and exquisite suf-
ferings !

* " Several of the Indians," says Hearne, who appears to be
not at all aware of the principle upon which the fact depends,
" being very ill, the conjurors, who are always the doctors, and
pretend to perform great cures, began to try their skill to effect
their recovery. Here it is necessary to observe that they use no
medicines, either for internal or external complaints, but perform
all their cures by charms.'' The learned traveller then describes
somewhat ludicrously the processes they adopt ; and adds, that
however laughable they may appear in the eyes of an European,
"custom makes it very indecent to turn anything of the kind into
ridicule." Vide " A Journey from Prince of Wales' Fort, in Hud-
son's Bay, to the Northern Ocean. By Samuel Hearne. London."

But it is not only in nervous diseases that animal
magnetism is so valuable a therapeutical agent ; in
derangements of the vascular system, in the early
stages of inflammation, and on the accession of fevers,
it is equally useful. In cases of general debility, de-
pending on scrofulous diathesis, to which young per-
sons are so liable, it produces also a remarkably in-
vigorating effect on the system. It ought, however,
to be observed that the application of animal mag-
netism in the treatment of disease produces beneficial
effects, albeit the more remarkable physical and
psychical magnetic phenomena be not developed.
The good, therefore, which is to be derived is not to be
estimated by the ostensible magnetic effects which are
induced.

" In some instances," says Loewe, " no other striking
phenomena takes place, than merely a gradual change
of the unhealthy to the healthy state, according to the
repetition of the application. In others the mag-
netised person falls asleep, and is recovered without
being brought to a higher degree of magnetical phe-
nomena. The four following cases have come under
my own observation : — At Groningen, a girl, about
nineteen years of age, was suffering under hysterical
spasms, which sometimes continued for forty-eight
hours : after being magnetised half an hour a day for
three weeks, the patient recovered, and no other phe-
nomena was effected.

" A lady residing in London, after a violent attack
of fever, under which she was suffering in the months
of December and January last, was affected by con-
vulsions of every kind, but mostly by fainting, which
often lasted two hours, and it was difficult to bring
her to herself. I was one day present when this faint-
ing was coming on, and, in presence of her sister and
brother-in-law, I tried to make application of animal
magnetism : I had scarcely begun to operate, when
she quickly recovered from the fainting, as though
she had been awakened by fright, and from that mo-
ment she gradually recovered, with the assistance of
medicaments usual in such cases, and is now in per-
fect health.

" A boy in Groningen, fourteen years of age, was
suffering under tertian ague about eight weeks : after
having given him all medicaments usual in this case,
without effect, he was recovered by applying animal
magnetism no longer than eight days ; but no other
phenomena was observed.

" A gentleman, thirty-five years of age, had laboured
for many years under a chronic disease, which some-
times presented itself in the form of head-ache, par-
ticularly on one side of the head, (hemicrannim,) and
sometimes as an hypochondriac affection : after having
made use of all the medicines usual in such diseases
without effect, he was magnetised. For three weeks,
during which time the animal magnetism was daily
repeated, there was no remarkable difference in his
case, but in the fourth week the symptoms of the first
degree of magnetism presented themselves, and he
was brought to the state of sleeping ; and after the
daily repetition of animal magnetism during the space
of eight weeks, he recovered without any other phe-
nomenon taking place."*

In other cases, however, the phenomena of clair-
voyance and lucidity supervene, and the patients pre-
scribe, not only for themselves, but for others, the
treatment which should be adopted ; and, as I have
already advised, the injunctions given in this state
should be scrupulously obeyed. I now proceed to
adduce, from the mass of evidence which lies before
me, a few cases which will sufficiently illustrate the
curative effects of animal magnetism ; I subjoin them
without reference to any nosological arrangements.

Caroline Baudoin, twenty years of age, of a lym-
phatic temperament, had passed her childhood at Ge-
neva, where the badness of her constitution fully
developed itself, aggravated perhaps by the influence
of the climate, or the use of unwholesome food. Her
whole glandular system became diseased ; her throat,
breasts, and arm-pits exhibited tumours of a decidedly
scrofulous nature, many of which suppurated, and
discharged an abundance of purulent matter. The dis-
ease had been treated by all the most approved means ;
several issues had been inserted, but other tumours
gathered and burst. One in particular, in the left
arm, had burrowed down to the bone, and spread
through the adjacent muscles, so as to render neces-
sary the amputation of the arm. This having been
resolved on, the operation was performed at the Hos-
pital St.-Louis, with the consent of the patient, who,
fatigued with the pain occasioned by this festering
limb, looked upon its removal as a blessing. It was
attended with complete success ; the wound, however,
took sometime in healing ; and the patient afterwards
left the hospital, wherein she had been under treat-
ment for several months. But her system, infected
as it was with scrofulous matter, gave her no rest.
Another wound opened on her breast, and resisted
every medical treatment ; she was in this state when I
first knew her ; a poor girl, doomed to great suffering,
and apparently to a premature death. Moved by the
recital of her sufferings, I resolved upon magnetising
her, rather from an instinctive feeling that I might
relieve her, than from any conviction that I could do
her good, for I scarcely considered it possible to cure
so inveterate a disease. In the course of three mi-
nutes' magnetisation, she fell asleep, and began by
telling me that, had she known me seven months
sooner, she would not have lost her arm. It was only
three months since she had been operated upon. She
pointed out the means of healing the wounds on the
arm and breast, and on these being applied they
proved completely successful. The most important
thing, however, remained to be effected, which was
to change her constitution, or at least to modify it in
such a manner as to prevent a recurrence of the pre-
vious eruptions. Magnetism had produced a sufficient
degree of lucidity to allow of her giving advice to
other patients, but hitherto not enough to describe
the means of curing herself. One day, as she was
prescribing for a patient whose recovery she was
anxious to bring about, she interrupted the consul-
tation, and told me that on the 24th of August, at
nine in the evening, she should fall into a state of
profound sleep, which would last for thirty hours ;
that this sleep would be very calm, if during the two
preceding days she were not annoyed by anything j
but otherwise she should be much agitated; and that,
by an unaccountable feeling, she should endeavour to
eat her own flesh. She therefore desired that precau-
tions might be taken to check this fatal propensity,
and requested that she might be incessantly watched.
She declared further, that during this crisis of thirty
hours, she would eat absolutely nothing ; and that the
scrofulous matter would be carried out of her system.
She also said, that during her sleep a bruissement
would be heard at the epigastrium, caused by the
flow of scrofulous humours. She then predicted her
perfect recovery. This declaration was made on the
14th of July, 1833. I made her repeat it on the 21st
of the same month, in the presence of fifteen persons,
who drew up and signed a report to this effect, having
previously taken care to ascertain her scrofulous state.
In the intervening period many persons took cognizance
of the declaration, and promised, if her prediction
were fulfilled, to attest so remarkable a case. On the
24th of August, at eight in the evening, it was ar-
ranged that several persons should assemble in the
house of the patient, at the Petit- Carreau ; and I en-
joined her attendants to put her to bed half-an-hour
before the accession of her crisis, in order to prevent
her being annoyed. All this was punctually done.
At nine o'clock precisely, a number of visitors had
congregated. On arriving, we were informed that
the crisis had declared itself a few minutes sooner than
she had predicted, and that it was fully developed.
On entering the room we saw the unfortunate girl
with her face swelled, her tongue protruding out of
her mouth, nearly, to all appearance, cut in two by
her teeth, her limbs stiffened, and her jaws so firmly
locked that it was impossible to open them. After
having magnetised the masseter muscles so as to re-
move the stiffness of the jaws, I caused the tongue to
be drawn in, which was already very much discoloured,
and fortunately had only been bitten very slightly.
No one had yet perceived that one of her fingers had
not only been bitten, but that there was a loss of sub-
stance, the piece wanting having been swallowed by
her during her previous paroxysm. The wound was
now dressed, out of which no blood, but a great quan-
tity of red lymph issued. As the violence of this
crisis continued, I thought it proper to remain with
her during the ensuing thirty hours. I was perfectly
right in having taken this resolution, for she struggled
long with extraordinary violence, and attempted to
put her hand into her mouth to bite it again, but she
had been so bound down that she could only get at
the sheets, a piece of which she succeeded in tearing
off. The somnambulic state at length terminated;
her prediction was fulfilled ; and she was, to the satis-
faction of all the parties interested, from that day
cured.

A woman of forty years of age, worn out by long
sufferings, and unable to stir without crutches, re-
solved on having recourse to animal magnetism, and
was conveyed for that purpose to Paris, in a sedan-
chair. She was two days travelling a distance of
thirty-six miles. Several fainting fits came on during
this journey. On being magnetised upon her arrival,
she fell into somnambulism, but her sleep did not
present any lucidity. The magnetic effects, however,
produced by the magnetiser were such * that he at
once declared that, in a few days, the patient would
walk without crutches. He therefore invited her to a
ball, which he intended giving in his house on a cer-
tain day. The doubts expressed by the patient and
her friends did not in the least disconcert him, but,
on the contrary, he sent his invitations to a great
many people, that they might go and convince them-
selves, and acknowledge the truth of his assertion, and
the triumph of magnetism. In the meantime the pa-
tient was magnetised every morning, and at each sit-
ting a decided improvement was observed. On the
eleventh day she began to attempt a few steps, being
supported by the arms, and she left off using crutches.
On the seventeenth, she came to the soiree of the
magnetiser, ascended the stairs unassisted, walked
about the room, and remained there until one o'clock
in the morning, when she retired to her own house
without having felt any more fatigue than would have
been the case with a person in good health.

Mademoiselle Lacourt, the daughter of a commis
sioner to the Mont de Piete, residing in Paris, Cour
de& Fermes, eighteen years of age, had suffered for
five years and a half under morbus coxarius, affection
of the hip joint ; and had derived some benefit from
the treatment she had undergone, when, on a sudden,
in consequence of a fall, she lost the use of her legs ;
a luxation of the femoral bone now perfectly marked
supervened. Able physicians were called in to attend
her. The means prescribed by them were applied
without any beneficial result, and they unanimously
declared that the disease had assumed a scrofulous
character, which rendered it utterly incurable. This
declaration was communicated to the relatives of the
patient, and confirmed by M. Dupuytren, who ad-
vised that the leg should be amputated. Meanwhile
another trial was made by applying moxas, which had
been recommended by M. Broussais. The sufferer,
however, obtained no relief. At last, some allusion
was made to magnetism as a doubtful remedy, but the
only one that remained untried. I was asked if I
would employ it in this case, but I at first refused,
considering that the disease was too severe, and most
likely incurable ; on being, however, again solicited, I
yielded to the entreaty, and paid a visit to the patient,
who did not even know what was meant by mag-
netism. After being magnetised by me for five mi-
nutes, she fell asleep ; 1 then questioned her, and she
declared, before several persons, that on the 25th of
July, at twelve o'clock, she would be able to walk
without crutches, that her lameness would leave her,
and that she never should have a relapse. She re-
quested to be magnetised daily for the next fifteen
days, and then every other day up to the above date.
This was five weeks previously, and I conformed en-
tirely with her injunctions ; and invited a number of
physicians to watch the progress of her treatment.
Twelve of my pupils observed it with great attention,
and attended several times every week. The appointed
day was approaching; the whole family, sadly afflicted
by this dreadful calamity, could not believe in so prompt
a recovery ; it would have been a miracle — and nobody
now-a-days believes in miracles — but I, in my own
mind, was quite confident that the patient would walk.
The effects produced by magnetism were very appa-
rent at each successive sitting, and abundant exuda-
tion of viscous matter plainly indicated that a more
healthy action was going on in the articulations ; the
skin recovered from its morbid colour ; her strength
reappeared ; and her digestion decidedly improved.
In fact, no bad symptom remained, excepting that the
affected leg, as is usual in such cases, after having
been longer, became shorter than the other. On the
24th, she again affirmed that on the morrow, at twelve,
she would be able to walk without crutches, and with-
out being lame. It was then six months since she
had been confined to bed, and five years and a half
since the first appearance of her disease. On the
25th, at half-past eleven, I went to her house ; the
apartment was crowded with persons wishing to wit-
ness this unprecedented cure. Incredulity was de-
picted on every countenance. I was called an enthu-
siast, a visionary, a mere youth ; every one expected
to witness my confusion. I confess that I felt an in-
expressible anxiety; a cold dew trickled down my
forehead ; I was pale and trembling, notwithstanding
something that whispered to me that in a few minutes
I should reap the reward due to my exertions, and
that my faith in somnambulic prevision, so often put
to the test, would be once more justified. At twelve
o'clock precisely, I approached the patient ; she was
in her bed, and dressed. I magnetised her before the
spectators ; and when sleep was induced, I reminded
her of her promise, and called upon her to keep it ; I
then commanded her, in a firm voice, to rise and
walk. She slowly moved out of bed, and placed her
feet on the floor for her shoes to be put on. The
spectators, impressed with the novelty of the scene,
remained silent, staring, and motionless ; then, at the
waving of my hand, they drew back to make room for
her ; and I again commanded her to walk ; she im-
mediately touched the floor with her diseased foot, and
very hesitatingly ; she then made one step, took a deep
breath, and at length walked forward to the other end of
the room, without being supported or leaning on any
one. She then returned to her bed. I now awakened
her, and bid her again walk, — an act which she was
perfectly unconscious of having just performed ; she
thereupon again touched the floor, to make sure of
her footing, and moved with hesitation ; but soon
gaining strength, she walked several times round the
room.

In the thesis of a distinguished foreigner, M. Albert
Jozwik, which was cordially received by the profes-
sors,* who encouraged him to proceed in his scientific
researches, several remarkable magnetical cases are
reported. I extract the following, — " In the month
of July, 1829, in the camp then before Warsaw, a
subaltern officer of the third regiment of Chasseurs d
pied of the Polish army, shot himself by putting the
muzzle of his musket in his mouth. The medical
officer of his regiment was instantly on the spot, and
gave him every assistance, but in vain. This case
was reported to me, as I was then superintending the
medical department of the division. The body of the
severely wounded officer had been conveyed to the
infirmary, to which I immediately repaired ; and,
having found it still warm, I magnetised it. After a
magnetisation of about half an hour, the poor fellow
began to breathe, and was resuscitated ; I then dressed
his wound, and sent him to the hospital called Uiaz-
dow."*

M. Joseph Skrodzki, captain, aged 21, having been
seized with an attack of St. Vitus' dance, was treated
by the doctors of Besancon, who cauterised his arms
and lumbar region, and bled him several times. Hav-
ing found that the antiphlogistic treatment, and various
medicaments prescribed in similar cases, had produced
no change for the better, they advised him to take a
trip to Paris. He accordingly came to the capital,
and was admitted at the hospital de la Pitie, where
he was again bled and subjected to applications of
moxa at the nape of the neck. All these means were
prescribed and strictly adhered to without producing
any remarkable amelioration of health. The patient
then applied to me, as he had before been under my
care ; but his state did not allow me to give him a
favourable prognosis ; I proposed, however, to treat
him magnetically for a fortnight, that I might then be
enabled to pronounce whether it was in my power to
cure him. He had left the hospital de la Pitie in
the month of July, 1832. I began to apply magnetism
immediately on his leaving. At the first sitting, the
paroxysms which had occurred in the early part of
the day no longer returned ; they were confined to
the prodromes ; during the subsequent days, the pro-
dromes were less frequent. On the seventh day the
captain was perfectly cured, and the parts which were
in a purulent state were healed by a lotion of mag-
netised water.

* This case clearly proves that, as a resuscitating process, animal
magnetism may, in cases of partial asphyxia, be advantageously
applied.

A child, eight years old, without any known cause,
was seized with ascitis, and afterwards with an ulcer
in the right leg. The physician who attended wished
to perform the operation of paracentesis, and, with
this view, applied to me for advice. I proposed to
defer the operation for a few days, and to submit the
child to the magnetic treatment, to which they ac-
quiesced. As early as the second day of magnetisa-
tion, the evacuations became more abundant than
they had been during the application of the remedies,
which had been previously exhibited with this intent.
After the third, fourth, and fifth sittings, the patient
became still more improved, and by the twentieth day
was perfectly cured.

The curative influence of animal magnetism was
fully attested by the Report of the French Academy,
to which I have so often adverted — not because the
facts it records are magnetically considered curious or
remarkable, but because this is an authentic docu-
ment, embodying the verdict of a critical tribunal,
which herein put on record details which, as pure
matter-of-fact evidence, cannot be controverted. Any
individual authority, however unexceptionable, is liable
to be impugned; but I do not understand how the
concurrent testimony of numerous scientific men,
highly respected members of one of the most scientific
academies in Europe, who were delegated, in the most
solemn manner, to inquire into the veracity of any
series of demonstrable facts, can be so easily repu-
diated. On this account, I repeat, I so frequently
cite this report in preference to my own experience,
or any other authority. The following case, of an old
and severe paralysis cured by animal magnetism, is
very similar in its details to some of those above nar-
rated.

" Paul Villagrand, student of law, born at Magnac
Laval (Upper Vienne,) on the 18th of May, 1803, suf-
fered a stroke of apoplexy on the 25th of December,
1825, which was followed by a paralysis of the whole
left side of the body. After seventeen months of dif-
ferent modes of treatment, by acupuncture, a seton in
the nape of the neck, twelve applications of moxa
along the vertebral column — modes of treatment which
he followed at home, at the Maison de Sante, and at
the Hospice de Perfectionnement, and in the course
of which he had two fresh attacks — he was admitted
into the Hopital de la Charite on the 8th of April,
1827. Although he had experienced perceptible relief
from the means employed before he entered this hos-
pital, he still walked with crutches, being unable to
support himself upon the left foot. The arm of the
same side, indeed, could perform several motions ; but
Paul could not lift it to his head. He scarcely saw
with his right eye, and was very hard of hearing with
both ears. In this state he was entrusted to the care
of our colleague, M. Fouquier, who, besides the very
evident paralysis, discovered in him the symptoms of
hypertrophy of the heart.

" During five months, he administered to him the
alcoholic extract of nux vomica, bled him from time to
time, purged him, and applied blisters. The left arm
recovered a little strength ; the head-aches, to which
he was subject, disappeared ; and his health continued
stationary until the 29th of August, 1827, when he was
magnetised for the first time by M. Foissac, by order
and under the direction of M. Fouquier. At this first
sitting, he experienced a sensation of general heat,
then twitchings (soubresauts) of the tendons. He was
astonished to find himself overcome by the desire of
sleeping ; he rubbed his eyes in order to get rid of it,
made visible and ineffectual efforts to keep his eyelids
open, and at length his head fell down upon his breast,
and he fell asleep. From this period his deafness and
head-aches disappeared. It was not until the ninth
sitting that his sleep became profound ; and at the
tenth he answered, by inarticulate sounds, the ques-
tions which were addressed to him. At a later period,
he announced that he could not be cured but by means
of magnetism, and he prescribed for himself a conti-
nuation of the pills composed of the extract of nux
vomica, sinapisms, and baths of Bareges. Upon the
25th of September your committee repaired to the
Hopital de la Charite, made the patient be undressed,
and ascertained that the inferior left limb was mani-
festly thinner than the right — that the right hand
closed much more strongly than the left — that the
tongue, when drawn out of the mouth, was carried to-
wards the right commissure, and that the right cheek
was more convex than the left.

" Paul was then magnetised, and soon placed in a
state of somnambulism. He recapitulated what re-
lated to his treatment, and prescribed that, on that
same day, a sinapism should be applied to each of his
legs for an hour and a half ; that next day he should
take a bath of Bareges ; and that, upon coming out of
the bath, sinapisms should be again applied during
twelve hours without interruption, sometimes to one
place, and sometimes to another ; that, upon the fol-
lowing day, after having taken a second bath of Ba-
reges, blood should be drawn from his right arm to
the extent of a palette and a half. Finally, he added,
that by following this treatment he would be enabled,
upon the 28th, i. e., three days afterwards, to walk
without crutches on leaving the sitting, at which, he
said, it would still be necessary to magnetise him.
The treatment which he had prescribed was followed ;
and upon the day named, the 28th of September, the
committee repaired to the Hopital de la Charite.
Paul came, supported on his crutches, into the con-
sulting-room, where he was magnetised, as usual, and
placed in a state of somnambulism. In this state, he
assured us that he should return to bed without the
use of his crutches, without support. Upon awaking,
he asked for his crutches ; we told him that he had no
longer any need of them. In fact, he rose, supported
himself on the paralysed leg, passed through the crowd
who followed him, descended the step of the chambre
d' experiences, crossed the second court of the building,
ascended two steps, and when he arrived at the bottom
of the stair he sat down. After resting two minutes,
he ascended, with the assistance of an arm and the
balustrade, the twenty-four steps of the stair which led
to the room where he slept, went to bed without sup-
port, sat down again for a moment, and then took
another walk in the room, to the great astonishment of
all the other patients, who, until then, had seen him
constantly confined to bed. From this day Paul never
resumed his crutches."

But however efficient a remedy animal magnetism
may be in paralysis, it is still more so in cases of epi-
lepsy ;* and all medical men are aware that this is one
of the most intractable diseases that can fall under
their attention. Its pathology is yet very imperfectly
understood ; and its treatment, on the ordinary prin-
ciples of medical science, is generally a confessed fail-
ure. In vain has the physician exhausted his ingenuity,
and ransacked the vegetable and mineral kingdoms to
discover some remedy which might avert the paroxysm,
or mitigate its intensity. Before the perplexed by-
standers, the individual suddenly falls down in a state
of perfect insensibility ; the limbs become convulsed,
the body writhes in apparent agony, and sometimes
doubles on itself (opostlwtonos) ; the jaws are clenched,
the teeth gnash violently on one another, and the tongue
protruding between them is often severely wounded.
It is no wonder that, in a superstitious age, it should
have been supposed by ignorant persons that the vic-
tims of this strange malady were possessed by an evil
spirit, and that they sought the exorcism of the priest
rather than the aid of the physician. We may rest
assured, however, that during the mystic rites of exor-
cism the priests, as I shall elsewhere have occasion to
shew, acted magnetically ; under the form of a reli-
gious ceremony they communicated the magnetic in-
fluence, and in consequence of the beneficial results
they produced, these rites are still preserved in many
catholic countries. Hence a celebrated English writer,
the late Mr. Thomas Hope, the accomplished author
of Anastasius, observes, " there are certain nervous
complaints, such as epilepsy and convulsions, at once
violent while they last, and during their intermittence
leaving no trace behind. Of these, the infliction ap->
pears to proceed more immediately from superhuman
causes, and the cure to be more directly within
the province of the priesthood, and are only to
be removed by exorcisms and prayers." He then
adds — and I beg attention to that which follows — " I
myself have witnessed at Naples the ceremony of ex-
pelling evil spirits ; and, strange to say, they yielded
for a time to the imprecations pronounced against
them."* It is certain that no ordinary medical treat-
ment is of any avail in this disease. The reason, says
Dr. Elliotson, it is so generally intractable, and that so
many remedies are so uncertain and so unsatisfactory,
is very evident. This is a disease which arises from
every sort of irritation in every part of the body ; and
the irritation may be structural, may be slow inflam-
mation, or something we cannot remove. If it arose
from one cause, it would be a different thing ; but it
will arise from any cause whatever, physical or mental,
organic or inorganic, and situated in any part of the
body.* Now, reasoning pathologically, the causes of
epilepsy as here described, and as given, also, by nu-
merous French authors, are precisely those in which it
might be predicated that the application of animal
magnetism would prove availing. I know of no re-
medy so likely to allay irritation, from whatever cause
it may arise ; and I now speak practically, not theo-
retically, for I have myself succeeded in curing many
cases of epilepsy by magnetism, and so have other
magnetisers. Unless, indeed, this disease depend on
organic lesion, or some purely structural cause, I con-
sider epilepsy perfectly curable by magnetism ; and,
even in those cases, the intervals between the pa-
roxysms may, by the magnetic operation, be prolonged,
and the intensity of the paroxysm itself mitigated. I
do not, be it observed, pretend that animal magnetism
will cure all diseases ; I do not cry it up as an universal
remedy or panacea, which is at once to exterminate
suffering, and prolong the duration of human life.
Far from it ; I regard it as an important and very
valuable therapeutical agent, the exhibition of which
requires much skill and judgment on the part of the
medical practitioner. Nay, there are many diseases
in which I have learned, from experience, that its
application is decidedly contra-indicated, and would be
attended with injurious consequences. Already I have
stated, that, in the case of a female patient who was
magnetised by me at the Hotel-Dieu of Paris, the
pulse rose from 60 in the minute to upwards of 100,
an increase of circulation which might be attended
with a fatal result in a person labouring under aneu-
rism, or disposed to haemoptysis, (hemorrhage of blood
from the lungs,) in far advanced pulmonary consump-
tion. When I first commenced the practice of mag-
netism, elated with the success I had obtained in some
very inveterate and almost hopeless cases, I magnetised
patients indiscriminately, and, among others, several
afflicted with pulmonary complaints, which other phy-
sicians had pronounced incurable. It appeared to me
— I was at any rate sanguine enough to believe — that
consumption itself would yield to its beneficial influ-
ence, for I had read that it had in some cases been
successfully applied ; — however, I was deceived, as the
following results may testify. A patient suffering
under this complaint being magnetised by me, at first
experienced a general soothing effect — a calmness,
accompanied by a sensation of general comfort. But
this state was soon succeeded by violent paroxysms
of coughing, attended by profuse perspiration, and
acute pains in the chest. Thus affected, she earnestly
entreated me to desist ; but, supposing that some fa-
vourable crisis was at hand, I persevered, and found
these ominous symptoms only became aggravated ;
the cheeks became flushed, the eyes suffused, and the
convulsive coughing brought up a quantity of bloody
mucus. I was then compelled to suspend magnetisa-
tion ; and, from further experience, have satisfied my-
self that in such cases its application is inadmissible.

* There is a certain analogy between the magnetic and epilep-
tic state of insensibility. It has been observed, that " when the
patient awakes from a fit of epilepsy he has generally no recol-
lection of what has passed ; and perhaps, therefore, there is no
suffering. The want of recollection of suffering is no proof
that there has been no suffering; for we have all suffered
enough in cutting our teeth, and we know nothing of it now.
And so it may happen in more recent events ; the fit may be
attended with more or less suffering, and yet the individual not be
aware of it afterwards." ''But,"says Dr.Elliotson, " I should think
there is no suffering ; and for this reason : persons do not suffer,
in general, when they are hung. There is an account in Lord
Bacon's works of a person who was hung, and all but killed, and
yet he did not suffer. There is a short account of Cowley, the
poet, (which is very scarce,) from which it appears that he three
times attempted to commit suicide, and one of these attempts was
by suspension. The account was written by himself, and found
among his manuscripts. He there mentions, that he suspended
himself over the chamber door in the Temple, and became per-
fectly insensible. He only recollected a flash of light appearing
before his eyes. His weight at last caused him to drop on the
floor; there he was found, and, after a time, recovered. He
says, that although he was thus in the jaws of death, and had
become perfectly insensible, yet he had no previous suffering;
and, therefore, as there was no previous suffering in that state, it is
probable that there is no suffering in epilepsy. I should suppose,
that in drowning there is no suffering, if it occur at once. Shak-
spear's expression is, ' O Lord ! methought what pain it was to
drown.' But there is no reason to suppose there is pain, if the
individual go down and do not come up again ; but if he come out
of the water, the suffering is dreadful." — Good's Study of Medi-
cine, by S. Cooper, vol. iii., p. 410, note.


" Philanthropy, or the desire of relieving a fellow-
creature," says an intelligent author, " has, no doubt,
greatly magnified the real virtues of magnetism ; but
this power indubitably exists ; it is, therefore, the
duty of the physician to study it without prejudice,
and of the physiologist to circumscribe it within
proper limits. The direct influence of this new agent
on the nervous system leads us to think, that its
power may be most efficacious in nervous affections in
general. Hysteria, hypochondria, melancholy, cata-
lepsy, epilepsy, have derived the most salutary benefit
from its application ; spasmodic diseases of every
kind, cramps of the muscles, convulsions, and a multi-
tude of pains, as well as cases of deafness and para-
lysis, have also been relieved by its application. In
these various affections, the nervous system being'the
chief seat of the disease, and magnetism directing its
influence especially on this system, it evidently fol-
lows that the result must be worthy of attention. It
is, therefore, in these affections that the partisans of
magnetism testify to having obtained the most sur-
prising success. It would take up too much time
were I to adduce instances of this ; but every work
on magnetism is replete with them. There is no
panacea in nature, and we do not pretend to repre-
sent magnetism as an universal remedy ; for if it be
useful in some cases, it is nevertheless injurious in
others. We must carefully, therefore, study the na-
ture of its operation, and learn whether it be exciting,
debilitating, or sedative ; and having once succeeded
in determining the precise nature of its physiological
action, we may then proceed, in a philosophical spirit,
to ascertain the particular cases in which it may
be employed with benefit."

In many acute diseases, animal magnetism alone is
not to be trusted, and certain medicines should at the
same time be administered ; but I shall abstain from
entering into details which would be purely profes-
sional. However, I may here observe, that a good
work on the practice of medicine, founded on the
principles of animal magnetism, is much required by
medical men ; and this desideratum I propose endea-
vouring to supply in my next volume, to which this,
as I have already stated, is only an introduction,
which I now publish for the purpose of calling the
attention of the profession, and the public generally,
to the elementary facts of animal magnetism, before
proceeding to more complex details; and this is the
only course I could with propriety have adopted ; for
there is, in this country, a general disbelief in animal
magnetism, accompanied by an indisposition even
to investigate the facts ; and if I am only fortunate
enough to disturb this apathy, and excite even an
interest in the subject, I shall esteem myself happy ;
for they who will conscientiously enter on the inquiry,
will find such a multitude of facts spring up around
them, that I am persuaded they will eventually be
convinced of the truth I advocate. It is the sceptic
only who will not inquire ; it is he who hath eyes to
see, but will not see, — who hath ears to hear, but will
not hear ; it is he only I am inclined to pronounce
incurable; for, what would avail a revelation from
Heaven itself to so perverse a being ? And is not
all Nature, in reality, a revelation from Heaven to
the mind of the philosopher who should walk along
her paths rejoicing in the freedom of his thoughts,
unencumbered by the fetters of those narrow preju-
dices which must fatally restrict the sphere of o in-
comprehension ?


CHAPTER VII.

POWER OF ANIMAL MAGNETISM MAGNETISM OF

INANIMATE OBJECTS.

The penetrating intensity and subtile power of the
magnetic influence is best illustrated by the magnetiser
performing the operation at a distance, and without
the knowledge of the patient, through the intervention
of such opaque bodies as a screen, folding doors, or
thick walls. The possibility of the operation being
conducted efficiently in this manner is established
beyond a doubt ; and I proceed, therefore, to cite
some few facts in proof of it, because, before entering
on the explication of the phenomena of animal mag-
netism, it is necessary that all the facts should be
distinctly detailed. On the 4th of November, 1820,
the Commissioners having assembled at the Hotel
Dieu, M. Husson, one of the physicians of the hospital,
said to me, " You can induce sleep in a very short
time ; I wish you would obtain the same result
without the patient either seeing you or being aware
of your presence." I replied that I was willing to
try, but that did not warrant the success of the ex-
periment, because the action at a distance depended
so much on the peculiar susceptibility of the indivi-
dual. We agreed, however, upon a signal which I
could hear in an adjoining apartment. M. Husson
was to throw a pair of scissars down upon the table, and
I was then to begin the operation. Accordingly I was
ushered into a closet, separated from the room by a
thick partition ; and the door having a good lock
and key, I felt no hesitation in locking myself in,
as I wished to multiply obstacles, so that no pre-
text might be left for suspicion or doubt. The pa-
tient was then brought into the adjacent room, and
seated at a distance of about three or four feet, with
her back turned towards the closet wherein I was
concealed. They then, to deceive her, began won-
dering why I had not yet arrived, and Ihey pretended
from this delay to conjecture that I did not intend to
come; at the same time, they blamed me for not
keeping my appointment. In short, my alleged
absence was adverted to in such a manner as to leave
no doubt, on the mind of the patient, that I was
really elsewhere. The signal being then given,
although I knew not where nor at what distance Mile.
Samson was placed, I began to magnetise in the most
profound silence, carefully avoiding the least move-
ment which might apprise her of my being present.
It was then thirty-five minutes past nine. In the
course of three minutes, as soon as my will began to
act, she was observed to rub her eyes, exhibit the
usual symptoms of approaching sleep, and at length
fell into a state of somnambulism. This experiment I
repeated on the 7th of November, before Professor
Recamier, who took every precaution to prevent
deception, and the result was precisely similar. The
following are the details of this second trial : — On
my entering, at a quarter past nine, the operating
room, M. Husson informed me that M. Recamier
wished to be present, and to see me put the patient
to sleep through the partition. I readily acquiesced.
M. Recamier then entered, and privately conversed
with me on the subject, when we agreed upon a
signal ; and I slipped into the closet, where I was
again locked in. Mile. Samson was then brought in ;
M. Recamier placed her with her back turned to-
wards the closet, at a distance of more than six feet
from it. He then proceeded to converse with her,
and found her better ; but on being told that I was
not likely to arrive, she insisted upon retiring. The
moment M. Recamier asked her whether she digested
meat, which was the signal agreed upon between us,
I began to magnetise her at thirty-two minutes past
nine. Three minutes after, M. Recamier touched
her, raised her eyelids, shook her by the hands, put
questions to her, pinched her, and convinced himself
that she was in a state of profound magnetic sleep.
But even these trials were thought insufficient to
establish so extraordinary a phenomenon ; and it was
resolved, therefore, to multiply them, and vary all
their details. Accordingly, I went one night, accom-
panied by M. Husson and other physicians, to the
ward in which the same patient was, and took my
position from her at a distance of several beds, keep-
ing at the same time the most profound silence, so as
not to attract attention. I began magnetising her
at eight minutes past seven. At twelve minutes past,
we all drew near, and convinced ourselves that
magnetic sleep had been induced. It is unnecessary
to add, that the period fixed on for this operation had
been selected, not by me, but by the principal phy-
sician of the hospital ; further, that it had been ascer-
tained that the patient was not asleep before the expe-
riment, and that the magnetic influence had been
exerted at a distance of about twenty feet. Having
witnessed these experiments, M. Bertrand, Doctor of
Medicine of the University of Paris, affirmed that he
did not think it extraordinary that the patient should
fall asleep while the magnetiser was in the closet ;
because the constant recurrence of the same attending
circumstances might have, independently of my pre-
sence, produced the same results ; and that, moreover,
the patient might be naturally predisposed to sleep.
He therefore proposed that she should be brought
into the same room, and seated on the same seat, and
that a conversation should be held with her as before.
This repetition of the same circumstances, he thought,
would induce sleep. But he was deceived. At a
quarter before ten, they began to execute the plan
agreed upon ; — she was seated on the same easy chair
where she usually sat, and placed in the same position.
Various questions were put to her ; she was then left
to her own thoughts ; the signals previously used
were again repeated, — scissars were thrown upon the
table ; they went, in fact, through a complete rehearsal
of everything previously done, but in vain was the
magnetic state expected. She complained, became
restless, shifted her position, and evinced anything
but a disposition to either natural or magnetic sleep.
After this, on my entering the room and. commencing
the operation, the magnetic sleep, accompanied by the
usual state of physical insensibility was perfectly
established.

In a letter, dated Lyons, 1784, which appeared in a
work entitled, Reflexions Impartiales sur le Mag-
netisme, it is stated : — " The following experiment has
often been repeated. A very susceptible somnambula
was left in a room with other persons endeavouring
to engage her attention, during which time she was,
without her knowledge, magnetised from the next
room, and the effect was as prompt and nearly as
powerful as if the magnetiser had been close to her ;
the only difference observable was that, not being
aware that she was under the magnetic influence, she
at first endeavoured to counteract the sensations she
experienced, mistaking what she felt for a natural
uneasiness, and she only gave way to it when the
magnetic action, increasing in power, forced upon her
the consciousness that she was being magnetised. A
single experiment would not have been decisive ; but
by repeating the operation results have been obtained
more or less characterised according to the degree of
sensibility in the person magnetised." The report of
the <e Academie de Medecine" also contains a case of
magnetic action at a distance, which was proved to the
conviction of the commissioners — " On the 10th of
September, 1827, at seven o'clock in the evening, the
commissioners," says the reporter, " met at the resi-
dence of M. Itard, who continued his experiments on
Cazot. The latter was in the room where a conver-
sation was kept up with him till half-past seven, when
M. Foissac, who had entered after him, and re-
mained in a parlour separated from the above room by
two doors well closed, and at a distance of twelve feet,
began to magnetise him. Three minutes after, Cazot
said : — * I think M. Foissac is there, for I feel quite
giddy.' In the course of eight minutes he was in a
profound sleep."

It has already been observed that females can per-
form the magnetic operation as well as men ; and the
following case, related by M. Henin, will, I doubt not,
be perused with interest: — " An Indian lady," says
he, " residing in Paris, and possessed of great mag-
netic power, was solicited by a lady who accompanied
me, to visit her, and give us a proof of the energy of
her will. She had a maid servant, whom she kept
under the magnetic treatment, and often threw into
somnambulism. She was then working in a room
entirely separated from us. The Indian lady, on
being asked whether her maid should appear before us
at her tacit mental bidding, composed herself for a
moment, and magnetised her from the room where
she then was sitting without speaking or making the
slightest motion. A few minutes afterwards, we saw
the maid-servant step into the room in which we were
to inquire of her mistress what was her pleasure.''
M. Henin then adds, " that it was not possible he
could be deceived, and that he would not have re-
lated the fact had he not been convinced by the
clearest evidence of its existence." And after all, is
there anything more astonishing in the transmission of
the animal magnetic fluid through intervening opaque
bodies — than in the transmission of the galvanic or
electric fluid which we know permeates matter with
incredible velocity ? Here, again, the wonder is not
greater in the one case than it is in the other ; albeit
the one excites incredulity while the other is univer-
sally admited. The will, I am convinced, only acts
in these cases as the primum mobile, which directs,
under its energies, the direction of the magnetic fluid,
which is an animalized principle that may even be
accumulated in inanimate objects, and this, I doubt
not, was the great secret of the amulets and talismans
which were by the ancients supposed to possess me-
dicinal properties. Hence, Galen himself is reported
to have cured epilepsy by suspending peony roots
round the necks of his epileptic patients ; and the
cures which he effected by magnetic processes gave
him the reputation of a wizard, and compelled him
to quit the Roman capital. A kind of grateful vene-
ration for these inanimate objects, on account of the
virtues they were presumed to possess, transformed
them by degrees into tutelary divinities, and supersti-
tion, which ever walks in darkness, then extended
similar virtues to all sorts of ridiculous objects, which
were condemned as dangerous. Hence the Council
of Laodicea, in the fourth century, prohibited the use
of amulets, and this prohibition extending to rings of
all descriptions was repeated and confirmed by the
Council of Rome in 712 — of Milan in 1565 — and of
Tours in 1583. The discovery of animal magnetism,
and its investigation on scientific principles, throws
considerable light on a variety of facts which, in the
darker ages, led to horrible persecutions, and surely,
if history can bring any moral home to our convic-
tion, it should teach us how abject a being is man,
when, armed with the fire-brand and the sword, he
puts himself in an attitude of hostility before the
eternal divinity of truth.

In accordance with the views above stated, we
shall find that the animal magnetic fluid, or that in-
visible principle or agent which produces the mag-
netic phenomena, pervades all bodies, — in other words,
all are conductors of this fluid. It may be incor-
porated or accumulated in them so that they may
receive and retain it, and thereby exhibit magnetic
phenomena, and the affinity between the animal-mag-
netic fluid and these bodies into which it enters is so
great that no chemical or physical power can separate
them. Chemical re-agents and caloric have no power
over it. There is, however, very little analogy be-
tween the imponderable fluids known in chemistry,
and the animal-magnetic fluid. In proof of all which
I shall here refer to numerous experiments which are
well authenticated. A magnetised vitreous body,
which had put a somnambulist to sleep in a few
seconds, was afterwards rinsed with water and wiped
with a linen cloth ; on being again presented to the
same magnetic subject he fell asleep in one minute
and a half.

The same magnetised glass, rinsed with alcohol,
produced sleep in half a minute.

Another magnetised glass, rinsed with ammonia,
elicited somnambulism in fifteen seconds.

The same glass was plunged into fuming nitric acid.
After an immersion of five minutes it was put into a
China cup with water, out of which the young som-
nambulist having taken it, fell immediately asleep.

The same experiment was repeated with concen-
trated sulphuric acid, and the result was exactly the
same.

In all these experiments no chemical re-agent could
destroy the magnetic power of the magnetised glass.
Hence it follows that this power, unlike colours, elec-
tricity, and other similar fluids, does not reside
merely at the surface, but that it penetrates the whole
mass. The following experiment seems to confirm
this natural conclusion : —

A large marble pestle, after being magnetised, was
wholly immersed in muriatic acid, in which it was
kept until the acid had reduced the mass to about
one-half of its original size, it was then drawn out,
well cleansed, and presented to the somnambulist,
who fell asleep as soon as he had touched the whole
mass of marble.

Other imponderable and expansible fluids bear a
certain relation to each other; namely, when one of
them adheres to a solid body it cannot be separated
from this solid excepting by the action of some other
expansible fluid. For instance, the mineral magnetic
fluid is expelled from a natural or artificial loadstone
by ignition, and by an electrical shock. Combustion,
indeed, alters all relations between solid bodies and
expansible fluids, such as their conductive properties,
capacity, &c. Hence, in order to investigate the
nature of the animal magnetic fluid, it was absolutely
indispensable to submit the magnetised body to
various degrees of temperature, and even to combus-
tion. Accordingly, magnetised wax, colophane, sul-
phur, and tin, were melted, and then poured into
cylindrical moulds similar to their original shapes.
Their virtue was then tried upon the somnambulist
without the slightest difference in the results before
and after this operation : the instant he laid hold of
them he fell asleep.

A magnetised iron rod was made red hot, and in
that state plunged into a cup full of water, and then
presented to a young man by the same person who
had performed the operation, and as soon as he held
it in his hands he fell asleep.

A large sheet of paper, twisted and magnetised,
was burnt in a faience plate ; the carbon and cinders
which remained were presented to the somnambulist,
who took up as much as his hand could hold, and
fell asleep in a few moments.

Many cross experiments were tried with objects
which were not magnetised ; but no effect whatever
by them were produced ; but those which were mag-
netised being preserved with care, produced the same
effects six months afterwards ; — they seemed to have
lost none of their magnetic power.

All these experiments, made with the greatest care
by Professor Reuss and Dr. Lcewenthal, two phy-
sicians residing in Moscow, have been repeated by me
with hardly any difference in the results. I have,
moreover, discovered that whenever a somnambulist,
whether asleep or awake, approaches a spot where
magnetised objects are concealed, his physical organi-
sation undergoes remarkable modifications. In most
of my experiments, I had taken especial care to blind-
fold the somnambulists ; and in no instance did I
ever communicate to them the particular object I had
in view, without observing this effect. One day,
after having experimented, and tried with great
perseverance, whether some natural bodies had not the
property to isolate the somnambulist from the mag-
netic action, I fell upon the device of taking, out of
the library of the gentleman in whose house I was
experimenting, a large and voluminous folio : I mag-
netised the somnambulist through the covers of the
book, holding my fingers in a pointed direction. He
soon experienced all the effects of magnetisation, as
powerfully as if no body had been interposed between
him and me. I then endeavoured to magnetise the
somnambulist through the whole book; and soon
perceived, with some surprise, that the epigastrium,
which I tried to operate upon, felt nothing, whilst the
head and feet visibly experienced the magnetic action.
It was only after persisting for some time that the epi-
gastrium also felt the agency of magnetism ; but still
the effect was much weaker. I repeated this experi-
ment on other organs, and they were very slightly
influenced, while the rest of the body was actually
convulsed. Experiments, repeated under every va-
riety of circumstances, do not allow me to doubt this
extraordinary fact, — namely, that of all known bodies,
the best calculated to intercept the transmission of the
magnetic fluid is a great number of super-imposed
leaves of paper, as in a book.

" Hence it follows," says M. de Eschenmeier, a
celebrated philosopher of Tubingen, " that there is an
active principle resisting every mechanical, physical,
and chemical power, adhering to all solid bodies by an
indissoluble bond, which pervades their substance like
a spiritual being, and sets at defiance even the de-
vouring action of fire. But its existence, made mani-
fest by the phenomena it produces, does not reveal
itself to the organs of sense in the usual state of man ;
but only during this delightful expansion of our own
individuality, effected by the magnetic relation, which
bestows upon us the faculty of seeing, hearing, and
feeling, this vital principle, which receives all its
vigour from the will of man, and operates with an
energy proportionate to the strength of the will.
When it acts with great energy upon an organ en-
dowed with an equal but negative power, which sup-
poses the existence of a specific contrast (as when a
strong man directs it on a weak boy,) this principle
has all the intensity of lightning, and seems to extin-
guish life at one stroke. In the usual waking state,
man is but in a general relation with surrounding
objects ; in this magnetic state, by the sole energy of
his will, he defends his personal individuality against
all extraneous influence which threatens the spiritual
part of his existence, and this will is more or less in
equilibrium with the will and action of other crea-
tures. But this resistance exists only as long as the.
body and the soul preserve their intimate connexion.
In this state we possess a perfect consciousness of
ourselves ; and all our notions and sensations, as well
as our will, being in harmony with the welfare of the
body, preserve between them a just equilibrium and
equal proportion. In this state, which may be con-
sidered as intermediate between the purely spiritual
state and that of the brute creation, man sees
before him, on the one hand, an ideal world, and, on
the other hand, a corporeal world. But as long as
his own individuality remains firm, and he preserves
the consciousness of his own being, he can never enter
either of these worlds. He can only elevate his thought
by giving to all his sentiments and actions the stamp of
truth, of beauty, and of goodness ; but he is nevertheless
not able to soar into that region where thought enters
into a state of transcendent purity. It is only when
freed from all the shackles of its material mould that
it can reach this sublime height. These are the two
extreme limits which bound the range of man's ex-
istence during the habitual waking state. The
existence of a new specific relation can change this
state. A foreign impulse, particularly the will of
a stranger, can penetrate this circle of indifference
which determines the ordinary state ; it can open all
its barriers, and overcome its obstacles, to a certain
extent. On the one hand, the spiritual essence of
man becomes more refined ; it is no longer confined
to its former seat; it no longer contemplates the
realms of thought as a remote constellation; but,
bounding at once over the limits of the senses, it ac-
quires new perceptions on entering a new state. On
the other hand, the organic system becomes more
materialised, begins to act as the imponderable fluids
of electricity, mineral magnetism, &c. In this state
of exalted contrast, man is capable of perceiving the
vital principle itself, of seeing, hearing, and feeling it
as a distinct object; but in his ordinary condition,
this is utterly impossible, since it is the same vital
principle which itself actively hears, sees, and feels ;
it cannot, therefore, be passively heard, seen, or felt.
In the magnetic waking state, when the contrasts are
exalted, the spiritual essence is less closely united to
the organic system, the eye of fancy itself becomes more
intelligent, raises itself above the vital principle, and
perceives it as an object. We cannot explain in clearer
terms the constant action of magnetised substances
upon the somnambulists, and the immediate influence
of magnetism. In magnetic vigilation, the spiritual
essence is no longer under the dominion of the vital
principle ; it looks upon the latter as upon a subordinate
being. In like manner the somnambulist, being brought
under the energetic influence of the magnetiser's will,
can send forth this vital principle as a messenger to
reconnoitre the most remote regions. His eye, like a
ray of light, darts forward to an immeasurable dis-
tance, taking no other direction but that prescribed
by the will of the magnetiser. It is the same vital
principle which adheres to all bodies by an indissoluble
combination, without being perceived in the usual
waking state, because this state admits of no specific
relation, and is rather opposed to all influences ; but
in magnetic vigilation it is distinctly felt by a percep-
tive organ."

Assuredly no person, however cynical, can con-
demn an attempt tending to unfold the mysteries of
nature to our contemplation, — mysteries which are
constantly reproduced before us ; for what is the for-
mation of bodies, their motion, the origin and cure
of diseases, but ineffable mysteries ? Do we under-
stand the connexion between the soul and her corpo-
real tabernacle, which is ever vibrating in unison with
the infinite modulations of her thoughts, and the ex-
quisite harmony of her feelings ? No. Let proud
philosophy, therefore, descend from her throne of
bigotry and intolerance, and with a spirit of humility
proportioned to their sublimity, prepare to investigate
these solemn mysteries. It is, I repeat, the mystery
of life, and the not less absorbing and perplexing mys-
tery of death ; it is the revealing to us of that spiritual
essence upon which are shadowed the outward forms
of all material objects and living beings ; it is the un-
veiling to us of an hereafter which all men anxiously
desire, yet which the dicta of materialism would anni-
hilate. I know of no study so exalting to the human
mind, none so deeply interesting to all who are capable
of reflecting on their own destiny.


CHAPTER VIIL



TESTIMONY OF THE ANCIENTS.



Although animal magnetism may be regarded as a
modern science, the principle upon which it is founded,
and the phenomena it educes, were recognised at an
early period. Most of the magnetical facts I have
above described were familiar to the ancients. It
should be remembered that a long time is required
before any science can attain maturity. Ages must
elapse during which isolated facts only can be ob-
served, and these will remain scattered like the links
of an unconnected chain, until some master spirit rises
up which can discriminate the affinities that subsist
between them, and determine the laws by which they
should be mutually associated. Hence vestiges of almost
every science may be traced in the early history of
mankind ; but the facts are often strangely confounded
with, and obscured by, the prevailing superstitions of
the age. It is, however, for a more enlightened phi-
losophy to divest truth of all accessory fictions, that
her shrine may be revealed to us unclouded by the
mists of prejudice, and the illusions of imagination.
It is not surprising that so universal a power as that
of animal magnetism, producing effects so ostensible,
should have been recognised even in the earliest ages.
The ancients were well acquainted with the pheno-
mena of somnambulism ; they discovered that it could
be induced by certain mystic rites, during which, as
will hereafter appear manifest, the magnetic principle
unknown to them was evolved ; and they placed im-
plicit reliance on the lucidity which occurs in this
state, and which they naturally enough ascribed to the
direct interposition of some of their heathen divinities.
We shall find, too, that they had recourse during these
religious ceremonies to direct manipulations ; hence
Prosper Alpinus distinctly states, that frictions during
ablution was one of the secret remedies of the Egyp-
tian priests,* after which the patients lay down on the
skins of the animals they had sacrificed, and, having
prepared themselves for sleep by fervent prayer,
awaited the visions which Isis was supposed to reveal
to them. " The Egyptians," says Diodorus Siculus,
" report that Isis found out many medicines for the
recovery of men's health : being very expert in the art
of physic, she contrived many remedies for that pur-
pose, so that even now when she is advanced to an
immortal state, she takes pleasure in curing men's
bodies. For clear proof of all this they refer, not only
to the usual fables of the Greeks, but to the undoubt-
ed evidence of the fact Many who have been
on the authority of Galen, in the temple of Vulcan,
called Hepliestium, near Memphis.* In the temples
of Apollo and iEsculapius, ceremonies were conducted
on the same principle, the object of all, as interpreted
by Sprengel, being to occupy the imagination of the
patient, and produce a state of exaltation sufficient to
elicit the desired effect.f He also observes, that the
baths were always accompanied by frictions and other
manipulations, which could not fail to produce sur-
prising effects on persons possessing a delicate ner-
vous system4 When cures had been thus success-
fully wrought, it was customary to record them on
tablets of marble or brass, which were erected in the
temples ; and sometimes they were engraven on the
walls or pillars of the temple itself. Many of these
inscriptions have been lost, but some few have been
preserved by the antiquarian researches of Mercurialis,
Gruter, and others. They constituted the only code
of medicine that existed at this epoch ; and it is even
affirmed that the pretended works of iEsculapius were
borrowed from these inscriptions in the temples of
Cos.§ " Nothing," says Dacier, " is more common
among the ancients than remedies indicated to the sick
in their dreams ; and this was so generally received in
antiquity, that they were sought in the temples, be-
cause it was believed that the god more readily com-
municated them there, and revealed to the sick during
their sleep those things which would effect their cure."
" But," continues Dacier, " I should not, myself, attach
much importance to the customs of a people always
credulous and superstitious, unless persons of great
intelligence and worthy of belief had spoken of what
occurred to them in their dreams, in a manner which
almost precludes doubt. Aristides attests that he was
often cured by remedies which were revealed to him
in his dreams. Synesius assures us, that by the same
assistance he avoided great dangers. We know, too,
what Socrates said of dreams."*

Among the thanksgivings which Marcus Antoninus
returned to the gods, we find the following: — "I render
you thanks for having given me a good father, a good
mother, and good preceptors ; for having made me ac-
quainted with Apollonius, Rusticus, Maximus. — I ren-
der you thanks that I have found a wife gentle and affec-
tionate to her husband and children ; and excellent tutors
for their infant education. — 1 render you thanks for
having indicated to me different remedies during my
dreams, especially for a spitting of blood and vertigo
which happened at Cajeta."* The gratitude of Anto-
ninus to Serapis for these cures induced him to have a
medal struck to his honour, with an inscription, which
will be found in Patin ; he furthermore raised a temple,
which he dedicated to him by an inscription, which
will be found in Gruter : —

SERAPI DEO
M. AURELIUS ANTONINUS
PONTIFEX MAX TRIBUNIC
POT X
^)DEM.

He also adorned a statue to the honour of the god,
with the following inscription on its base : —

SERAPI SACR
IMP. C^SAR M. AUREL
ANTONINUS AUG
PIUS FELIX COS III.
P P f

Jamblichus so distinctly describes the state of mag-
netic somnambulism induced by the mystic ceremonies
in these temples, that the passage might be appropri-
ately transferred into any modern treatise on animal
magnetism. " This state," says he, " commences by a
certain heaviness or inclination of the head forwards,
the eyes close involuntarily, and we find ourselves in a
state between sleeping and waking. In ordinary sleep
we do not distinctly and fully remark either what occurs
or where we are; but when sleep comes from divinity,
we in reality sleep not. We perceive perfectly objects, .
and distinguish them more clearly than in our accus-
tomed waking state ; so that it is in this kind of sleep
that vaticination principally takes place."* " They
who are thus inspired," he continues, " do not live as
other men, even in their corporeal state, because many
of them do not burn when fire is applied to their
bodies ; the divinity that inspires them from within
repels it, so that even if they are burned they are not
sensible of it any more than of the punctures of iron
pins, or other torments. You will see them walk in
places which would be otherwise impracticable." He
then proceeds to describe the different effects pro-
duced according to the different modes of inspiration.
" Some of the inspired," he observes, " are tranquil,
others are agitated and move the whole of the body,
or only certain limbs ; some dance or sing, or do quite
the contrary ; others again extend the body and rise
themselves in the air ; the sound of their voices is
sometimes equal and prolonged ; sometimes unequal
and interrupted ; sometimes strong and sometimes
weak."f These effects, arising from what in that age
was presumed to be the inspiration of the gods,
manifestly correspond with the effects produced by-
animal magnetism as attested by the French commis-
sioners in 1784.

But independent of the cures which were wrought
in these temples by outwardly imposing religious cere-
monies, we find, as I have already premised, that the
curative effect of corporeal apposition, whether by the
touch, the breath, or the saliva, has in all ages been re-
cognised. When Elisha restored the child of the Shu-
nammite to life, he lay upon it ; put his mouth upon its
mouth, his hands upon its hands, and he stretched him-
self upon the child, and the child opened its eyes. So
also Naaman expected that Elisha would have stricken
his hand over the place to cure the leprosy. iElian in-
forms us that the Psylli performed cures by placing
themselves in contact with their patients, breathing
into their mouths, &c. ; and he adds, that those who
underwent this treatment fell into a state of stupor,
and were for a time deprived of their intellects. Plu-
tarch relates of Pyrrhus, that he had in his demeanour
" an air of majesty rather terrible than august," and
that " he cured the swelling of the spleen by passing
his right foot over the part affected, gently pressing it
while the patient lay down ;" he adds, that " he did not
refuse to give this relief to any persons who applied
to him, however poor or mean they might be."* Pliny
relates the same anecdote with the view of shewing
that there are some persons whose bodies are endowed
with medicinal properties, but he considers that it is
the imagination which produces these salutary emana-
tions.-)* Celsus informs us that Asclepiades could, by
frictions, cure phrensy ; and further states, that when
these frictions were carried to a great extent, they
produced a lethargic state. Cselius Aurelianus re-
commends manual friction for the cure of pleurisy,
lethargy, and various other maladies, and describes
the manner in which they should be conducted. In
epilepsy, the head and forehead are to be chafed ; then
the hand is to be carried gently over the neck and
bosom. At other times the hands and feet are to be
grasped, so that we " may cure in the very act of hold-
ing the limb." J

The emperor Vespasian cured, on the same prin-
ciple, a person who was blind, and another afflicted
with paralysis ; the following are the facts as related by
Tacitus : — " Vespasian," says he, " passed some months
at Alexandria, having resolved to defer his voyage to
Italy till the return of summer, when the winds blow-
ing in a regular direction afford a safe and pleasant
navigation. During his residence in that city, a num-
ber of incidents, out of the ordinary course of nature,
seemed to mark him as a particular favourite of the
gods. A man of mean condition, born at Alexan-
dria, had lost his sight by a defluxion on his eyes.

He presented himself before Vespasian, and, falling
prostrate on the ground, implored the emperor to ad-
minister a cure for his blindness. He came, he said,
by the admonition of Serapis, the god whom the
superstition of the Egyptians holds in the highest
veneration. The request was, that the emperor would,
with his saliva, condescend to moisten the poor man's
face and the balls of his eyes. Another, who had lost
the use of his hand, inspired by the same god, begged
that he would tread on the part affected. Vespasian
smiled at a request so absurd and wild. The wretched
objects persisted to implore his aid. He dreaded the
ridicule of a vain attempt ; but the importunity of the
men and the crowd of flatterers, prevailed upon the
prince not entirely to disregard their petition. He
ordered the physicians to consider among themselves
whether the blindness of the one, and the paralytic
affection of the other, were within the reach of human
assistance. The result of the consultation was, ' that
the organs of sight were not so injured, but that by
removing the film or cataract the patient might re-
cover. As to the disabled limb, by proper applications
and invigorating medicines, it was not impossible to
restore it to its former tone.' The gods perhaps in-
tended a special remedy, and chose Vespasian to be
the instrument of their dispensations. If a cure took
place, the glory of it would add new lustre to the
name of Caesar ; if otherwise, the poor men would
bear the jests and raillery of the people. Vespasian,
in the tide of his affairs, began to think there was
nothing so great or wonderful — nothing so impro-
bable, or even incredible, which his good fortune
would not accomplish. In the presence of a pro-
digious multitude, all erect with expectation, he ad-
vanced with an air of serenity, and hazarded the expe-
riment. The paralytic hand recovered its functions ;
and the blind man saw the light of the sun. By living
witnesses, who were actually on the spot," adds Taci-
tus, " both events are confirmed at this hour, when
deceit and flattery can hope for no reward." * Both
cases are related also by Suetonius,f who repeats that
the men sought the aid of Vespasian under the advice
and direction of the god Serapis ; he, however, de-
scribes the paralytic limb to have been the leg, and
not the arm, as mentioned by Tacitus ; and also states
that the cure was wrought before a public company,
"palam pro condone." Voltaire, who I apprehend will
not be accused of a disposition to credulity, observes,
" Of all miraculous cures, the best attested, the most
authentic, are those of the blind person to whom
Vespasian restored sight, and the paralytic person to
whom he restored the use of his limb. It was not
for him to attach value to prestiges which a monarch
firmly enthroned does not need."^

Spartian relates that the emperor Adrian, reduced
to the last extremity by disease, came to the resolu-
tion that he would commit suicide ; at which time a
woman presented herself to him, who declared that
she had been warned by a dream to advise him not to
kill himself, for that he was about to recover ; but as
she did not obey this order she was struck blind.

Being commanded, however, again to do the same
thing, she came to Adrian to repeat it, and embraced
his knees ; having accomplished which dream, she
washed her eyes in the lustral water in the temple, and
recovered her sight.* Spartian also states that when
this emperor was ill with fever, there came to him a
certain blind man from Pannonia, who touched him,
which being done, he who was blind recovered his
sight, and the fever left Adrian. f In the same reign
with Marcus Antoninus, lived Apollonius of Thyana,
whose biography, written by Philostratus, supplies us
with a number of other curious facts. One of the
most remarkable of these was the resuscitation of a
girl who was being conducted to the grave, having
fallen down apparently dead during the solemnisation
of her marriage. The funeral procession being in-
cidentally met by Apollonius, he ordered it to stop,
and after touching the young woman, and muttering
some secret words, she recovered, began to speak, and
returned to her paternal home.J It appears that
Apollonius possessed in a high degree the magnetic
power, and was himself often in a state of lucidity ; read
the thoughts of others, and perceived events passing
at a distance. He was at Ephesus when the tyrant
Domitian was assassinated. All at once his voice be-
came feeble, he paused, his eyes were fixed on the
ground, he advanced three or four steps forward, and
exclaimed with unwonted energy, " Strike the tyrant !
Strike !" And this he did, not as a person might who
saw the event passing in a mirror, but as one who
was present and witnessed the assassination passing
directly under his eyes, and endeavoured to assist in
it.* The Ephesians present were exceedingly asto-
nished ; whereupon he again exclaimed, " Have con-
fidence, O Ephesians, for the tyrant is this day slain :
but why do I say to-day ? it is rather at this mo-
ment." t A few days afterwards the news arrived at
Ephesus of the death of Domitian, which happened
at the time and in the manner which Apollonius had
described.

Hitherto, however, my attention has been restricted
to the fact, that cures of a remarkable nature were
wrought by the ancients by simple and direct corpo-
real apposition — the manipulations, per contactum^ of
the animal magnetisers — and not only from the authors
I have already cited, but from a variety of other
sources, we may learn that the sleep, or rather the
somnambulism thereby induced, was characterised by
the magnetical phenomena — if I may be allowed the
phrase — of insensibility, lucidity, and prevision.
Hence, in the temples of Isis and Osiris, Apollo and
iEsculapius, statues, representing Sleep and Dreams as
divinities, were placed in the vestibules, near which
the votaries lay down to await the inspiration from
the God of Health. The whole practice of medicine
originally consisted in this kind of divination ; and,
accordingly, Jamblichus, after stating that numerous
cures were performed in the temple of ^sculapius,adds,
that the art of medicine itself originated in this divine
sleep.* So also Philostratus, in his life of Apollonius,
affirms that the art of divination rendered man essen-
tial services, the greatest of which was that of medi-
cine ;f for he adds, the sons of iEsculapius would
never have acquired the art of curing, if iEsculapius,
who was the son of Apollo, had not obeyed the vati-
cinations of his father, and thence arose the art of
medicine, for by this means antidotes were discovered
against poisons, and the means of making poisons
themselves useful under certain circumstances. "Who
can deny that this knowledge," he continues, "is
referable to the art of divination ? for it is not rea-
sonable to suppose that, without such foreknowledge,
science would have mingled with its remedies poisons
so dangerous." *

In the Orationes Sacra? of Aristides, we learn that
this orator, being ill, conducted his own case entirely
by the dreams which revealed themselves to him while
in a somnambulic state in the temple of iEsculapius.
On one occasion he was directed in his sleep to use a
warm bath ;f on another, to suspend the bathing and
take emetics, a practice which, on the authority of
Diodorus Siculus, was very common among the Egyp-
tians4 He was also, in one of his dreams, directed to
be bled by his physician Theodosius, who, on visiting
him, said it was necessary to obey the revelations of
iEseulapius, and accordingly bled him with success.§
On another occasion he describes himself to have seen
in his dream the internal condition of his body ; he gives
a long description of his complaint, and the treatment
he adopted ; and assures us that it was not until the phy-
sicians at Rome and Pergamus had failed to cure him,
and acknowledged themselves ignorant of his disease,
that he had recourse to the remedies which were pre-
scribed to him in dreams. Hence, what magnetisers
term the faculty of intuition, or the power of per-
ceiving in the somnambulic state the internal organi-
sation — whether healthy or diseased — of the body, was
occasionally observed by the ancients. It is described
by Julius Scaliger with as much exactness as could
be desired in any treatise professedly on animal
magnetism. His words are, " When the soul is de-
livered by sleep from directing the grosser functions of
the body, she retires within herself as into a port pro-
tected from tempests. Here she knows all that passes
in the interior, that is, within the body;* she depicts
as in colours, figures, and quantity, that which therein
occurs ;f and this is what Hippocrates, always con-
sistent with himself, affirms, where, in his third book on
Regimen, he affirms that the mind, when the eyes are
closed, can discriminate those things which happen to
the body."J We find that Galen describes the luci-
dity of the mind in dreams nearly in the same lan-
guage as Hippocrates ; he acknowledges that he was
guided in the treatment of many diseases by the pre-
scriptions which occurred to him in his dreams ; and
states that Hermes, of Cappadocea, in the same way,
asleep in the temple named Hephcestium, near that of
Memphis, derived the knowledge of many valuable
receipts. " In this manner," says Conringius, U the
sick acquire the knowledge of the medicines necessary
for them ; and which, by their natural properties, are
really adapted to their complaints. Hence arose the
numerous medicaments referred to Hermes in Galen ;
hence also were discovered those which were indicated
by Isis, which will be found not only in Galen, but in
Celsus, Paul of Egina, and others." The idea that
the soul, during sleep, disengages itself from the en-
cumbrance of the body, and concentrates its energies
in a higher degree than it can do in the waking state,
prevailed generally among the ancient philosophers.
Lucretius himself observes : —

(( Sleep then occurs when fades through every limb
The soul's sensorial power, part by fatigue
Wasted through ether and concentered part
Deep in each vital organ."*

According to the epicurean hypothesis, there is an
emanation, or effluvium, of very subtle and minute
particles, thrown off from the body,f which stimulates,
not only the physical organs to the due exercise of
their functions, but "is capable," in the words of the
late learned Mason Good, " of winding through the
substance of the flesh, and of stimulating the soul
itself in the interior of the animal frame, especially
when in a state of sleep, in which the external sense is
closed, or of deep abstraction, in which it is inattentive,
and thus of presenting to the soul in its naked state,
as it may be called, pictures of objects no longer in
existence ; and hence these philosophers, though now
as it appears with great incorrectness, undertook to
solve many of the most difficult problems of nature, ac-
counted for the casual appearance of spectres in the
gloom of solitude and retirement, and directly un-
folded to the world the < stuff that dreams are made
of.' "* How far these learned philosophers were in-
correct remains, however, yet to be determined; there
can be no reason why the progress of psychical
science should not reveal to us the laws which deter-
mine the manifestations of the mind, whether the body
be in a waking or sleeping state, as satisfactorily as
physical science has made known to us many of
the laws which govern the material universe. It is
our ignorance alone which veils them in mystery.
" The opinion of all, or most men," says Aristotle,
" that dreams have some signification, procures belief
as an assertion derived from experience ; and that
there is a divination concerning some things in dreams
is not incredible, for it possesses a certain reason...

The most elegant physicians say that it is necessary to
pay very great attention to dreams ; and it is rea-
sonable thus to think and believe them, since they
are observed by artists, by speculative men, and by
philosophers." Aristotle then proceeds to argue that
dreams are not sent from divinity, but are demoniacal ;
" because," says he, " nature is demoniacal and not
divine, of which this is an indication, that very dege-
nerate men are prescient, and clearly see future events
in their dreams." He then proceeds to discuss the
cause of "persons in an ecstacy foreseeing future
events," and wherefore " those who are inspired by
prophetic fury" do the same.* Here I may observe
that the matter at issue respects not the theories
which ancient philosophers hazarded to explain the
phenomenon, but the existence of the phenomenon
itself ; and hence I refer to these ancient authors in
order to shew that the facts which are insisted on by
the professors of animal magnetism, have in all ages
been recognised.

According to Jamblichus, the soul has a two-fold
life ; the one which we employ when awake is " com-
mon with the body, except when by intellectual energy
and the pure reasonings of the dianoctic power, we
entirely depart from it ;" the other, which he knows
not whether to call " intellectual or divine," energises
within us when asleep in such a manner as it is
adapted to energise. He then continues, "if the soul
connect the intellectual and divine part of herself
with more excellent natures, then her phantasms will
be more pure, whether concerning the gods or things
essentially incorporeal, or, in short, concerning things
which contribute to the truth pertaining to intelligi-
bles. If, however, the soul refer the reasons of gene-
rated natures which she contains in herself to the
gods, the causes of them, she receives from them a
power and a knowledge which apprehends what was
and will be, which surveys all times, beholds the pro-
duction of whatever happens in time, and is allotted
the province of taking care of and correcting them in
an appropriate manner. And bodies indeed, which are
infirm, she heals ; such human affairs as are in a con-
fused state, she aptly arranges, and frequently delivers
the inventions of arts, the distribution of justice, and
the constitutions of legal establishments. Thus, in
the temple of iEsculapius diseases are healed by
divine dreams ; and through the order of nocturnal
appearances, the medical art consists from sacred
dreams. The whole army of Alexandria was saved,
which otherwise would have entirely perished, in con-
sequence of Bacchus appearing in a dream and exhi-
biting the solution of the deplorable calamities in
which it was involved. The city of Aphutis also,
when it was besieged by king Lysander, was saved by
the dreams which were sent by Jupiter Ammon, in
consequence of which the army rapidly marched from
the city, and immediately abandoned the siege. What
occasion is there," he adds, "to mention every parti-
cular of things which happen daily, and which exhibit
an energy superior to that of reason. Thus much,
therefore, may suffice concerning divine inspiration
by sleep — what it is, how it is produced, and what
benefit it affords to mankind."* In the Timaeus of
Plato we find that this philosopher also recognised the
faculty of prevision, and even assigned it a local habi-
tation in the liver ; he observes that this organ is so
constructed as to be the abode of this part of the soul,
which " repairs from excess in the night, and employs
prophetic energies in sleep." He adds, that " no one
while endued with intellect, (in the ordinary waking
state,) becomes connected with a divine or true
prophecy ; but this alone takes place, either when the
power of prudence is fettered by sleep or suffers from
mutation, through disease or a certain enthusiastic
energy."* We learn also that Pythagoras reposed
confidence in the interpretation of dreams ; and Jam-
blichus relates that he " used means to procure men
quiet sleeps with good and prophetic dreams."t It
appears to me that the universal belief which prevailed
among the ancients in the prophetic character of
dreams, was derived from the phenomena developed
during somnambulism in the temples, for, be it ob-
served, the sleep was in these cases artificially induced,
the votaries yielded implicit confidence in the power
of the priests, and predisposed themselves to be affected
by earnest prayer and resignation to the divine will.
Then, again, on the part of the priests, they conducted
the mystic rites — as Jamblichus has just observed —
with the sincere intention and desire of producing a
particular description of dreams — those which should
be prophetic ; so that the conditions on the part of the
votaries, and those also on the part of the priests, cor-
respond precisely with the conditions which are re-
quired on the principles of animal magnetism ; that is
to say, faith, or, at least, passive acquiescence, on the
part of the magnetisee ; and self-confidence, energy,
and concentration of the desire or will on the part of
the magnetiser. Nay, we have seen that Mesmer
himself complicated the principle of magnetism with a
variety of ceremonies and paraphernalia which were,
in reality, utterly superfluous ; and so was it in the
ancient temples, the fumigations, sacrifices, hymns,
ablutions, &c, were in reality unnecessary, and only
adopted because they happened to be in accordance
with the superstitions of the age.

How, excepting on magnetic principles, can we in-
terpret the following anecdote of Alexander the
Great ? It is related by Cicero that Ptolemy having
been wounded by a poisoned arrow, was in great pain,
and likely to die, when Alexander, sitting at the
edge of the bed in a profound sleep, the dragon, nou-
rished by his mother Olympia, appeared to him with
a certain root in his mouth, and told him where it was
to be found, which was not far from that place, and
that it possessed such virtues that it would soon cure
Ptolemy. On awakening, Alexander narrated his
dream to his friend ; — they then sought the root, which
was found, and not only was Ptolemy cured, but many
other soldiers who had been wounded by the same
arrows.* We have already seen that magnetic som-
nambulists prescribe, and that successfully, for the
complaints of others, and here we have precisely the
same fact. A cavern is also mentioned by Strabo,
to which the sick resorted for the purpose of consult-
ing sleeping priests. We learn, too, from Cicero, that
when the Lacedemonian magistrates were embarrassed
in their administration, they went to sleep in the temple
of Pasiphae, so called from Past Phainein, te commu-
nicative to all." To the clairvoyance and lucidity
which often occur during somnambulism may be re-
ferred many of the visions and predictions which are
recorded in ancient history. The mystery of Oracles,
the prophetic raving of the Sybils, the predictions of
many of the ancient philosophers, are all explicable on
the same principle. That the Sybils uttered their ratioci-
nations in a state of magnetic crisis or extase is clear,
from the account given by St. Justin, who remarks
that they did not themselves understand what they
said, and that as soon as the instinct which animated
them was extinguished, they lost all recollection of
what they had predicted.* The Sybils and Bac-
chides, says Aristotle, who fall into a state of enthu-
siasm called sacred, do so, not from disease, but only
from their natural temperament.-)- Avicenna also
repudiates the idea of their being possessed, and, fan-
tastically enough, ascribes their power of divination
to the black bile4 Louis Buccaferrei, of Bologna,
one of the commentators on Aristotle, insists that the
gift of prophecy depends entirely on the temperament,
and the melancholic is the one to which he assigns the
development of this faculty .§ Gaspard Pencer wrote
a treatise professedly on divination, in which he adopts
partially the theory of Buccaferrei, but insists that in
many cases it is a faculty peculiar to certain indivi-
duals.* The Jews, more than any other nation of an-
tiquity, appear to have cultivated this somnambulic
power : Josephus himself was constantly in what we
now term a state of crisis, that is, in the highest degree
of somnambulism, in which prevision is developed. On
the authorities of Suetonius, Dio, and all Roman his-
torians, he foretold the succession of Vespasian and
Titus to the Roman empire, and this he did in the
days of Nero, before Galba, Otho, or Vitellius, were
thought of to succeed him. His faith in the lucidity
of such visions was manifested on the occasion of his
being in imminent danger after the fall of Jotapata.
When the city had been taken, he sought refuge from
the enemy in a deep pit, adjoining a large cavern,
which could not be seen above ground. Here he met
with forty persons of eminence, who had also, in
a similar manner, concealed themselves; but on the
third day he was betrayed by a woman, upon which
Vespasian sent two tribunes to him, and ordered them
to give Josephus their right hands as a security for
his life, and to exhort him to come up. He was,
however, afraid to comply with the request, lest he
should be punished ; and Vespasian then sent Nicanor,
a personal acquaintance of Josephus, to persuade him
that no such perfidy would be committed. Thereupon
the enraged soldiery threatened to set fire to the
cavern, which the tribune would not permit, being
desirous that Josephus should be taken alive. " And
now," I quote the history itself, "as Nicanor lay hard
at Josephus to comply, and he understood how the
multitude of enemies threatened him, he called to
mind the dreams which he had dreamed in the night-
time, whereby God had signified to him beforehand
both the future calamities of the Jews, and the events
which concerned the Roman emperors. Now Jose-
phus was well able to give shrewd interpretations of
such dreams as have been ambiguously delivered by
God. Moreover he was not unacquainted with the
prophecies contained in the sacred books, as being a
priest himself and of the posterity of priests. And
just then was he in an ecstacy ; and, setting before him
the tremendous images of the dreams he had lately
had, he put up a secret prayer to God, and said,
* Since it pleaseth thee, who hast created the Jewish
nation, to depress the same ; and since all their good
fortune is gone over to the Romans ; and since thou
hast made choice of this soul of mine to foretel what
is to come to pass hereafter, I willingly give them my
hands, and am content to live ; and I protest openly,
that I do not go over to the Romans as a deserter
from the Jews, but as a minister from thee.' When
he had said this, he complied with Nicanor's invita-
tion."* From what follows, it appears that Vespasian
himself at last gave credit to his predictions. Nay,
when Josephus was led by Nicanor before Vespasian,
we almost recognise a direct magnetical action on those
by whom he was immediately surrounded : they who
were remote from him, cried out that he should be put
to death ; but they who were near his person, relented,
and were subdued.

The prevision of the dying was well known to the
ancients. Possidonius cites the example of a Rhodian
who on his death-bed predicted to six companions
who were in attendance the order in which they
would severally die.* Quintus adds the case of the
Indian Calamus. This philosopher, at eighty-three
years of age, being very ill, and in great pain, deter-
mined to commit suicide. On ascending the pile, he
exclaimed, " How delightful is it to depart this life !
When my body is reduced to ashes, like that of Her-
cules, my spirit will emerge into light." Then Alex-
ander asked him if he wished to say anything, to which
he replied, " Yes — speedily I shall see you !" which
happened accordingly, for in a few days afterwards
Alexander died at Babylon.-f- So also Apollonius fore-
told the day and hour when Cocceius would die, and
the time and manner also of the death of Titus Ves-
pasian. Melancthon reports, that a woman predicted
that Dioclesian would become Emperor of Rome.
Urban Grandier foretold the death of Father Lanc-
tantius, and his prediction was verified. Indeed, a
host of facts of the same description might here be
adduced, which are not, in my judgment, mere happy
guesses, or accidental coincidences, but revealed by
the same faculty of lucidity which enabled the epileptic
to predict to the French commissioner, in 1835, the
day, the hour — nay, the very moment — when his next
paroxysm would occur.

The somnambulic faculty of clairvoyance, or the
power of seeing events passing at a distance, affords a
solution of the mystery of what, in the north of Scot-
land, is called second sight, and many occurrences of
this description are on record. We have seen that
Apollonius, who was habitually crisiaque when at
Ephesus, saw the assassination of Domitian. So also
we learn from Tacitus, that, when Vespasian, during
his sojourn at Alexandria, went to consult Serapis, to
know whether he should be emperor or not, Basilides,
the Egyptian, appeared by his side ; albeit, he was at
that moment eighty miles from Alexandria.*

St. Augustin relates a still more remarkable exam-
ple: — A man, well educated, who occupied himself
particularly in studying the philosophy of Plato, as-
sures us, that one night, in his own house, before he
fell asleep, a philosopher, well known to him, appeared
before him, and explained a number of difficulties in
platonism which he had before in vain solicited him to
propound. When the narrator afterwards met the
philosopher, he asked him how it happened that he
explained to him in his house that which he had re-
fused to do in his own ; to which the philosopher
replied, " I did nothing of the sort ; I only dreamed
that I did so." By this means, adds St. Augustin,
the one who was awake really saw the fantastic image
which appeared to the other in his dreams ; this, to
us, would be unworthy of credit, but those to whom
we refer we do not consider capable of deceiving us.*
This vision, related by St. Augustin, may recall to
the recollection of those acquainted with the history
of animal magnetism a case which is reported by
Deleuze, in the 13th number of the Bibliotheque du
Magnetisme. It occurred at Stutgardt, and is attested
by Dr. Meier, of Carlsruhe, and Dr. Klein, coun-
sellor to his Majesty the King of Wirtemberg. " Ma-
demoiselle Muller, without quitting her bed," says
Deleuze, " appeared to a friend of hers in a house at
a distance, and cured her of the tooth-ache. She
affirmed that it was her spiritual being which, con-
ducted by the soul of her mother, rendered this
visit/'t All magnetisers believe that magnetised
persons can tacitly communicate with, and know inti-
mately each other's most secret thoughts. It is even
affirmed, that in this state of exaltation, the mind of
the person magnetised is so much divested of all gross
and sensual qualities, that it recoils from the slightest
impurity in the ideas of any person with whom it may
be in magnetical connexion. " Such persons," says
Loewe, " express this without reserve, and add, that
those individuals who would spare them the pain of
violent spasms, must relinquish their impure ideas, or
leave the room."* Hence it is that purity of intention
on the part of the magnetiser is insisted on as one of
the elementary conditions under which the operation
should be performed.

In the records of history, ancient and modern, ex-
amples of clairvoyance, or what Ennemoser and Wol-
fahrt describe as universal lucidity, are very numer-
ous. Aulugelle relates, that during the war between
Caesar and Pompey in Thessaly, a priest, well known
for the sanctity of his life, suddenly cried aloud in the
town of Padua, that he saw the battle terminating ;
that the one party fled, the other pursued ; that he
heard the cries of the wounded and dying ; and then,
as if himself taking part in the combat, he exclaimed,
" Caesar is conqueror." He was looked on as insane ;
but it afterwards appeared that the day and hour of
the battle, and alternations of victory, happened ex-
actly as he described. f Eunapius, who lived under
the emperor Julian, in his life of Eclesius, relates an
incident of the same description, which occurred to
the celebrated Sosipatra. One day, while discoursing
on the nature of the soul, she suddenly paused, and,
after a moment's silence, exclaimed, " What is this ?
My friend, Philometer, has fallen from his car, and is
in danger of having his limbs broken ; but, no, he has
only grazed his elbow and hands — the danger is now
over — he is put safely into a chaise ;" — all which hap-
pened at the time, and in the manner she described.*

Alexander, of Alexander, relates that a young man,
named Marius, his pupil, one night sleeping in bed
with him, suddenly awoke in tears, and cried out,
that he had just seen his mother breathe her last, and
the preparations for her funeral. Alexander noted
the day and hour. A few days afterwards a messen-
ger arrived, who brought intelligence of the event,
which happened at the precise time the young man
had intimated.* Bodin relates the case of a young
man named Jacques, a priest at Perouse, who one
day, while celebrating mass, instead of saying, when
he turned before the people, " Brethren, let us pray,"
exclaimed, " Pray ! for the army of the church is in
extreme danger;" — at which time the army, twenty-five
leagues from Perouse, was actually defeated.f It is
also related that St. Ambrose, when he should have
been celebrating mass, fell asleep by the altar, and
remained sleeping three hours : on being awakened,
he said to those around him, " Be not troubled ; it
was important that I should sleep, for God hath re-
vealed to me a great miracle ; know that my brother
St. Martin is dead. I, myself, assisted at his funeral
obsequies." The people were astonished ; and having
noted the day and hour, it was found that at this pre-
cise time the bishop was being interred4 A remark-
able example of this lucid vision will be found in the
Memoirs of the Queen of Navarre ; it is quoted by
Deleuze, in his Histoire Critique du Magnetisine.
The following are the particulars : — The queen, my
mother, was at Metz dangerously ill with fever. She
was delirious ; and around her bed were my brother
and sister, my brother of Loraine, several ministers and
ladies, and princesses, all of whom gave up all hope,
but did not leave her. She cried in her reveries, as
if she witnessed the battle of Jarnac. " See how they
fly — my son has the victory. Oh, my God ! help my
son — he is down ! See you not in the turmoil the
Prince de Conde dead ? " All present thought she
raved ; but the night afterwards M. de Lopez arrived
with the intelligence. " I knew it well," said she ;
" did I not see it yesterday ?" From this we learned
that what she had uttered proceeded not from the
delirium of fever, but from the warning which God
gives to illustrious personages.*

In the German Annals of Medicine, Schelling re-
lates the following case, which occurred under his
own observation : — " In a crisis of clairvoyance, Miss
M., having previously been quite cheerful, began, all
at once, to assume an appearance of anxiety and sor-
row, and at last fell a-weeping. When I asked her
what was the matter, she answered, that she had just
then become aware that a death had recently taken
place in the family, at the distance of more than one
hundred and fifty leagues. I endeavoured to dissuade
her from entertaining such thoughts, but in vain ; she
insisted that she was quite certain of the fact, and con-
tinued to weep. Wishing to ascertain how she had
come by this intelligence, she said she herself did not
well know, but that she had at once become quite
certain of it. I asked her whether she could name
the person who had died : she said she could not at
that time, but should be able to do so in a future
crisis. She added, that the letter containing the in-
telligence was then upon its way. She conjured me
to say nothing about this presentiment after the crisis,
otherwise it would give her mortal anxiety.

" It is well known," says the Professor, " that som-
nambulists, when they awake out of the magnetic
sleep, have not the slightest recollection of what may
have taken place in it. When she awoke out of her
sleep, Miss M. was as cheerful as ever, and had
not the most distant idea of her vision. The expres-
sion of pain she exhibited during the crisis, which
seemed to proceed so entirely from an internal con-
viction of the reality of the fact, and the obstinacy
with which she adhered to her assertion of its truth,
induced me to give her credit. I mentioned the case
to Professor Schmidt, in order that he might be a wit-
ness to the fact. I awaited with great anxiety the
hour when I could again set my somnambulist asleep,
in order to ascertain whether she would again have
the same vision. For a considerable period during
the crisis, nothing of the kind appeared. She was, as
usual, quite cheerful, and spoke a great deal, until, all
at once, marks of sorrow were exhibited in her coun-
tenance. She turned away her face, and hid it on
her arm, which she had placed on the arm of her
chair, and wept in silence. At length, I asked her
what ailed her. * The same as yesterday,' she an-
swered ; i a death has taken place in our family — I
know it for certain.' She thought it fortunate for her
that she knew nothing of this when awake, because it
would occasion her so much grief. I again asked
her whether she did not also know the individual who
was dead ; and she repeated that she would be able to
tell me in a future crisis, provided I put the question
to her. In the following crisis, as soon as she was
set asleep, she again began to weep. She requested
me to use every means of diverting her attention from
this circumstance during her sleep, and I endeavoured
to do so by introducing other subjects of conversa-
tion ; yet she frequently reverted to it. Had I fore-
seen the circumstances which subsequently made it
impossible for me to place her more frequently in a
state of crisis, I should, upon the last occasion, instead
of diverting her thoughts from the subject in ques-
tion, rather have endeavoured to ascertain whether
she could give any further particulars of the event.
But I neglected the opportunity, and reserved my
questions for future crises, which could no longer take
place. Four or five days after the last sitting, upon
entering her apartment, I found Miss M. much down-
cast, with appearances on her countenance indicating
that she had been weeping. On inquiring into the
reason of this, she pointed to a letter which lay upon
the table, and said it contained intelligence of the
death of a near relative and particular friend. T asked
her w r hether she had received any previous accounts
of the indisposition of this individual. She answered,
' No — none at all ; the intelligence came upon me
quite unexpectedly.' Nor was she at all aware of anv
presentiment she had of the event."

Dr. Arndt, the eminent German physician, relates,
that being one day seated near the bed of one of his
somnambulists, on a sudden she became agitated,
uttered sighs, and, as if tormented by some vision,
exclaimed, " O heavens ! my father ! he is dying !"
A few moments afterwards, she awoke, seemed quite
cheerful, and recollected nothing of the anxiety she
had so recently manifested. She again relapsed twice
into the same state of magnetic sleep, and each time
she was tormented by the same vision. Being asked
what had happened to her father, she answered, " He
is bathed in blood — he is dying." Soon afterwards
she awoke, became composed, and the scene finished.
Some weeks afterwards, Dr. Arndt found this lady
pensive and sorrowful. She had just received from
her father, who was at a distance of some hundred
miles — an account of a serious accident which had
befallen him. In ascending the stair of his cellar, the
door had fallen upon his breast — a considerable hae-
morrhage ensued, and the physicians despaired of his
life. Dr. Arndt, who had marked the precise time of
the preceding scene of the somnambulism of this lady,
found that it was exactly on the day, and at the hour,
when the accident happened to her father. " This," ob-
serves the Doctor, " could not have been the mere
effect of chance ; and, assuredly, there was no concert
nor deceit on the part of the observer."

All those who have studied the philosophy of
dreams are aware that, even in ordinary sleep, our
dreams not unfrequently assume a high degree of
lucidity. Almost every individual will remember in-
stances of dreams being verified in a wonderful man-
ner. Dr. Abercrombie, in his work on the Intellectual
Powers, relates several such dreams, and candidly ac-
knowledges that he is unable to account for them.
" Cases of dreams," says he, " are on record, which do
not admit of explanation on any principle which we are
able to trace. Many of these histories, there is every
reason to believe, derive their marvellous character
from embellishment and exaggeration ; and in some in-
stances which have been related to me, I have found
this to be the case after a little investigation. Others,
however, do not admit of this explanation, and we are
compelled to receive them as facts, which we can in
no degree account for. Of this kind I shall only add
the following example, and I shall do so without any
attempt at explanation, and without any other com-
ment than that its accuracy may be relied on in all its
particulars.

" Two ladies, sisters, had been in attendance for
several days upon their brother, who was ill of a com-
mon sore throat, severe and protracted, but not con-
sidered as attended with danger. At the same time
one of them had borrowed a watch from a female
friend, in consequence of her own being under repair;
this watch was one to which particular value was at-
tached, on account of family associations ; and some
anxiety was expressed that it might not meet with any
injury. The sisters were sleeping together in a room
communicating with that of their brother, when the
elder of them awoke in a state of great agitation, and
having roused the other, told her that she had had a
frightful dream. " I dreamed," she said, " that Mary's
watch stopped, and that when I told you of the cir-
cumstance, you replied, 4 Much worse than that has
happened, for 's breath has stopped also ;' "
naming their brother, who was ill. To quiet her agita-
tion, the younger sister immediately got up, and found
the brother sleeping quietly, and the watch which had
been carefully put by in a drawer, going correctly. The
following night, the very same dream occurred, fol-
lowed by similar agitation, which was again composed
in the same manner — the brother being again found
in a quiet sleep, and the watch going well. On the
following morning, soon after the family had break-
fasted, one of the sisters was sitting by her brother,
while the other was writing a note in the adjoining
room. When her note was ready for being sealed,
she was proceeding for this purpose for the watch
alluded to, which had been put by in her writing
desk ; she was astonished to find it had stopped. At the
same instant she heard a scream of intense distress from
her sister, in the other room, — their brother, who had
still been considered as going on favourably, had been
seized with a sudden fit of suffocation, and had just
breathed his last."* On the principles of animal mag-
netism, facts of this description are explicable, for as
I have already stated, natural sleep is the initiatory
condition of somnambulism, and the same phenomena
often develop themselves spontaneously, which occur
during the magnetic state.

We have seen that the cures which were wrought in
the Egyptian, Greek, and Roman temples, were, perhaps
unconsciously on the part of the priests, effected upon
what we now recognise to be magnetic principles ; but
more than this, it would appear as if all nations — the
most unlettered and barbarous — instinctively adopted
the magnetic method of treating diseases. Their
charms, their incantations, their ceremonies, however
whimsical, involved a principle of which they may
have been ignorant ; but as no effect can be produced
without a cause, so, unless an active principle had
been developed, all such rites must have proved in-
effective. Among the ancient Oriental nations, the
treatment and cure of diseases by the application of the
hands is universally attested. Jarchas informs us, that
he saw almost every description of disease cured in this
way by the Indian sages. Some of the cases he has
detailed are interesting. (i A stout man," says he,
" thirty years of age, a great hunter of lions, was
severely wounded in the chase by one of these furious
animals, who turned round on him, and severely lace-
rated, and even dislocated, the thigh. And how was
he treated ? They reduced the limb, and relied for
the cure entirely on manual frictions, under which he
perfectly recovered." Jarchas also cites the case of a
person whose sight was restored by the same process ;
and that of a man whose hand having been paralysed
recovered its use in the same manner.* Jobson in-
forms us, that the Mandingos, or ^Ethiopians, on the
banks of the river Gambia, have no recourse to herbs,
or any description of medicines, but trust entirely to
charms, in the treatment of every disease, no matter
whether surgical or medical. " The gregories," he
observes, " bee things of great esteeme amongst them ;
for the most part they are made of leather, of several
fashions, wounderous neatly ; they are hollow, and
within them is placed and sewed up close, certaine
writings or spels, which they receive from their Mary-
buckes (or priests), whereof they conceive such reli-
gious respect that they doe confidently beleeve no
hurt can betide them whilst these gregories are about
them If any of them be possessed of any
malady, or have any swelling or sore upon them, the
remedy they have is only by placing one of these
blessed gregories where the griefe lies, which they
conceite will helpe them ; and, for aught I can per-
ceeve, this is all the physicke they have amongst them.

To countenance his state he hath many
times two of his wives sitting by him, supporting his
body, and laying their hands upon his naked skin,
above the waist, stroking and gently pulling the same,
which he seems to receive with content."* We learn
too, from one of the latest, and perhaps best works
which has appeared in this country on China and
the Chinese, by Charles Toogood Downing — that ani-
mal magnetism, as a remedial agent, is still had re-
course to by this curious people.f

In the heathen temples, and even in the catholic
church, several of the forms observed during the
solemnisation of religious rites appear to be derived
from magnetism as practised in the early ages. " We
find in the Mosaic history," says the Reverend James
Blunt, " that the rod was peculiarly appropriated to
purposes of magic ; it was used by the sorcerers and
enchanters of Pharaoh It could communi-
cate a blessing as well as a curse ; it could remove as
well as inflict a calamity." He then proceeds to no-
tice another distinctly magnetical action. " Thus am
I led to mention another ancient charm to which
credit is yet given in Italy. Nothing is more common
than to isee the Romans approach the confessionals
and receive a touch on the head from a wand, which
the father confessor holds in his hand, and which is
supposed to confer some benefit on the parties. I
believe that the priests of Isis imparted a blessing in
nearly the same manner ; and that such was the legi-
timate method of exorcism may be argued from the
way in which the companions of Ulysses describe
themselves to have been restored to their natural
forms : —

' Sprinkled with better juice, her wand reversed
Above our crowns, and charms with charms dispersed,
The more she sings we grow the more upright.' " *

The learned author notices particularly the mysterious
virtues ascribed to the human saliva. He refers to
the authorities of Pliny and Varro, and then adds, " It
is curious that to this day a set of men exist in Sicily,
who profess to heal the wounds of animals by their
spittle. They frequent the neighbourhood of Syra-
cuse, and, as I was informed, annually assemble in
great numbers at Palazzuolo, a place at some distance
from that city, on the festival of St. Paul, their patron
Saint It is remarkable that in administering
the rite of baptism, the priest, among other ceremonies,
moistens a napkin with his own saliva, and then
touches with it the eyes and nose of the child, accom-
panying the action by the word, Epliphatha. It was
with a similar rite that Roman infants received their
names on the Dies Lustricus."t It is reasonably
conjectured by M. Colquhoun, that on the fall of
the Roman empire, when literature, science, and the
arts, took refuge in monasteries, the secrets and prac-
tices of the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans,
which had previously been confined to the temples,
passed also into the monasteries, and the magnetic
mode of treatment was thus preserved. Hence, St.
Jerome complains that the leger-de-main practices
which had been adopted in the heathen temples, were
passed into, and desecrated the primitive church. So
also Thiers informs us that Protogenes, priest of
Edessa, cured the children, his pupils, by prayer and
the touch of his hand ; and that the monk, John, had
received from God the gift of curing the gout, and
replacing dislocated limbs. The monk Benjamin cured
all kinds of diseases by the touch of his hand, and
anointing with holy oil. Petrus Thyraeus, the Jesuit,
in his work on Deemoniacs, refers to a number of
cures performed by ecclesiastics by the imposition of
the hands and other means analogous to the magnetic.

Accordingly, the early history of animal magnetism
throws considerable light on many of the mystic rites
and ceremonies of the ancients ; it unseals the door of
the heathen temple, and strips the priest before his
altar of all his supernatural attributes ; it explains a
variety of extraordinary facts which the historians of
all ages have recorded, and connects them with each
other as effects which are identical and dependent on
the operation of the same cause. It affords, too, as I
shall now proceed to shew, a satisfactory explanation
of the curious facts connected with sorcery and
witchcraft, which, during the middle ages, excited
the apprehension of the vulgar, imposed on the cre-
dulity of the learned, and led to those horrible perse-
cutions which prevailed throughout Europe. This
melancholy chapter in the history of mankind is replete
with details which can only be comprehended on mag-
netic principles.


CHAPTER IX.

SORCERY AND WITCHCRAFT.

In studying the origin of any science, when, in retrac-
ing the steps of human knowledge, we arrive at the
superstitious notions which were entertained by our
ancestors, it is incumbent on us, instead of turning
away from them with ridicule and contempt, to inves-
tigate their nature and the manner in which they ori-
ginated ; for it may be laid down as an axiom that
every popular belief, however extravagant it may
become, springs originally from some fixed principles
in nature. These for ages may be misinterpreted and
obscured by all manner of vague idealisms ; neverthe-
less, the elements of truth remain unobliterated ; the ore
may be yet separated from the dross, and the principle
which worked in darkness fairly and clearly brought to
light. Hence the history of superstition itself is an
instructive record ; nay, it is wonderful what germs
even of divine truth will often be found scattered
through masses of apparent fiction.

In looking over the trials of those unfortunate per-
sons who were condemned for sorcery and witchcraft, it
is impossible to escape the conviction that the sorcerers
or wizards exercised a truly magnetic influence over
their credulous disciples. Far be it from me to strain
the interpretation of the facts in favour of magnetism ;
I am myself surprised to find the evidence so clear, so
full, and so conclusive.* The persons who were so
affected will be found to have exhibited all the pheno-
mena of magnetic somnambulism, complete physical
insensibility, convulsions, sometimes partial, sometimes
general, sleep-talking, clairvoyance, prevision, and it
is certainly not at all surprising that effects so extraor-
dinary should in this age of darkness have been as-
cribed to demoniacal possession. Furthermore, on
the part of those who professed these supposed satanic
arts, it will appear manifest, that in the exercise of their
skill, they discovered the development of a power
within themselves to affect others, of which they were
originally unconscious, and which confirmed them in
the idea of their being really endowed with superna-
tural power, so that many who commenced their
career as conjuring impostors, eventually died the
victims of a faith, which neither the terrors of the
scaffold nor the stake could induce them to repudiate.
In confirmation of these views I now proceed to ad-
duce cases, many of which indeed require no comment-
In the year 1599, a girl named Martha Brossier,
of Romorantin, in Berry, was reputed to be possessed,
and excited a considerable sensation in Paris. At the
suggestion of the right reverend the bishop of Paris,
the king ordered a committee, composed of the most
eminent physicians, to examine and report on her
case. The physicians appointed were Marescot, El-
lain, Haulin, Riolan, and Duet ; and their report,
which is exceedingly curious, will be found translated
into English by Abraham Hartwel.* The dedication
to his majesty — I quote from this English translation —
proceeds thus :— " Sir, by the commandmant of your
majestie wee have set down briefely and truly that
which we have found in our visiting of Martha Bros-
sier We present the same unto your majestie
without any art, without any painted show, without
nourish, but with a naked simplicitie, the faithful com-
panion of truth, which you have desired from us in
this matter, and which in every other matter you have
always loved and curiously sought." The report then
continues, e< We, the undersigned Doctors Regents in
the facultie of physicke, in the Universitie of Paris,
touching the matter of Martha Brossier, a maide of the
age of two-and-twenty yeres, or thereabouts, born at
Romorantin, in Berry, who was brought unto us in the
chappel of my Lord of Saint Geneufue and
who we saw sometimes in constitution, countenance,
and speech, as a person sounde of bodie and minde,
do say in our consciences, and certify that
which followeth ; that all which is before set down,
[referring to the character of her fits] must be referred
to one of these three causes, sicknesse, counterfeiting,
or diabolicall possession."

" For the opinion that it proceedeth from sick-
nesse, we are clerely excluded from that, for the agi-
tations and motions we observed therein, doe retain
nothing of the nature of sicknesse, nay, not of those
diseases whereunto of the first sight they might have
resembled; it being neither an epilepsie or falling
sicknesse, which always supposes the loss of sense and
judgment, nor the passion which we call hysterica, or
suffocation of the matrix, nor any of the foure mo-
tions proceeding from diseases, — that is to say, shiver-
ing, trembling, panting, and convulsion, or, indeede
if there doe appeare any convulsion, and that a man
will so call the turning up of her eyes, the gnashing
of her teeth, the writhing of her chaps, which are
almost ordinarie with this maide while she is in her
fittes ; the confidence which the priest hath when he
openeth her mouth, and holdeth it open with his finger
within it, testifying sufficiently that they doe not pro-
ceede from, nor are caused by, any disease, considering
that in diseases he that hath a convulsion is not master
of that part or member wherein it is, having neither any
power of election or command over it, and particularly
which is in the convulsion of the jawes, which is most
violent of all the rest, the finger of the priest should
bee no more respected nor spared than the finger of
any other man. Moreover, diseases, and the motions
also of diseases (especially those that are violent),
leave the body feeble, the visage pale, the breath
panting. This maide at the end of her fittes was found
to be as little moved and changed in pulse, colour,
countenance, and breath, as ever she was before ; yea,
which is the more to be noted, as little at the end of
her exorcisme as at the beginning, at evening as in the
morning — at the last day as at the first."

" Touching the point of counterfeiting, the insensi-
bilitie of her bodie during her extasies and furies tried
by the deepe prickings of long pinnes, which were
thrust into divers parts of her hands and of her necke,
and afterwards plucked out againe without any show
that ever she made of feeling the same, either in the
putting in of them, or the taking out of them, a griefe
which, without majicke and without speach, could
not, in our opinion, be indured without any counte-
nance or show thereof, neither by the constancie of
the most courageous, nor by the stoutnesse of the
most wicked, nor by the stronge conceit of the most
criminall malefactors, took from us almost the suspi-
cion of it, but much more persuaded us from that
opinion, the thin and slender foam that in her mad
fits we saw issue out of her mouth, which she had no
means to be able to counterfeit. And yet more than
all this, the very consideration before mentioned of
the little or no change at all that was seene in her
person after all these most sharpe and very long
pangs (a thing which nobody in the world did ever
trie in their most moderate exercises), we are driven
even till this houre, by all the lawes of discourse and
knowledge, yea, and almost forced to beleeve, that
this maide is a demoniacke, and the devill dwelling in
her is the author of all these effects. If wee
had seen that which my lord of St. Geneuefue, and
many others, doe report that this maide was lifted up
into the ayre more than four foote above five or six
strong persons that held her, it would have been an
argument to us of an extraordinarie power over and
beyond the common nature and condition of man.
But not being presente at that wonder, we doe give a
testimonie of our knowledge, which is as much, or
rather more admirable than that force and power
was, — viz., that being demanded, and in her exorcising
commanded — my lord of Paris furnishing the priest with
questions and interrogatories — this maide divers and
sundrie times, by many persons of qualitie and worthie
of credit, was seene and heard to obey and answere to
purpose, not only in the Latin tongue (wherein it had
not been impertinent, peradventure, to have suspected
some collusion), but also in Greeke and in English,
and that upon the sudden. She did (we say once
againe) understande the Greeke and English lan-
guages, wherein we beleeve, as it is very likely that
she was never studied, so that there was no collusion
used with her, neither could she invent or imagine the
interpretations thereof. It resteth therefore even in
the judgment of Aristotle in the like case that
they were inspired unto her." The report then con-
cludes with this solemn declaration ; — u By reason
whereof, and considering also (under correction) that
Saint Luke, who was both a physician and evangelist,
describing the persons out of whose bodies our Lord
and his apostles did drive the devils left unto us,
none other nor any greater signes than those which
wee thinke wee have seene in this case; wee are the
more induced, and almost confirmed to beleeve and
to conclude as before, taking God for a witnesse of
our consciences in the matter. — Made at Paris, this
3rd April, 1599."

On this report I have only to observe that the phy-
sicians Marescot, Ellain, Haulin, Riolan, and Duet,
were all men of scientific attainments, and unimpeach-
able moral integrity ; — the same facts were also wit-
nessed and attested by the bishop of Paris, the abbot
of Geneuefue, and other competent observers.

In the year 1564 the case is reported of a girl named
Anne Myllner, and some curious facts connected with
it are attested by Sir William Calverly, Sir William
Sneyd, Lady Calverly, and other persons of distinction
who lived at Chester. The description of the paroxysm
is extremely graphic. " We went (says the report,
which is signed by the above parties) at about two of
the clocke, in the afternoone of the same 16th day of
February, and there found the mayden in her traunce,
after her accustomed manner, lying in a bed within the
haule, her eyes half shut, half open, looking as she had
been agast, never moving either eye or eyelid, her
teeth something open, with her tongue doubling be-
tweene, her face somewhat red, her head as heavy as
leade to lift at, there she lay stil as a stone, and feeling
her pulse it beat in as good measure as if she had been
in perfite health." The report then describes her
becoming violently convulsed : — " She lifted herself up
in her bed bending backwards in such order that almost
her head and fete met, falling down on the one side
then on the other." A person of the name of Lane,
who was reputed to possess great power over demoniacs,
is then called in, who first, as the report expresses it,
" willed" that she should speak, and then " willed" that
she should rise and dress herself, all which she did to the
astonishment of the bystanders, and a certificate to that
effect was signed by all present on March 8, 1564.*

The violence of the convulsions is particularly
noticed in all such cases ; — in that of Anne Styles,
bewitched by Anne Bodenham, who was executed at
Salisbury in 1653, the narrative states that " she was
so strong in her fits that six men or more could not
hold her ;" but while suffering under " most grievous
hurryings and tortures of the body," the witch being
only brought into the room " she fell asleep, and slept
for three hours, so fast that when they would have
awakened her they could not."* The insensibility of
the body in this state, we are informed by Mather, led
to a cruel test for demoniacal possession. " There was
a notorious witchfinder," he observes, " in Scotland,
who undertook by a pin to make an infallible discovery
of suspected persons whether they were witches or not.
If, when the pin was run an inch or two into the body
of the accused party, no blood appeared, nor any sense
of pain, he declared them to be witches, by means of
which 300 persons were condemned for witchcraft in
that country."f

In a treatise entitled Daimonomagia, 1665, the
effects of witchcraft are described as a disease, and the
little pamphlet sets out with this definition: — "A disease
of witchcraft is a sickness that arises from strange and
preternatural causes, and from diabolical power in the
use of strange and ridiculous ceremonies by witches or
necromancers, afflicting with strange and unaccustomed
symptoms, and commonly preternatu rally violent, very
seldom or not at all curable by natural remedies." We
have then the signs diagnostical, among which are
convulsions, insensibility, preternatural knowledge of
languages. Afterwards we have the causes — " Bier-
nannus and Wierius find that aspect and contact do not
bewitch ; but witches sometimes try to bewitch one
and cannot, and yet bewitch another of the same
family." Lastly, touching the cure, we are instructed
to make the witch, besides prayers, charms, and certain
herbs, use the ceremonies by which she knows how to
cure the sick.* In the fact that the sorceress could
affect one member of a family and not another, we
recognise that difference in the magnetic susceptibility
of different persons which modifies so much the faci-
lity with which the effects are produced.

Among other unfortunate women who were arraigned
for practising witchcraft, we find the case of one Jane
Brookes, who was tried, condemned, and executed at
Charde, March, 1658. She was indicted for be-
witching Richard, the son of Henry Jones, of Shepton
Mallet, and numerous persons, including physicians and
clergymen, witnessed his paroxysms. In this ease we
shall find that the direct personal influence of the
woman exercising what was imagined to be a demo-
niacal power was clearly proved. " The boy," I quote
Glanville's report, " fell into his fits on the sight of
Jane Brookes, and lay in a man's arms like a dead
person ; the woman was then willed to lay on her hand?
which she did, and he thereupon started and sprung out
in a very unusual manner. One of the justices, to prevent
all possibilities of legerdemain, caused Gibson and the
rest to stand off from the boy, and then that justice
himself held him ; the youth being blindfolded, the
justice called as if Brookes should touch him, but
winked to others to do it, which two or three succes-
sively did, but the boy appeared not concerned. The
justice then called on the father to take him, but had
privately before desired one Mr. Geoffrey Strode to
bring Jane Brookes to touch him, at such a time as he
should call for his father, which was done, and the boy
immediately sprung out after a very odd and violent
fashion. He was afterwards touched by several persons,
and moved not; but Jane Brookes being again caused
to put her hand upon him, he started and sprung up
twice, as before. All this while he remained in his fit,
and some time after, and being then laid on a bed in the
same room, the people present could not for a long
time bow either of his arms or legs."

This boy, in his fit, appears also to have possessed the
faculty of clairvoyance : he would describe, not only
Brookes, but her sister, named Alice Coward. " He
would tell," says the report, " the clothes and habits they
were in at the time exactly, as the constable and others
have found them on repairing to them, although Brookes'
house was a good distance from Jones' ; this they often
tried, and always found the boy right in his description."
It may be added, that to the deposition of these facts the
two justices annexed the following attestation : — " The
aforesaid passages were, some of them, seen by us, and
some other remarkable ones, not here set down, were,
upon the examination of several witnesses, taken upoo
oath before us. (Signed) Robert Hunt, John Carey."*

About the same period, Elizabeth Style, of Bayford,
was indicted for bewitching a girl named Elizabeth Hill,
thirteen years of age, and the deposition of three cre-
dible witnesses attests that during her fits "her strength
was encreased beyond the proportion of nature, and
the force of divers men ; furthermore, in one fit she
foretold when she would have the next, which hap-
pened accordingly."*

A woman of the name of Florence Newton was
committed to Youghal prison, 24th March, 1661,
charged with bewitching Mary Longdon. In this case,
during the trial, it is stated that when the accuser had
closed her evidence the prisoner at the bar looked at
her, and made certain motions of her hands towards
her, upon which " the maid fell into most violent fits,
so that all the people that could lay hands on her could
scarcely hold her."f Another unfortunate woman,
named Jane Wenhani, charged with bewitching Anne
Thorn, Anne Street, and others, was tried at the
assizes of Hertford, March 1711-12, and received
sentence of death. The case was tried before Sir
Henry Chauncy, when the grand jury found her guilty
of felony and witchcraft, and fully committed her to
take her trial. Before the grand jury the depositions
of sixteen witnesses were taken, one of whom deposed
" that Jane Wen ham confessed to him that she had
practised witchcraft sixteen years."f On one occasion,
when the girl she afflicted was in one of her paroxyms,
we are informed that " a very ingenious gentleman
and able physician happened to be present, his curio-
sity bringing him a little out of his way to inquire into
the truth of the story of this witch, which he had heard
several ways told, as things of this nature generally
are. When he saw her in a fit, which was one of the
least she ever had, he tried whether he could bring her
out of it without prayers. He took a great feather,
which burning, he held under the maid's nose, and
though the stink was so great that we were not able to
bear it in the room, yet the maid received the strong
steam into her nose without being the least affected by
it, and without perceiving it, as far as we could per-
ceive." The physician then felt her pulse, and assured
them " it was no natural disease under which the maid
laboured ; that it must be counterfeit or preternatural ;"
" but," observes the author of this account, " that she
should counterfeit even death itself one minute, and
restore herself to health the very next, and that she
should put herself to all this trouble for no manner of
pleasure or profit, is so very inconceivable, and so wholly
unaccountable, that I must needs say I shall never have
faith enough to believe such a heap of absurdities."*

The insensibility of this girl in her fits was, it
is stated, proved by M. Chauncy, who " ran a pin
into her arm six or seven times, and finding she
never winced for it, but held her arm as still as if no-
thing had been done to it, and seeing no blood come,
he ran it in a great many times more, still no blood
came, but she stood talking and never minded it ; then
again he ran it in several times more ; at last he left it
in her arm, that all the company might see it run up
to the head."t The influence of direct manual appo-
sition in aggravating or calming the fits, is, in a variety
of these cases, very distinctly attested. " There are
also some things," continues the narrator, " in which
the fits of Mary Longdon and Anne Thorn agree,
particularly the great strength of the afflicted when in
a fit, — so great, that three or four men could hardly
hold 'em down ; but there is one very remarkable differ-
ence which I doubt not my readers have already
taken notice of, — viz. that this Mary Longdon was
always worse of her fits whenever Florence Newton
came into the room, whereas Anne Thorn constantly
recovered from hers at the touch of the witch. And
yet I thinkthese different appearances maybe accounted
for different ways. It is not reasonable to suppose that
either of these alterations in the afflicted came to pass
by the consent or procurement of the witches them-
selves, who could not but perceive that they served as
strong circumstances against them ; but this was done
by the overruling providence of Almighty God, to
convict these miserable creatures, and either of these
ways might do as well as the other, since it is equally
surprising to see one in perfect health fall into such
terrible fits at the sight of any one person as to see
another recover out of such fits by the bare touch of
the suspected witch, both of them tending only to the
discovery of the criminal."*

It is also observed by Increase Mather, " As for
that which concerns the bewitched persons being
recovered out of their agonies by the touch of the
suspected party, it is various and fallible; sometimes
the afflicted person is made sick instead of being made
whole by the touch of the accused; sometimes the
power of imagination is such as that the touch of a
person innocent and not accused shall have the same
effect." Bodin relates that (i a witch who was tried at
Nantes was commanded by the judges to touch a be-
witched person, a thing often practised by the judges
of Germany in the imperial chamber. The witch was
extremely unwilling, but being compelled by the judges
she cried out, ' I am undone,' and as soon as ever she
touched the afflicted person the witch fell down dead/'
" I think," continues Mather, " that there is weight in
Dr. Cotta's argument, — viz. that the power of healing
the sick and possessed, was a special grace and favour
of God for the confirmation of the truth of the Gospel ;
but that such a gift should be annexed to the touch of
wicked witches, as an infallible sign of their guilt, is
not easy to be believed. It is a thing well known, that
if a person possessed by an evil spirit is (as oft it
happens) never so outrageous whilst a good man is
praying with and for the afflicted, let him lay his hand
on them, and the evil spirit is quiet."*

In the year 1696 a commission was appointed in
Scotland, by the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council,
to inquire into the case of Christian Shaw, daughter
of John Shaw, of Bargarran. A quorum of these com-
missioners being met at Bargarran, and the accused
persons confronted before Lord Blantyre, the rest of
the commissioners, several other gentlemen of note,
and ministers, the accused and, in particular, Catherine
Campbell, were examined in the presence of the commis-
sioners. "When they [the accused] severally touched
the afflicted girl," says the report, "she was seized with
grievous fits, and cast into intolerable agonies ; others
then present did also touch her, but no such effects
followed : and it is remarkable that when Catherine
Campbell touched the girle, she was immediately seized
with more grievous fittes, and cast into more intolerable
torments than upon the touch of other accused persons,
whereat Campbell herself being daunted and con-
founded, though she had formerly declined to bless
her, uttered these words : — ' The Lord of heaven and
earth bless thee, and save thee, both body and soul.' "*
During these trials we are informed that the prisoners
were called in one by one, and placed about seven or
eight feet from the justices, and the accusers then stood
between the justices and them. " The prisoners were
ordered to stand right before the justices, with an officer
appointed to hold each hand lest they should herewith
afflict them ; and the prisoners' eyes must be constantly
on the justices, for if they looked on the afflicted
they would either fall into fitts or cry out they were
much hurt by them.f " " On the trial of Bridget
Bishops," it is further added, that " the indictment
being drawn up according to form, it was testified at
the examination of the prisoner, before the magistrates,
that the bewitched were extremely tortured. If she did
but cast her eye on them they were presently cast down,
and this in such a manner that there could be no collu-
sion in the business. But upon the touch of her hand
upon them when they lay in their swoons, they would
immediately revive, and not upon the touch of any one
else. Moreover, upon the special actions of her body,
as the shaking of her head, or the turning up of her
eyes, they presently fell into the same postures ; and
many of the like accidents fell out while she was at
the bar."*

In the year 1697, Richard Dugdale, a boy, nineteen
years of age, excited considerable attention in Surrey
as a demoniac ; his fits were witnessed by numerous
clergymen, physicians, and persons of respectability,
from whose evidence it is perfectly clear that he was
repeatedly in a state of magnetic extase. His fits
commenced with violent convulsions, his sight or eye-
balls turned upwards and backwards ; he afterwards
answered questions, predicted during one fit the period
of accession and duration of another fit, spoke in foreign
languages, of which at other times he was ignorant,
and described events passing at a distance. Here
again I shall quote verbatim the words of the narration :
" At the end of one fit the demoniac told what hour of
the night or day his next would begin, very precisely and
punctually, as was constantly observed, though there
was no equal or set distance of time between his fits ;
betwixt which there would be, sometimes a few hours,
sometimes many ; sometimes one day, sometimes many
days." " He would have told," says one of the deponents
on oath, " when his fits would begin, when they were
two or three in one day, or three or four days asunder,
wherein he never was, that the deponent knoweth of,
disappointed. On one occasion, while the minister was
preaching to him, he exclaimed, " at ten o'clock my
next fit comes on." " Though he was never learned in
the English tongue, and his natural and acquired abi-
lities were very ordinary, yet when the fit seized him
he often spake Latin, Greek, and other languages very
well." (i He often told of things in his fits done at a
distance whilst those things were a-doing, — as for in-
stance, a woman being afraid to go to the barn though
she was come within a bow's length of it, was imme-
diately sent for by the demoniac, who said, " Unless that
weak-faithed jade come my fit will last longer." Some
said, let us send for Mr. G. ; the demoniac answered,
" He is now upon the hay-cart," which was found to
be true. On another occasion he told what great
distress there was in Ireland, and that England must
pay the piper. Again, one going by him to a church
meeting, was told by the demoniac in his fit, " Thou
needest not go to the said meeting, for I can tell thee
the sermon that will be preached there ;" upon which
he told him the text, and much of the sermon that was
that day preached. Lastly, it is certified by two of
the deponents that " the demoniac could not certainly
judge what the nature of his distemper was, because
when he was out of his fits he could not tell how it was
with him when he was in his fits."*

The records of these trials for witchcraft are
replete with curious details, which will doubtless
excite the incredulity of many persons; but let us
distinguish between the facts themselves, as established
by positive evidence, and the superstitious ideas which
may accompany the report of them. I wish, indeed,
that they should be divested of all ideal colouring,
and viewed merely as abstract realities, the ex-
istence of which, all persons, of whatever rank or edu-
cation, are capable of determining. That some im-
positions may have been practised, and those too suc-
cessfully, I grant; but it is well, albeit somewhat
quaintly, argued, by an old English author, that " fre-
quency of deceit and fallacy will warrant a greater
care and caution in examining, and a greater scrupu-
losity and shyness of assent to things wherein fraud
hath been practised or may in the least degree be sus-
pected ; but to conclude that because an old woman's
fancy hath abused her, or some knavish fellow hath put
tricks on the ignorant and timorous, that therefore whole
assizes have been deceived in judgment upon matters of
fact, and that numbers of persons have been forsworn in
things wherein perjury could not advantage them, — I
say, such inferences are as void of charity as of good
manners In things of fact, the people are
as much to be believed as the most subtle philosophers
and speculators, since then sense is the judge ; but
in matters of notion and theory they are not at all to
be heeded, because reason is to be the judge of these,
and this they know not how to use."*

In Lancashire, seven persons in one family were, in
the year 1600, reputed to be possessed, and exhibited all
the signs of what was considered demoniacal possession.
Without entering into the details, which, after the par-
ticulars already given of other cases, might be tedious,
I shall refer only to a summary of the symptoms they
exhibited. " It is worthy to bee remarked," says George
More, " that though these possessed persons had every
one something peculiar to herselfe which none of the
rest did shew, and that so rare and straunge that all the
people were obliged to confesse it was the worke of an
evil spirit within them ; so had they many things in
common, and were handled, for the most part, in their
fittes alike They had all and every one very straunge
visions ; they heard hideous and fearful voices of spirits
sundrie times, and did make marveilous answers back
againe they were in their fittes ordinarilie
holden in that captivity and bondage that for an houre,
two or three, and longer time, they should neither see,
heare, nor taste nor feel nothing but the divells, they
employing them wholly for themselves, vexing and
tormenting them so extreameley as that for the present
they could feel no other paine or torture that could
bee offered, no, though you should plucke an ear from
the heade or an arm from the bodie They had
also a marveilous sore heaving as if their hearts would
burst, so that with violent straining some of them
vomitted bloude many times They were all of
them very fierce, offering violence both to themselves
and others, wherein they shewed verie greate and
extraordinarie strength. They were out of their right
mindes, without the use of their senses, especially
voyd of feeling, as much sense in a stock as one of
them, or as possible in a manner to quicken a dead
man as to alter or chaunge them in their traunees in
anything they either saide or did They in their
fittes had divers parts and members of their bodies so
stiffe and stretchd out, as were inflexible or very hard
to be bended They shewed very great and
extraordinarie knowledge, as may appeare by the
straunge things saide and done by them, according to
that which we have already set down in the particulars
might be, and very little or no hurte at all, although
they had been never so sore tormented immediately
before."*

Increase Mather, also, after giving an account of
the Tryals of the New- England Witches, gives the
following summary of the phenomena they exhi-
bited. He assures us " That they did in the assembly
mutually cure each other even with a touch of the
hand, when strangled and otherwise tortured, and would
endeavour to get to their afflicted companions to relieve
them:" — that they did also foretel when another fit
was coming on, and would say, " Look to her, she will
have a fit presently ;" which fell out accordingly, as
many can bear witness that heard and saw it : — that
the motions in their fits are preternatural as to the
manner, which is so strange as a well person could
not screw their body into ; and the violence also is
preternatural, being much beyond the ordinary force
of the same person when they are in their right mind :
—that the eyes of some of them in their fits are ex-
ceeding fast closed, and if you ask a question they can
give no answer, and I do believe they cannot hear
at that time ; yet do they plainly converse with the ap-
pearances as if they did discourse with real persons."f

Accordingly it is evident that the symptoms of sup-
posed demoniacal possession correspond precisely with
the phenomena which characterise the magnetic state.
How these effects were produced, whether by exciting
the imagination, or the fears, or otherwise affecting the
nervous systems of the afflicted, is not the question
which is now at issue ; all we have to do with is,
the simple fact that such phenomena really were de-
veloped, that the report of them is not false, that
they were not feigned, but were veritable effects,
depending on the operation of causes which were not
then, and may not yet be, clearly understood. That
they are referable to such fixed principles is certain,
and may be inferred from the very circumstance of
their constant uniformity, — that is to say, these symp-
toms of possession have been alike in all parts of the
world, although it is manifest there could be no collu-
sion or contrivance between the parties which exhi-
bited them, whereby any such agreement could be
simulated. In France, for example, during the admi-
nistration of Cardinal Richelieu, the nuns in the Ur-
suline convent, in the city of Loudun, were supposed
to be possessed. They were all violently convulsed ;
they exhibited a preternatural degree of strength ;
they all, too, during their fits, displayed extraordinary
knowledge, and conversed in various languages which
they had never learned.* Information of these facts
being transmitted to Cardinal Richelieu, who, under
colour of being minister, was at that time, de facto,
king of France, he ordered the affair to be investi-
gated, and Urban Grandier, against whom the car-
dinal entertained a secret animosity,* was accused of
being the author of these effects, and formerly ar-
raigned for the crime of sorcery. Twelve ecclesiastics
were appointed his judges : the process lasted eight
months, and after a very minute and, apparently,
solemn inquiry, he was condemned to be burned alive,
and to have his ashes scattered in the air. The sen-
tence was executed in April, 1634; and during the
most terrible crisis of his sufferings, he is reported to
have conducted himself with heroic fortitude. " Now,
whatever opinion," observes an English critic in a
recent number of the Foreign Review, " we may en-
tertain of the cardinal Richelieu, or of the twelve
judges appointed by his directions, or of the Jesuits
who were the confessors of these nuns, and the per-
sonal enemies of Grandier, we conceive that any one
who chooses to read the details of the transaction,
will find evidence enough to convince him that these
convulsions did not originate in any conspiracy, on the
part of the nuns, at least, against Grandier's life, but
were in reality first caused by their excited imagina-
tions, and their terrors of devils, and propagated by
the contagion of imitation, which is known to be so
powerful in such cases. Two of the exorcists them-
selves* died shortly afterwards in the belief that
they were possessed, and shewed all the symptoms
resulting from such a conviction."f Here I may again
repeat, that we are dealing with the facts of the case,
which the reviewer admits, and of which neither ima-
gination nor imitation can afford any adequate expla-
nation.

After the revocation of the edict of Nantes, the pro-
testants, it is well known, were, throughout France,
subjected to the most unrelenting persecution, and
were massacred in great numbers. The peasants
among the Cevennes mountains wandered about in
the open air, enduring every description of privation
and misery ; they held secret conferences for religious
purposes, and many became excited into a state of
ecstacy, which was characterised by all the phenomena
of magnetic somnambulism. They were seized with
vehement tremblings and convulsions ; hence they
were called the Trembleurs des Cevennes ; they
preached and prophesied, and spoke in a variety of
foreign languages. It is remarkable that this epide-
mic prevailed principally among men ; but women
also were affected by it, and even children of a tender
age.* Jurieu, in his Pastoral Letters, states that they
had all the appearance in their ecstacy of being in a
profound sleep ; the sensibility of the body was com-
pletely lost, so that they were not even sensible to the
pain of being burned : those who had only an imper-
fect knowledge of the French language in their ordi-
nary state, expressed themselves with facility and
purity ; many prayed and prophesied in a wonderful
manner; and on recovering, none of them recollected
anything which had during the paroxysm occurred.

Marshal Villars, who was commissioned by the
government to appease these troubles, observes, " 1
have seen things of this sort, which I would not
have believed had they not occurred under my own
eyes ; all the women and girls of a whole town ap-
peared to be possessed. They trembled and prophe-
sied publicly in the streets. One had the boldness to
prophesy before me for an hour. One of these pro-
phetesses, twenty-seven years of age, was taken, about
eighteen months ago, before the bishop of Alais, who
interrogated her before several ecclesiastics. The
creature, after having heard what he said, addressed
him with a modest air, exhorting him no longer to
torment the true children of God. She then addressed
him for an entire hour in an uncouth language, just as
we have formerly seen the Due de la Ferte, when he
had drank a few glasses, talk English before the
people of that country This girl talked in
a style like him, both Greek and Hebrew."*

Another set of religious enthusiasts, who have been
designated the Convulsionnaires of St. Medard,f ex-
hibited phenomena of the same description at the
tomb of the abbe Paris. These, and many other facts
which might be adduced of the same description,
clearly prove that enthusiasm, or fanaticism, may lead
to the development of effects which are truly somnam-
bulic.

To return, however, to the trials for sorcery and
witchcraft which took place in England ; it is, as
Glanvil has affirmed, not reasonable to suppose that
so many witnesses would have perjured themselves in
attesting facts, the falsity of which, had they so for-
sworn themselves, could so easily have been detected ;
besides which, it should be remembered, that the de-
position of every witness was corroborated by other
collateral evidence. It is true that the law which ex-
isted against witchcraft does not prove the existence
of witches ;* but the evidence on these trials esta-
blishes, as clearly as human testimony can establish
anything, that effects which in that age appeared
supernatural, were really produced. " No man," says
the venerable Baxter, " was more backward to con-
demn a witch, without full evidence, than Judge Hale ;"
unhappily, however, facts were too often insuper-
able, which, instead of causing the unfortunate vic-
tims to be led to the scaffold or the stake, ought to
have been made the subject of serious scientific in-
vestigation. " Many of these poor creatures," says
Reginald Scot, very truly, " had more neede to be
relieved than chastised, and more mete were a preacher
to admonish them, than a jailor to keep them ; and a
physician more necessary to helpe them, than an ex-
ecutioner, or tormentor, to hang and burn them."

CHAPTER X.

ROYAL TOUCH — CURES OF GREATRAK's — PHYSIOGNOMICAL
SUPERSTITIONS.

Pyrrhus, Vespasian, Adrian, Apollonius, and other
persons of less eminence, cured, as we have already-
seen, diseases by the touch. In England this power
was first assumed as a divine gift by Edward the Con-
fessor; and his contemporary, Philip I. of France, soon
proclaimed that he was endowed with the same faculty.
Without entering into any rationale of the facts, it may
be sufficient to observe, that many of their august
successors assumed the same privilege, and certainly
dispensed many royal blessings. The cures wrought
by Charles V. are attested by his confessor and his-
torian, Raoule of Presle, who especially bears testi-
mony to his power in relieving chronic rheumatic
affections. The historian Etienne de Conti, describes
very particularly the preliminary ceremonies observed
by Charles VI. before ^proceeding to the actual touch
of the sick. Louis XIII. endeavoured to perform
similar cures ; hence arose the caustic remark made
by the Due D'Epernon, who being informed of the
exorbitant power he had conferred on the Cardinal de
Richelieu, exclaimed, " What ! Louis, then, has only
reserved to himself the power of curing the king's
evil!" His successors, in accordance with this pre-
sumed royal privilege, continued the custom of touch-
ing scrofulous patients at the ceremony of their coro-
nation. The unfortunate Louis XVI. when he was
crowned, conformed with the ancient usage ; and after
touching the sick patients presented to him, pro-
nounced the old verbal formula — " The king touches
thee, may God cure thee." — " Le Roi te touche, Dieu te
guerisse"

In England, after the reign of Edward the Confes-
sor, his successors, both kings and queens, were re-
puted to enjoy the same faculty ; and the efficacy of
the royal touch was for many centuries generally
accredited. Bishop Tooker, chaplain to Queen Eliza-
beth, published, in 1597, a work entitled " Charisma
Sive Donum Sanitatis," in which he attests the extra-
ordinary ability of her majesty in curing, by the
touch, persons afflicted with scrofula. William Clowes,
Esq., one of the surgeons to her majesty, published,
in 1602, another book entitled " Right, Fruitful, and
Approved Treatise of Struma," in which he also com-
pliments her majesty on effecting a cure which he
judged to be " more divine than human," on a person
who was suffering from scrofula. We meet about this
time with the following anecdote : — " A papist, in prison,
who had been sore troubled with the king's evil, having
been cured by queen Elizabeth, after five years' expe-
rience from physicians in vain, being demanded — what
news ? I perceive, said he, that the excommunication
against the queen can be of no avail, since God hath
blessed her with such a gift."* Subsequent to this, John
Bird, about the period of the restoration, published a
treatise entitled " Ostenta Carolina," wherein he
maintains that Charles II. was the antitype of Edward
the Confessor, and was able, by the royal touch, to
cure, not only scrofula, but other diseases. About
the same period, Dr. Thomas Allen published a work
entitled the " Excellency, or Handy Work of the
Royal Hand," wherein, in allusion to Valentine Great-
rak's, who at that time was performing many remark-
able cures by the application only of his hand, warns
all persons against " the seventh sons, or those called
strokers," whose success lessened the esteem of his
majesty's performances.* The most eminent author,
however, whose evidence may certainly be esteemed
conclusive, is Wiseman, serjeant-surgeon to Charles
II., who published several chirurgical treatises of very
considerable merit. In his chapter on the cure of the
king's evil, he observes, u I myself have been a fre-
quent eye-witness of many hundreds of cures per-
formed by his majesty's touch alone, without any
assistance of chirurgery ; and these, many of them,
such as had tried out the endeavours of able chirur-
geons before they came thither. It were endless to
recite what I myself have seen, and what I have re-
ceived, acknowledgments of my letter not only from
several parts of this nation, but also from Ireland,
Scotland, Jersey, and Guernsey ."t

The ceremony of conferring the royal touch was,
during the reign of Henry VII., performed in the fol-
lowing manner : — the king, priest, physician, the sick,
and others being assembled, his majesty first knelt
down, saying, " In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus
Sancti, Amen — Benedicte." Then the chaplain, with
a stole round his neck, kneeling before the king, re-
peated a short prayer, to which the king responded :
" Confiteor Deo, Beatee Marias Virgini, omnibus
Sanctis," &c. The chaplain then, after another prayer,
read a portion of the gospel in Latin, during which
the clerk of the closet brought forward the sick per-
son, and both kneeling down before him, the king
laid his hands repeatedly over the sore, and then
crossed it with a gold coin, which was afterwards
worn suspended round the neck of the patient until
the cure was perfected. The chaplain having finished
the gospel, the surgeon then led the sick person from
the king. The pieces of gold used on these occasions
were not originally coined expressly for the purpose,
but were the current coin of the realm, called Angel
Nobles, and composed of the purest gold. In the
reign of Queen Elizabeth the coin bore the inscription,
" A Domino factum est istud, et est mirabile in oculis
nostris," but after her reign, it being suspected that
many persons applied to be touched for the sake of
the gold only, the piece was reduced to a coin of
much smaller size and value, bearing the inscription,
" Soli Deo Gloria." It was controversially alleged
that the cure, instead of being effected by the touch,
depended on the amulet virtues of the gold ; but, says
Wiseman, " We have many evidences to the contrary,
for his majesty's royal father, in his great extremity
or poverty, had no gold to bestow, but instead of it,
gave silver, and sometimes nothing ; yet in all those
cases did cure, and those that were cured by his
blood wore no gold."*

However extraordinary it may appear in this age
of incredulity, it is certain that by the royal touch
many cures were wrought. " That divers persons,''
says Bishop Bull, " desperately labouring under the
king's evil, have been cured by the mere touch of the
royal hand, assisted with the prayers of the priests of
the church, is unquestionable ; unless the faith of all
our ancient writers, and the consentient report of
some hundreds of most credible persons in our own age
attesting the same, were to be questioned. "f " I, my-
self," observes Dr. Douglas, bishop of Salisbury, " have
met with a man who assured me that Queen Anne's
touch, and the medal she hung about his neck, (and
which I saw about it above twenty years afterwards,)
had cured him when in a most desperate way. But,
as a single unnamed witness will perhaps meet with
little credit, what will you say when I name one whose
attestation must be owned to be free from every sus-
picion ? I have in my eye the late Mr. Dicken, ser-
jeant-surgeon to Queen Anne, a gentleman well known
for eminence in his profession. That he had oppor-
tunities of knowing the truth must be allowed, for all
who were to be touched were first examined by him
before they were brought to her majesty, and he made
no secret in bearing witness to the certainty of some
of the cures. This attestation of his must be con-
sistent with the knowledge of many still alive, and I
relate it to you on the authority of a physician of the
strictest honour and probity, who assureth me that
Mr. Dicken hath declared to him that he had in his
possession a great number of letters writ to him by
persons of character and distinction from most parts
of England, attesting the recovery of their relations,
acquaintances, and servants, who had come up to
London to be touched, and thanking him for the
trouble he had taken ; that he himself could, from his
own knowledge, affirm that several who were touched
received benefit; and, in particular, he related one
case which I shall here mention. A woman came to
him, begging that he would present her to be touched
by the queen. As, from her appearance, he had no
great opinion of her character, he told her that the
touch would be of little service to her, as he supposed
she would sell her medal, which should continue
about her neck to make the cure lasting. She pro-
mised to preserve it, was touched, and the medal
given to her ; and soon afterwards her sore healed
up. Forgetting her promise, and now looking upon
the piece of gold as useless, she disposed of it ; but
soon after her sores broke out once more. Upon this
she applied to Mr. Dicken a second time, entreating
him to present her again to the queen. He did so,
and once more she was cured."* In allusion to the
sick relapsing under such circumstances, Wiseman,
vindicating the divine power of the royal touch, ob-
serves, " Now, whereas, some of them, upon the loss
of their gold, have found damage, I should like to
know whether any of them were relieved by any other
gold than what the king gave them." * That this
sanative blessing, however, was not conferred by the
hand of sovereignty alone is manifest, for in Germany
the same faculty was ascribed to the Counts of Has-
prug, and the Saludadores in Spain professed to heal
all external sores by the touch and the application of
white linen.

In various parts of Europe individuals have occa-
sionally appeared who professedly cured diseases by
manual contact. One of the most celebrated of these
was Valentine Greatrak's, an Irish gentleman, of high
respectability in the county of Waterford.f He ap-
pears to have cured a variety of diseases, by simply
passing his hands over the surface of the body ; and it
is interesting to know that among the number of his
patients were the second Villiers, Duke of Bucking-
ham ; the son of the philosopher Cudworth, and the
astronomer Flamstead. His fame having spread
throughout Ireland, he was requested, by the Earl of
Orrery, to visit England, for the purpose of treating
the Right Honourable the Viscountess Conway, who
was afflicted with a severe chronic headache, which
had resisted the skill of the most eminent physicians
in France and England. He accordingly visited Eng-
land in January 1666, and resided at Ragley, the seat
of Lord Conway, in Warwickshire. He afterwards
removed to Worcester, where his success was so great,
that he received an order from Lord Arlington, secre-
tary of state, to proceed to London. On his arrival there,
he took a house in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, and, during a
residence of many months, performed many remark-
able cures, an account of which, with certificates from
the parties, he published in a letter addressed to the
Honourable Robert Boyle. " The cures therein nar-
rated," says Dr. Douglas, 4< seem to have all the cir-
cumstances necessary to establish any matters of fact.
The names of those who were cured, the time when,
the places where, and the witnesses before whom the
cures were performed ; all these marks of a genuine
narrative are to be found in his book, which was be-
sides published on the spot where the facts in question
lay, exposed to every one's enquiry, so that had there
been any fraud it must have been discovered; but
indeed no such thing was or could be affirmed. The
witnesses, many of them at least, are persons of such
unexceptionable credit, good sense, and learning, that
as we cannot suspect they were imposed upon, so
we cannot suspect they would impose. Besides the
certificates of many gentlemen of distinction,* we have
also the attestations of grave Divines,f and eminent
physicians,:): which last are not very ready in admitting
that cures may be effected without making use of
the medicines which they themselves prescribe."

This letter of Greatrak's, addressed to the Honour-
able Robert Boyle, is dated London, 8th May, 1666,
and is written in a modest and unpretending style.
He states briefly his genealogy, and the education he
received; he then accounts for his commencing the
practice of healing by manual apposition, in the fol-
lowing manner : — " About four years since, I had an
impulse or strange persuasion in my own mind (of
which I am not able to give any rational account to
another), which did very frequently suggest to me that
there was bestowed on me the gift of curing the king's
evil, which for the extraordinariness of it I thought lit
to conceal for some time ; but at length I communicated
this to my wife, and told her that I did verily believe
that God had given me the blessing of curing the king's
evil, for whether I were in private or public, sleeping
or waking, still I had the same impulse ; but her reply
was to me, that she conceived this was a strange ima-
gination."* He then adds, u that a few days after-
wards he tried his skill on a man who was grievously
afflicted with this disease, and within a month he was
perfectly cured." " Within some small time
after this, God was pleased, by the same or the like
impulse, to discover unto me that he had given me the
gift of healing, which the morning following I told my
brother and wife, but neither of them could be pre-
vailed upon to believe it, though, for my own part, I
had a full assurance thereof within me. This impulse I
had the Sunday after Easter day, the 2nd of April,
'65, early in the morning ; and the Wednesday ensuing
I went to Cornet Deans (about some occasions I had
with him), to Lismore, where there came into his house
to me a poor man, that with a violent pain in his loins,
went almost double, who desired me, for God's sake,
that I would lay my hands on him, and do him what
good I could." Accordingly, Greatrak's complied
with his request, and succeeded in curing him. He
does not, however, pretend that he was, in all cases,
successful ; on the contrary, he distinctly states that he
was unable to relieve the Viscountess Conway of her
painful malady, and resolved on returning home.
" But," says he, " at the entreaty of my Lord Conway,
I remained with his honour at Ragley, three weeks or
a month, where many hundreds daily came to me, and
many were cured of their diseases and distempers, and
many were not."* Again he observes, " Many may
demand of me why some are cured and not all? to which
I make this answer, that God may please to make use
of such means, by me, as shall operate according to
the disposition of the patient, and therefore cannot be
expected to be the like effectual in all. They also de-
mand further, why some are cured at once coming and
not all ; and why the pains should fly immediately
out of some and take such ambages in others ; and
why it should go out of some at their fingers, some at
their toes, some at their noses, others their ears or
mouths ? To which I say, if all these things could
have a plain and rational account given of them, then
would there be no reason to account them strange,
Let them tell me what substance that is which removes
and goes out with so great expedition, and it will be
more easie to resolve their questions ; but till then let
them be silent and admire the works of God, whose
ways are past finding out, and whose majesty is not
confined to time, manner, or measure."*

During the time Greatrak's was on this visit
at Lord Conway's, Mr. Henry Stubbes, physician, at
Stratford-on-Avon, was invited to Ragley, where
he met Greatrak's, and had the opportunity of be-
coming personally acquainted with him. He de-
scribes him to have been a man " of a graceful
personage and presence," and, " if my phantasy," he
adds, "betrayed not my judgment, I observed in his
eyes and meene a vivacitie and spritelinesse that is
nothing common I inquired of him how he
came by his miraculous gift of healing, and he replied
it was the grace of God in him, which he understood
first by a strong and powerful impulse in him to essay
it, and this notion was so prevalent upon him that it
incessantly runne in his minde, nor could any businesse,
how serious or religious soever, divert him from those
cogitations/'f His method of operating appears to
have been very simple. " I considered," says Dr.
Henry Stubbes, " that there was no manner of fraud
in the performances, that his hands had no medicaments
upon them, nor was the stroking so violent
that much could be attributed to friction. I observed
that he used no manner of charms or unlawful words ;
sometimes he ejaculated a short prayer before he cured
any, and always after; he bade them give God the
praise." It is asked by Mr. Colquhoun, after citing
this passage — " Now where is the imposture in all this?"
Certainly there was none, and he must be somewhat
arrogant of his own critical sagacity who would repu-
diate such testimonies as the following : —

Dr. Rust, the Lord Bishop of Dromore, observes,
" I was three weeks together with him at my Lord
Conway's, and saw him, I think, lay his hands upon
a thousand persons ; and really there is something
in it more than ordinary, but I am convinced it is
not miraculous. I have seen pains strangely fly
before his hands, till he hath chased them out of
the body — dimness cleared, and deafness cured by
his touch ; twenty persons, at several times, in fits
of the falling sickness were, in two or three minutes,
brought to themselves, so as to tell where their
pain was, and then he hath pursued it till he hath
drawn it out at some extreme part He pre-
tends not to give testimony to any doctrine ; the manner
of his operation speaks it to be natural ; the cure
seldom succeeds without reiterated touches ; his patients
often relapse ; he fails frequently ; he can do nothing
where there is any decay of nature, and many distem-
pers are not at all obedient to his touch. So that, I
confess, I refer all his virtue to his particular temper
and complexion ; and I take his spirits to be a kind of
elixir and universal ferment ; and that he cures (as
D. M. expressed it) by a kind of sanative contagion."*
The testimony of Dr. Whichcote also, cannot, I appre-
hend, be in any way impugned. He states in his
certificate, " I have been present when sundry persons
thus helped and relieved have, with an abundance of
joy and chearfulness, given God thanks for the great
benefit they had received by means of Mr. Greatrak's.
I have been in company with persons of good under-
standing and credit, who have, of their own accord,
declared and testified that they themselves have been
eye-witnesses of the like good effects. Tis true he
does not cure such in whom nature is spent, or where
the parts or principles of nature altogether are defec-
tive, to whom, at first coming to him, he doth com-
monly declare, that he cannot help them : some others,
at the first or second application to him, he doth not
help, who afterwards are restored at their oftener
coming to him For my own part he hath
been to me an happy instrument of God to relieve and
ease me of a very dangerous and painful malady, which
for many years had greatly disabled and sorely afflicted
me."t It does not appear that Greatrak's produced
somnambulism, but then it should be remembered he
did not comply with the elementary condition neces-
sary to produce that effect ; he did not operate with the
intention of inducing it ; however, many of his pa-
tients were convulsed, and some manifested that degree
of physical insensibility which is so peculiarly charac-
teristic of the magnetic state. In Dr. Wilkins' certi-
ficate in reference to the case of a woman who had
applied to Greatrak's to be cured of severe headache, it
is stated, that, " after the operation, the upper joints of
her fingers were dead, and that if she were wounded
in them she would neither feel it nor would any blood
come, for the tryal of which having first several times
pinched the pulp of her fingers betwixt my nails, with
great violence, I did several times thrust in a pin neer
to the bone, but the woman was not sensible of either,
neither did any blood come ; but upon two or three slight
strokes of his hand she professed to be eased of her
pain, and her fingers were restored to their wonted
temper, and then being but gently pricked with a pin,
she was sensible of it, and the blood followed upon it.
This I can truly and do willingly attest." This certi-
ficate is then signed by Dr. Wilkins, and countersigned
by Mr. Sandys, who also witnessed the operation.
Upon the whole, it will be found that the cures which
Greatrak's performed by manual apposition are so
fully and unequivocally attested by impartial and com-
petent observers, that I do not think the most perverse
and ingenious sceptic can, by any sophistry whatever,
invalidate the evidence.

Many years after Greatrak's had acquired so much
celebrity, John Joseph Gassner, the celebrated German
exorcist, attracted considerable attention by the cures
which he performed. He was born in 1727, at Bratz,
near Pludenz in Swabia, and became catholic minister
at Closterle, in the bishopric of Chur. He began by
healing his parishioners in an obscure town on the
borders of Switzerland and Tyrol, and his reputation
so much increased, that during the last two years of
his residence there he had between four and five hun-
dred patients under his treatment. He made a tour
through several of the Swiss Cantons, and settled at
Ratisbon, where he was visited by Mesmer, the cele-
brated Lavater, and many men of scientific eminence.
His cures were performed with much pomp, and it
was observed that he always rubbed his hands upon
his girdle and handkerchief previous to his touching
the patient. He performed the ceremony in the name
of our Saviour, and by the faith of the diseased in his
holy name ; if the cure did not take place they wanted
faith. He gave the sick, when he dismissed them,
balm and oil, together with certain waters and powder,
which they were to use as spiritual medicaments. A
public officer took minutes of the cases he treated,
which were attested by numerous persons of high rank
and respectability.

In the darker ages, the art of effecting cures by such
processes as the above was mixed up with the study
of natural magic. Hence Hippocrates,* Dioscorides,f
Theophrastus,^: acknowledge the curative effects of
magic, which was performed by looks, gestures, signs,
and various ceremonious rites. Fascination and En-
chantment are terms frequently used by old authors
to express the magnetical power exerted by one person
over another; and, like some modern theorists, Avi-
cenna, Pomponatius, and many others who recognised
the facts, ascribed them to the operation merely of
the imagination. As regards the influence of phy-
siognomical expression, the fascination or magical
power of the expression of the eye has been always
a matter of popular observation.* Athenaeus and
Zustatius state, that one Cratisthenes was so ex-
cellent a magician that he could not only charm with
the eyes, but change the very phantasies of men. The
whole secret of fascination is described by Ficinus as
depending on the witchcraft of the eyes. " Mortal
men," says he, i( are especially bewitched when, by
often gazing one on another, they direct sight to sight
— join eye to eye therefore he that hath a
clear eye, though he be otherwise deformed, will make
one mad, and tie him fast to him by the eye."* So
also Philostratus speaks of an Ephesian, who " by
looking steadily on a person could kill him ;" and
Pliny mentions a whole family, " who," he says, " pos-
sessed so cross and felonious an aspect that they killed
those on whom they gazed/'f Furthermore, Plutarch
affirms that some persons have such a power in their
eyes that their friends are thereby fascinated, £ and
a variety of other passages from ancient authors
might be cited to the same effect. The superstition
of the "evil eye" is familiar to every one; among the
Arabians it is yet entertained, and accordingly we find
that Captain Lyon, in his travels in Northern Africa,
informs us that he " observed, in a deep romantic
valley, about six miles from Beni-Abbas, many of the
trees ornamented with the skulls of horses, camels,
or sheep, to protect them from being blasted by the
evil eye."§

This, and other physiognomical superstitions, evi-
dently derived their origin from the popular observa-
tion of the remarkable influence which some individuals
almost unaccountably acquire over others ; indeed the
very sympathies which associate mankind together are
inexplicable excepting on magnetical principles. The
natural affinities which exist between chemical sub-
stances are, it is well known, determined by laws which
are fixed and permanent ; and so also the manifestations
of the human mind, and the affections of the human
heart, are doubtless determined by laws equally inherent
in the constitution of our nature ; nay, to suppose other-
wise, would be to destroy, imaginatively, the whole
harmony of the moral world, for it would in reality be
to presume the existence of a vast series of effects
unproduced by any cause whatever, and existing inde-
pendent of any laws to determine their mutual relations.
Matter affects matter upon physical principles that are
demonstrable, and mind, we may rest assured, affects
mind on psychical principles, which ought to be more
fully investigated.


CHAPTER XL

EARLY WRITERS ON MAGNETISM ANIMAL MAGNETISM

IN ENGLAND.



In this great commercial country it is notorious that
the attention of the government is so exclusively occu-
pied in conducting its own domestic and foreign affairs,
that science and literature do not receive the same
immediate encouragement as in France. Here no
royal commissions are delegated to inquire into any
reputed great discovery; the author of it is left to fight
single-handed against the opposition by which he must
inevitably be assailed, and when he has succeeded in
establishing the truth of his discovery, he is then not
unfrequently honoured by the patronage and favours
of the reigning monarch. So was it with Harvey, Sir
Isaac Newton, Jenner ; and so has it also been with
many men of high literary distinction. This being the
character of the government, under whatever admi-
nistration it may be conducted, and there being no
Institution like the Academie Royale de Medecine in
Paris, or the Academie des Sciences at Berlin, to whose
verdict I can appeal, I at once meet with this difficulty,
that there is here no tribunal before which I can ex-
hibit the facts I am prepared to demonstrate, whose deci-
sion might carry with it authority ; for I am aware that
the evidence of individuals, however in reality unim-
peachable, may unjustly be impugned as insufficient ;
and yet it appears to me that the opinions in favour of
animal magnetism, by such men as Cuvier, La Place,
Ampere, Hufeland, Treviranus, Humboldt, Sprengel,
Keiser, Brandis, Autentreith, Cloquet, Rostan, Georget,
might at least disarm scepticism of its arrogance, and
enforce on the conviction, especially of the medical pro-
fession, the propriety of giving the subject an impartial
and candid investigation. What was the opinion of
Dugald Stewart, who will not be accused of being a
German visionary ? It was in favour of animal mag-
netism. What was the observation of the acutely-
minded scholar and philosopher, Coleridge ? " I have
seen that which I would not have believed on your re-
port ; and therefore, in all reason, I can neither expect
nor wish you should believe on mine."* And what has
been the conclusion of almost every scientific man who,
either in France or Germany, has paid attention to the
phenomena ? It has been so decidedly in favour of the
science that the existence of the facts is no longer, on
the continent, a matter of dispute.

We have already seen that many of the more os-
tensible phenomena of somnambulism obtruded them-
selves, in a manner, on the attention of the ancients ;
and we shall find that traces of the doctrines of Mesmer
— " foregone conclusions" — founded on imperfect ob-
servation — are scattered through the works of many
early authors. It is easy to denounce learned men, who
lived in an age unillumined by the present light of
science, as visionaries and impostors ; — it is easy to
raise an outcry of quackery against the most intelli-
gent and zealous minded champions of truth ; but the
stream of human knowledge, although for a moment
darkened by such prejudices, is not interrupted in its
progression, or diverted out of its proper channel.
The very vestiges of hostility and persecution are the
landmarks which should warn men of science of a
future age against falling into the same error ; for what
can be more irrational than to reject, without investi-
gation, facts which are ex facie well authenticated ?
The early writers on animal magnetism imperfectly
anticipated many of the doctrines maintained by the
magnetisers of the present day. It occurred to Para-
celsus, that all animated beings were endowed with an
occult power analogous to mineral magnetism, which
was derived from the stars, and which he called magnate.
He insisted on faith as the elementary foundation of
all the occult sciences. " The imagination," says he,
" is confirmed and developed by faith ; it must receive
its full development before it can be brought to act,
for the slightest doubt crushes the whole offspring ;—
faith strengthens imagination — faith determines the
will ; he who believes in nature receives from nature
everything in proportion to his faith."* One of the
commentators on Paracelsus, Leon Suavus, who ap-
pears to have studied magnetism, observes " All the
phenomena of the will are not incredible to those phi-
losophers who perfectly understand the virtues and
character of the human mind, which is restrained only
by the interposition of the body being in every other
respect equal to that of angels. We pass over, with-
out observation, fascination and other modes by which
the mind exhibits outwardly very surprising phenomena.
Nothing is more effectually productive of these mar-
vellous effects than the imagination of one who places
the most unbounded confidence in the object of his
pursuit, whether it be real or ideal."f After Paracelsus,
a certain Rumelius Pharamond, the Chevalier Digby,
Crollius, Bartholin, and Anman, published treatises on
the magnetic doctrine, and their opinions having found
their way into France, were warmly espoused by Loysel,
Dole, Gaffarel, and some other men of learning.

In the beginning of the fourteenth century, Arnauld
de Villeneuve, being well versed in the literature of the
Arabs, drew from this source the doctrine of mag-
netism, and practised it in the treatment of diseases.
The signs he adopted were soon reputed magical. He
practised at Montpellier, where he was' severely at-
tacked by his colleagues, and anathematised by the
Sorbonne. Harassed by misfortune, with his health
shattered, and his spirits broken, he gave way to me-
lancholy; and, like J. J. Rousseau, fancied himself
an object of hatred to all mankind. After him ap-
peared Pomponatius, so renowned for his wit, and par-
ticularly for the persecution he endured on account of
his metaphysical opinions. His work on incantations,
" De Incantationum Occulta Potestate," had great
publicity. He declares in it, that he does not believe
in magic ; but he affirms that the virtue of curing
diseases possessed by certain men, is inherent in them,
and that they can effect cures by touch, without any
miraculous or magical intervention. He considers it
possible that " health may be produced from without
by a soul imagining as well as desiring it." He also
states, " that his opinion is not the same as that of the
Arabs. According to Avicenna, the soul never acts
but from her own independent consciousness, and by
the sole force of her will ; but, according to him, the
soul never acts but by attraction, and through the
vapours which she propels towards the patients."
" There is in the mind of man," says he, f< a certain
power of changing, attracting, checking, and binding
men and things according to his desire ; for everything
yields to him when he is carried to an extreme of
passion or virtue ; but only inasmuch as he excels
those whom he wishes to bind."

Cornelius Agrippa, born at Cologne in 1486, carried
his ideas of the extension of faith and imagination
very far. " The passions of the mind which are led,"
he observes, " by fancy, when they are very strong,
can not only change the body of their possessor, but
can also influence the bodies of other persons, and
even communicate or cure diseases both mental and
physical." He also remarks, and the idea involves an
excellent moral principle, that " some men influence
you by their sole affection, the peculiar habit which
surrounds them in consequence of which we should
avoid all intercourse with the wicked and the wretch-
ed ; for their soul radiates a noxious influence, con-
taminating those who come near them with a sort of
contagious wretchedness; for the same reason, the
case being reversed, he recommends the society of
good persons."

At a later period, Nicolas of Lucca wrote a treatise
on the magnetism of the blood ; Laurence Strause,
another on magnetic sympathy ; and Pierre Borel, the
king's physician, and a member of the " Academie des
Sciences," in a dissertation published by him, main-
tains, on sympathetic cures, the same doctrine, and
admits, not only the influence of the general fluid, but
likewise that of the will on the animal economy.

In the year 1608, Goclenius, professor of medicine
at Marburg, published a rather long treatise on mag-
netic cures, in which he endeavours to prove that such
cures are effected by a natural process which he en-
deavours to explain. In 1621, Vanhelmont, a dis-
ciple of Paracelsus, published his treatise on the mag-
netic cure of wounds, a work in which he defends his
teacher against the attacks of several Jesuits. The
inquisitors, astonished at the profound knowledge of
medicine possessed by Vanhelmont, regarded him as a
magician, and ordered him to be arrested. He es-
caped, however, from the dungeons of the inquisition,
and went, like his cotemporary Descartes, to seek peace
and liberty in Holland. Here he published, at the
Elzevir establishment, his work entitled, " Effects of
Magnetism on the Human Body," in which he deve-
loped many new and striking views. " Magnetism,"
says he, " exerts its influence every where ; there is
nothing new in it, excepting the name ; it seems a
paradox to those only who deride everything, attri-
buting to the evil spirit whatever they cannot explain.
Supposing a witch practise witchcraft, it is not through
the agency of the devil, for he cannot communicate a
power which he does not possess ; it is by means of a
faculty peculiar to, and inherent in, human nature,
and which, like every other faculty with which we are
endowed, may be applied either to a good or to an
evil purpose."

According to Vanhelmont, the soul is endowed with
a modelling power, which, after having produced an
idea, can mould it into substance and shape, and send
it far off, propelled and guided by the will. This
power, infinite in the Creator, is, of course, limited in
his creatures, and may consequently be more or less
obstructed by obstacles. Ideas thus clothed in sub-
stance, have a physical influence on living beings
through the medium of the vital principle ; they act
with more or less power, in proportion to the energy
of the will that sends them forth ; and their action
may be checked by the resistance of the receiving
patient. Some learned men, in Vanhelmont's time,
thought that the sympathetic power emanated from
the stars, but Vanhelmont maintained the contrary.
" I see," said he, " the source of this power in an agent
much nearer to ourselves. Ideas are the directing
power, and these ideas are produced by charity or
good-will. Thus, respecting the sympathetic influence,
I consider these stars of our intelligence (attention
and chanty) far above the stars of the heavens. Such
ideas arising through a desire of doing good are heard
afar off, and reach the object pointed out by the will,
whatever may be the intervening distance."

It is impossible to have a more correct idea of the
nature of the magnetic agency ; it is much to be re-
gretted that such truths should ever have been min-
gled and confounded with the superstitions of the age
in which they were promulgated. Vanhelmont was
supported in his subsequent attempts to support this
doctrine by Robert Flud, a Scotchman, who was the
author of several works on philosophy.

According to Robert Flud, man has two poles, like
the earth ; and magnetism can only take place when
his body is in the proper position. After having
examined, on this point, the opinions of various
authors, chiefly those of Plato, Pythagoras, Aristotle,
and Empedocles, he concludes that, besides the action
of the poles in man, which he admits as demonstrated,
there exist two principles acting continually upon
him, which he thus describes : — " If, when two persons
come together, the magnetic rays or emanation they
send forth, happen to be repelled, reflected, or reper-
cussed, from the circumference towards the centre,
antipathy exists, and magnetism is negative. If, on
the contrary, there is abstraction on either side, and a
free emission from the centre to the circumference,
sympathy takes place, and magnetism is then positive."
He admits several species of magnetism ; and the evi-
dence he adduces in support of his assertions, is ex-
tremely curious.

Robert Boyle, the founder of the Royal Society of
London, a profound mathematician and learned phy-
sician, perceived the action and the reaction which indi-
viduals could exert upon one another ; and he admitted
a general fluid productive of this result. In his highly
esteemed treatise on the corporeal affluences, proving
their extreme subtility, he also established their power
and influence.

The same researches had already been made by the
Spaniard, Balthazzar-Gracian. Attraction, which he
seems to have known, is called by him, with much pro-
priety, the natural relationship of the minds and hearts
of men. He perceived this permanent flux and reflux
of the vital principle and corporeal humours in man,
without which he thought the motion necessary to life
would be interrupted ; and he explained the effects of
sympathy and antipathy in such a manner as to make
them lose much of their mystery. " The atmosphere
peculiar to each individual," says he, " retains as
much of the attraction and repulsion of the general
fluid, as the nature of his constitution allows. In
the various intersections of these individual atmo-
spheres, some emanations are more attractive between
two beings, others more repulsive, than others." This
doctrine differs but little from that of the ancient
Rabbin Abraham Benhannas. " The magnet," said
he, " attracts iron ; iron is found everywhere ; every-
thing therefore is under the influence of magnetism.
It is only a modification of the general principle which
establishes harmony, or foments divisions among men ;
it is the same agent which gives rise to sympathy,
antipathy, and the passions." Father Kircher, whose
work contains an account of that of Robert Flud, says,
towards the conclusion, that his book must have come
from the devil ; but he goes much further than his
predecessors in adducing known instances of sympa-
thy and antipathy, and every species of affinity ob-
servable in nature ; all of which appeared to him so
many species of magnetism. He distinguishes several
kinds, — namely, the magnetism of metallic bodies, that
of the sun, that of the sea, that of animals, which he
denominates " zoo-magnetism os" Kircher was so pos-
sessed with this sole idea, that all nature appeared to
him like one immense magnet.

Another learned author, Jean-Baptiste Porta, whose
house was the resort of all the literati, and who founded
at Naples the Academy of Secrets (de secretiX so
called because, in order to be admitted a member, it
was indispensable to be the inventor of some secret
or discovery, adopted part of Kircher's opinions, and
published a book on the corpuscular philosophy, con-
taining several magnetic prescriptions, and a treatise
on natural magic. The cures operated by Porta ap-
peared so extraordinary to the court of Rome, that,
on the suspicion of his being a magician, he was inter-
dicted, and his cures prohibited.

Others, especially, Coclius and Porta, confounded
the science of magnetism with the study of astrology ;
the former predicted the nature of his death, and ap-
prized his murderer, at Caponi, that ere the sun went
down he would commit a crime, which proved true,
for he was murdered by that very man ; the latter
foretold Spinola, the Genoese, that he would meet
with great success if he would embrace the military
profession, which happened according to the pre-
diction.

Wirdig, professor of medicine at Rostoch, persuaded
himself that there was in nature, and its bodies, more
life, more motion, more magnetism, more intelligence,
than had been heretofore admitted. He enlarged the
system of Kepler ; his own system appeared under the
title of " New Medicine of the Spirits;" he presented
it to the Royal Society of London, where it was
printed in 1673. According to Wirdig, the magnetic
influence takes place, not only between the celestial
and the terrestrial bodies, but this influence is reci-
procal. " The whole world," say she, u is submitted to
the power of magnetism. Life is preserved by mag-
netism ; everything perishes by magnetism."

Stahl, to whom chemical science is indebted for
much of its lustre and glory, discovered among the
ancients the doctrine of magnetism, and made novel
and felicitous applications of its principles. His
« True Medical Theory," printed in 1708, an-
nounced the grasping genius with which he had
studied all the branches of his art. It contains some
acute observations, founded on the existence of a vital
principle circulating in all beings, by which their
actions are modified, and governed, and which he
supposed possessed, like all currents, a sort of flux
and reflux, the absence of which in man produces
obstructions, paralysis, epilepsy, convulsive move-
ments, and death.

Maxwel entertained the same ideas ; he reduced all
his observations into a regular system, and devoted
himself to the improvement of magnetic medicine,
which he boasts of having first drawn out of its chaos.
His work was published at Frankfort, and reduced
into aphorisms by Ferdinand Santanelli. Among a
variety of things it Contains, unintelligible to those
who are not familiarised with the study of occult
powers, we meet with very ingenious ideas, explaining
the influence exerted by one individual over another,
and sometimes over his own organisation. " All
bodies," says he, " emit corporeal rays serving as
vehicles through which the soul transmits her in-
fluence, by communicating to them her energy and
power of acting ; and these rays are not only
corporeal, but they are even composed of various
kinds of matter. When the spirit intimately con-
nected with the properties of one body, communi-
cates with another body, the mutual flux and reflux of
the spirits from one body to the other, establishes a
kind of sympathetic connexion, which is not so easily
dissolved as when it is the work of imagination. The
universal remedy is no other than the vital spirit
strengthened in a suitable subject. According to the
primitive design of nature, every subject receives the
exact share of vital spirit necessary for its preserva*
tion after its kind ; it is, however, possible that nature,
through the exertions of a philosopher, may be made
to produce things superior to their own principle. If
you wish to work prodigies, abstract from the mate-
riality of beings, increase the sum of spirituality in
bodies, rouse the spirit from its slumbers. Unless
you do some one or other of these things, — unless
you can bind the idea, you can never perform any-
thing good or great."

Thus it is evident that these old authors imper-
fectly anticipated many of the views of Mesmer,
but facts were as yet wanting to enable them to
establish anything like a permanent system ; and these
were not supplied until the discoveries of Mesmer and
Puysegur put men of science in possession of the
method of inducing the magnetic state. It was soon
found that there was no mystery, no secret art, no
difficulty, in conducting the operation ; and facts there-
fore have, during the last fifty years been accumulated
in every part of Europe ; so that the induction I appre-
hend is now sufficiently large, and complete, to warrant
our coming to more satisfactory conclusions.

The discovery of animal magnetism was, in England,
received with considerable distrust and apathy ; and
as soon, therefore, as the unfavourable report of
Franklin, Lavoisier, Bori, &c, appeared in France, it
was translated* into English, and appealed to as con-
clusive evidence against the doctrine. It was not
then perceived, — nor is it now by many persons suffi-
ciently understood, — that this very report attests the
facts of animal magnetism. The commissioners dis-
pute only the fluid theory of Mesmer; instead of
being adduced, therefore, as an evidence against the
system, it is in reality a conclusive attestation in its
favour. In the year 1788, Dr. Maineduc, a pupil of
Deslon's, arrived in England, and delivered a course
of lectures on animal magnetism at Bristol,-}* and
afterwards in London.:): He also treated magnetically,
and with considerable success, a great number of
cases, an account of which, with certificates from the
patients themselves, he afterwards published in a pam-
phlet entitled " Veritas," which bears the appropriate
motto, " Causa latet, vis est notissima."* His lectures
excited very considerable sensation in scientific and
literary circles ; and, as might be expected, a number
of magnetic practitioners, in imitation of him, soon
entered the field of competition. We are informed by
Dr. George Winter, that a person named Holloway,
by giving lectures on animal magnetism at five guineas
for each pupil, realised a considerable fortune ; and
the house of Mr. Loughborough, another magnetic
professor, at Hammersmith, about the year 1790, was
daily for many months crowded with patients. " In
the year 1790," says Dr. George Winter, " I deem
animal magnetism to have been at its height ; it was
credibly reported that 3000 persons have attended at
one time to get admission to Mr. Loughborough's, at
Hammersmith, and that some persons sold their
tickets for from one to three guineas each."f But,
notwithstanding all this, while animal magnetism was
making rapid progress in Germany and France, it does
not appear to have made any advancement in Eng-
land ; on the contrary, the fanatical interpretation
which a Mrs. Pratt put on the cures of Loughborough,
could not fail to have disgusted many who might
otherwise have been interested in the facts themselves,
which were very clearly and unequivocally esta-
blished.

However indisposed British practitioners may ori-
ginally have been to listen to the advocates of Mes-
mer, when they perceived years afterwards the conti-
nental journals constantly reporting cases treated on
principles of animal magnetism ; and when, further-
more, they heard that some of the most eminent men
of science* in Europe had become proselytes to the
doctrine, it was reasonable to expect that some intel-
ligent member of the profession would throw aside all
prejudice, fairly investigate the reputed evidence, and
communicate the result of his conviction to his medi-
cal brethren. This was done in a spirit of candour
and veracity by the late Mr. Chenevix, which I be-
lieve never has been impugned. It is well known that
the members of the medical profession, especially in
England, are very scrupulous in conceding their be-
lief publicly to any new science, or system of philoso-
phy. The apprehension of ridicule, the policy of not
outstepping the boundaries of faith prescribed by the
prevailing opinions of society, are so generally felt,
that few medical men of eminence will peril their
reputation in advocating a doubtful, much less ob-
noxious, doctrine. It required, therefore, no ordinary
degree of moral courage for any medical practitioner
to throw down the gauntlet, and declare himself an
out-and-out champion of the principles of animal
magnetism. He, however, who has the temerity thus
to stem the tide of popular prejudice, and openly ad-
vocate the cause of truth, will, in the end, receive his
reward ; if he live not to witness the hour of triumph,
his memory will be yet crowned with honour.

In the history of animal magnetism there is, perhaps,
no chapter which contains such strong and conclusive
evidence in its favour as that which supplies us with
details respecting the conversion of those who were
originally unbelievers. After Mr. Chenevix had con-
vinced himself of the truth of animal magnetism —
which he terms Mesmerism — to avoid implicating the
facts with the theory of the magnetic fluid, he an-
nounced the truth of its principles to the profession,
and gave the following account of the circumstances
which led him to that conviction. I quote his own
emphatic words : — " Animal magnetism is true. In
the whole domain of human acquirements, no art or
science rests on experiments more numerous, more
positive, or more easily determined. As this assertion
is in direct contradiction to the vast majority of current
prejudices, it is just to state the grounds upon which
it is made. In former times, whenever animal mag-
netism was mentioned, I joined the tribe of scoffers ;
and so much was I convinced of its absurdity that,
being at Rotterdam in 1797, I laughed to scorn a
proposal made to me by an English resident there to
witness some experiments in which he was then engaged.
In 1803 and 1804, while travelling in Germany, I
heard many very enlightened men of the universities
talk of animal magnetism nearly with the same cer-
tainty as of mineral magnetism ; but their credulity I
set down to the account of German mysticity, and
thought it not incongruous that the nation which took
its philosophy from Kant, Tiehte, and Schelling, should
believe that motions of the hands could, by the will of
the mover, transmit an influence to the person acted
upon, which should produce the wonder related of
animal magnetism. I remained an unbeliever. In
1816 some persons of my acquaintance proposed to
take me to the house of a lady in Paris, whose daughter
was an artificial somnambulist, and in the terms of the
art, lucid. I went to laugh ; I came away convinced.
To suspect anything like trick in the parties concerned
was impossible ; — they were of the highest respectability
and distinction, and some of them I had known for
many years No sooner had the Abbe Faria
begun to operate than the countenance of the young
lady changed, and in two seconds she was fast asleep,
having manifested symptoms which could not be coun-
terfeited. The sitting lasted about two hours, and
produced results, which though I still remained a
sceptic on some of the most wonderful phenomena,
entirely convinced me of the evidence of a Mesmeric
influence, and of an extraordinary agency which one
person can, by his will, exercise upon another. The
Abbe Faria offered every means to dispel my re-
maining doubts ; and gave me all necessary instructions
to obtain total conviction from experiments of my
own. I most zealously attended his labours, public
and private, and derived complete satisfaction upon
every point relating to Mesmerism ; even upon those
which appear supernatural. Many of the experiments
I repeated, not only upon persons whom I met at his
house, but upon others totally unacquainted with him
and with his studies, and was ultimately compelled to
adopt the absolute and unqualified conclusion an-
nounced above, ' Mesmerism is true.' ''

Hence it will be observed that the belief of Mr. Che-
nevix in the truth of animal magnetism was founded on
direct positive evidence ; — on his own personal obser-
vation ; and, more than all, on his own experience ; for,
as he subsequently states, nothing can be fairer than the
proposition of the magnetisers, who say, " Come and
see ; — go and try." He did so, and what was the
result ? He informs us, that " of 164 patients, ninety-
eight manifested undeniable effects ; some in one minute,
some not until the operation had been repeated several
times. There was hardly an instance where disease
existed that relief was not procured ; and many of the
patients offered phenomena as extraordinary as any
recounted in Germany or France." "I was
myself an unbeliever," he adds, " until I was undeceived
by my own experiments ; but had I sooner taken this
plain and rational road to knowledge, instead of think-
ing all men mad who trusted to their eyes that told
them truths which to me seemed more marvellous than
all the other wonders of creation, I should many years
since have possessed the conviction which I now enjoy,
and not bewail, that in 1797, my presumptuous igno-
rance had shut, in my own face, the door of a science
more directly interesting to man than all that chemistry
and astronomy can teach. Nine-tenths who will read
may laugh at this, as I did at my friend at Rotterdam ;
let them do so, but while they laugh, let them learn,
and not, thirty years afterwards, have to lament that
so short a remnant of life is left them to enjoy this new
and most valuable secret of nature."* Acknowledg-
merits of this description from men of scientific eminence
ought to have some weight. It is a description of evi-
dence which cannot be repudiated. It were, indeed,
preposterous to suppose that the voice of factious ig-
norance should set all human testimony at nought.
He who has the temerity, however, to act even upon
this outrageous principle, may, in the present case,
satisfy himself by personal investigation of the truth
of every fact I have asserted.

In 1833 the attention of men of science and litera-
ture in England was again called to animal magnetism,
by Mr. Colquhoun's translation of the Report of the
French Academy, to which was annexed a short essay,
containing an abstract of evidence in proof of the
occasional transference of the faculties, during som-
nambulism, from their usual and appropriate organs
to the epigastrium, and other parts of the nervous sys-
tem. Hitherto, as I have already stated, the old report
of the Academy, in 1784, had been constantly, albeit
ignorantly, referred to as evidence against the doctrine;
but now the English public was put in possession of
experimental details which remain unanswerable. The
most obstinate sceptic could scarcely summon courage
to challenge the concurrent testimony of the academi-
cians, — men who were not the partisans of animal
magnetism, but many of them avowedly unbelievers,
and who, throughout their report, restrict their at-
tention to the relation of the facts alone which fell
under their observation. " It is curious, and by
no means uninstructive," says Mr. Colquhoun, " to
observe the different reception which these two Re-
ports respectively met with in the scientific world.
The former, with all its numerous faults, imperfec-
tions, inconsistencies, and contradictions on its head,
was at once almost universally hailed, by the pro-
fessional physician and the philosopher, with the
highest satisfaction and applause, as conclusive with
regard to the reality, the merit, and the utility of an
alleged important discovery which had begun to dis-
turb the calmness of their scientific repose. The latter
has been viewed with suspicion and distrust, and treated
with censure, contumely, and ridicule, because it has
opened up an obnoxious but highly interesting dis-
cussion, although this last committee, carefully avoiding
the controversial example of their predecessors, have
merely laid before their brethren the result of their
own experiments and observations, without one word
of argument, or a single allusion to theory. This
affords one instance, among many, of the extreme re-
luctance which is felt by philosophers to allow their
partial convictions to be unsettled by new lights, and
of the great difficulty of procuring a favourable re-
ception for doctrines which are objectionable only
because they are deemed incompatible with precon-
ceived notions."* In 1836, the Isis Revelata, being
an inquiry into the origin, progress, and present state
of animal magnetism, was published by the same
author ; — the mass of information which it contains —
the philosophical spirit in which the whole argument
is conducted, could not fail to ensure for the author
the respect and esteem of all who are interested in the
cause of science. This work forms an epoch in the
history of animal magnetism in England, analogous
to that which was formed by the appearance of the
Histoire Critique, by Deleuze, in France.

On my arrival in England, in 1837,1 found that many
persons who attended my demonstrations possessed a
general knowledge of the principles of animal magne-
tism ; but there being no permanent magnetic clinique
in this city, the majority had never had an opportunity
of personally observing the effects which are produced.
This desideratum it was my intention to supply. At
the North London hospital, in the presence of many
scientific persons, professors of medicine, and students,
I commenced my operations, and I feel myself fully
warranted in stating that I succeeded in convincing
many members of the profession of the reality of the
magnetic influence.* Hence Dr. Elliotson, in one of
his clinical lectures, delivered shortly afterwards, stated
that he had already, in 1829, been convinced by Mr.
Chenevix that there was something more than imagi-
nation in the effects produced ; but that he had neither
opportunity nor time to proceed with the investigation
until my arrival in town. He then details the symp-
toms which were exhibited by several patients mag-
netised by me at the hospital, and concludes with this
declaration : — " Now, so far as the facts had gone, that
is, those that had come under his own notice, he be-
lieved in what he should call Mesmerism, he

was never ashamed to declare what he believed ; he
had little respect for authorities ; when he saw facts like
those he had observed in the cases manipulated on by
Baron Dupotet, he must believe them. The whole
profession might laugh, but he must believe that there
was a peculiar power which gave rise to the phenomena
which he had observed, and that it was not sufficiently
known or appreciated."* It is to me gratifying to add,
that the magnetic mode of treatment has been, since
this period, adopted in the wards of this hospital, and
that several members of the profession have been in-
duced to try it in private practice.f

Hence I am sanguine enough to believe that animal
magnetism in England will, ere long, attain the same
rank as a science which it already enjoys on the con-
tinent; and in the meantime, undisturbed by the ridicule
of the ignorant or the abuse of the vulgar, I shall per-
severe in demonstrating its principles, fully assured
that the innate force and power of truth will eventually
triumph over the hostilities which may temporarily
embarrass, but never permanently affect, its progres-
sion.

CHAPTER XII.

EXPLICATION OF THE PHENOMENA OF ANIMAL MAG-
NETISM TENDENCY OF THE DOCTRINE.

The phenomena of animal magnetism having been
repeatedly demonstrated to the satisfaction even of the
most incredulous, various speculative attempts have
been made to explain them. The human mind is
naturally disposed to theorise ; restless of advancement,
it is apt to supply the void of real knowledge by phan-
tasies of its own creation. Hence, in the early ages of
the world, eclipses, meteors, every unusual appearance
in nature, was readily accounted for by supposing it a
special revelation from heaven to warn kings and king-
doms of their approaching destiny. This intuitive
desire of satisfying our conviction by prematurely ex-
plaining, in some way or other, every fact which falls
under our observation, has given rise in science to a
host of absurd theories, many of which have seriously
impeded the progress of human knowledge. Upon
this principle we have seen that the ancients, the
Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, ascribed all the phe-
nomena of somnambulism to direct inspiration from
the gods ; — so also, in the middle ages, the learned and
the unlearned regarded somnambulists so affected by
the arts of sorcery and witchcraft, as demoniacally
possessed ; — and, with nearly as much sagacity, the
commissioners of the French academy, in 1784, ascribed
all the phenomena to three omnipotent causes — ima-
gination, imitation, and manual contact (attouchement.)
In thus prematurely hazarding imperfect explications
of the magnetical phenomena, it is not to be concealed
that many of the inveterate antagonists of the doctrine
imagine that they strip the facts themselves, which, be
it observed, they are constrained by the force of
evidence to admit, of their specific identity as mag-
netical results, and reduce them to the level of or-
dinary effects arising from causes altogether indepen-
dent of the magnetic influence. They strain their
ingenuity to devise a theory for the express purpose
of annulling the importance of the very facts which
they are bound to acknowledge ; — a motive which is
certainly unworthy of any person who professes to be
the advocate of truth. Imagination has been one of the
most favourite of these hypotheses. It has solved more
mysteries than the sphynx herself. Let us, however,
examine seriatim, these theories ; we shall find not one
of them is at all adequate to explain the magnetical
phenomena.

I. Imagination. — Without entering into any length-
ened discussion on the powers and effects of the ima-
gination, I shall briefly refer to certain facts already
detailed, which must completely subvert this theory : —

1. It has been shewn that infants are very easily
thrown into a magnetic state.

2. Persons, during their natural sleep, are very sus-
ceptible of the magnetic action ; they soon, under its
influence, become disturbed, and somnambulism and
all the higher magnetical phenomena successively en-
sue.

3. It has been most distinctly proved that persons
can be magnetised at a distance, through the inter-
vention of screens, doors, and thick walls, when they
are not aware even of the presence or intention of the
magnetiser.

4. Animals, the organisation of whose nervous
system is similar to ours, [the vertebrata] may also
be magnetised.

Now, in not one of these cases can the imagi-
nation be assigned as a cause of the phenomena pro-
duced.

That the magnetic influence will take effect without
the consent or sympathy of the party magnetised, was
very clearly proved to the commission of the French
Academy, by one of its own members, M. Itard, who,
not believing that any such effects could be produced,
subjected himself to the magnetic action. I operated,
and the case, in their report, is thus related : — " When
magnetised by M. Dupotet, on the 27th of October,
1827, he experienced a heaviness without sleep, a
decided sensation of a peculiar nature ; — a setting on
edge (agacemeni) in the nerves of the face, convulsive
motions in the nostrils, in the muscles of the face
and jaws, and a flow of saliva of a metallic taste ; a
sensation analogous to that which he had experienced
from galvanism." Two other cases were also sub-
mitted to the commission ; one, a child of twenty-
eight months ; the other, a deaf and dumb boy,
both of whom were magnetised. " The one," con-
tinues the report, " was not in a state capable of
knowing it ; the other never had the slightest idea
of magnetism ; both, however, were sensible of its in-
fluence, and it is impossible, in either case, to attri-
bute this sensibility to the imagination ; still less is it
attributable to this principle in the case of M. Itard.
It is not over men of our years, and like us, always on
their guard against mental error and sensible delusion,
that the imagination, such as we view it, has any
sway. At this period of life it is enlightened by
reason, and disengaged from those illusions by which
young persons are so easily seduced. At this age
we stand upon our guard, and distrust rather than
confidence presides over the different operations of
our minds. These circumstances were all happily
united in one colleague, and the Academy knows
him too well not to admit that he really experienced
what he declares that he felt."*

The magnetisation of persons during sleep, or in a
state of insensibility, proved also, to the satisfaction
of Cuvier, whose authority may perhaps be as highly
esteemed as the report of any Academy in Europe,
that the magnetic effects cannot be explained by
any such hypothesis. In the second volume of his
Comparative Anatomy, page 117, he observes, e< It
must be confessed that in all experiments, the object
of which is to determine the action which the ner-
vous system of one person may have on the nervous
system of another, it is difficult to distinguish the
effects of the imagination of the person acted upon
from the physical effects produced by the person who
acts. Yet the effects produced upon persons who before
the operation was begun were in a state of insensi-
bility, — those which have taken place upon other per-
sons, after the operation itself had reduced them to
that state, and also the effects produced upon ani-
mals, — no longer permit it to be doubted that the
proximity of two animated . bodies in a certain posi-
tion, and with the help of certain motions, do produce
a real effect wholly independent of the imagination
of either. It is also evident that these effects are
entirely owing to a communication which takes place
between the nervous systems of the two parties."

II. Imitation. — This cause might be expected to
operate to a certain extent, were the magnetic process
always conducted in an assembly where many persons
were at the same time being magnetised ; but in silence
and privacy, when the magnetiser is alone with his pa-
tient, the operation is attended with the most striking
effects. On such occasions, when there is no person
present to imitate, the same effects are produced. How
is it, too, that ignorant persons, the peasantry, for exam-
ple, in Germany, Switzerland, or Holland, when magne-
tised, exhibit the same phenomena, albeit they never
heard, and could have no idea, of the effects which would
attend the operation ? How is it that so constant an
uniformity in the results produced by magnetism pre-
vails in all parts of the world ? Surely this very fact
proves that the effects of animal magnetism depend on
certain fixed principles, which, like other of the laws of
nature, are similar in all latitudes.

III. Manual contact, or attouchment. — This
theory is at once subverted by the fact, that the best
magnetisers produce all the magnetical effects without
the manipulation per contactum. It is a process which
is now seldom or never used.

IV. Animal heat. — This is absolutely an absurd
theory. Individuals constantly sleep together and
communicate animal heat to each other, but no mag-
netical effects are the consequence. Besides, the magnetic
operation is often performed at such a distance from
the patient, that no communication of heat even by
radiation could possibly be felt.

In addition to these theories, which do not carry
with them even a colouring of plausibility, many
lay considerable stress on the effects which the mo-
notonous manipulations of the magnetiser must have
on the patient. It is true that monotonous actions
and sounds, — a rocking cradle, a swing, an old lullaby,
the murmurs of the sea, — anything which by constant
repetition fatigues the attention, will induce sleep;
but let it be observed, that the sleep which is so pro-
duced is a perfectly natural sleep, there is neither in-
sensibility, somniloquism, clairvoyance, or any of the
phenomena which characterise the magnetic state.
No monotonous motions of the hands merely before
any person will give rise to these effects ; they de-
pend, as I have already explained, on the will of the
magnetiser, and the monotonous movements of the
hands may, in many cases, be altogether dispensed
with ; they are not necessarily a part of the opera-
tion. Lastly ; a theory has been lately proposed by
Dr. Sigmond, who, having operated successfully in
many cases, is of opinion that the " art consists in
obliging the individual again to inspire by the nostrils
the carbon he has already expired, whilst the currents
of air caused by the extended fingers produce some
effect on the facial nerves."* It is true enough, as
travellers amuse themselves by proving at the Grotto
del Cane that the inspiration of carbonic oxide gas
induces stupor ; but Dr. Sigmond will, I doubt not,
be able himself to draw a diagnosis between the
stupor arising from the inhalation of narcotic gases
and the insensibility of the magnetic state ; besides, it
may reasonably be doubted whether the passing the fin-
gers up and down before the nostrils, or even wrapping
the mouth round with a cotton comforter, which might
occasion a person to inhale repeatedly the breath he
had expired, would lead to the accumulation of a suf-
ficient quantity of this gas in the lungs to produce
even stupor : this again is an untenable hypothesis.
Hence not one of these theories affords any satisfac-
tory explication of the magnetical phenomena which
are developed.

I now, therefore, proceed to detail the theory
/which the magnetisers of the present day have
adopted ; but let it be remembered that whether
accepted by the reader or not, the facts on which it
is founded still remain unimpeached. In so doing,
I give, in particular, the views of Rostan, an eminent
pathologist, who, like other men of science, could not
withhold his conviction as to the truth of animal mag-
netism, when he had witnessed personally its effects.
He states, in the following terms, the creed of the
magnetisers : — " It is our opinion that the whole of
these phenomena belong to the nervous system, all
the functions of which are not as yet known ;
that it is to a modification — to an extension of this
system, and of its properties, that the effects we are
now considering must be ascribed. In the present
state of science, everything leads us to consider the
brain as an organ secreting a peculiar substance, the
principal property of which is to transmit and to re-
ceive volition and sensation. This substance, what-
ever it may be, appears to circulate in the nerves,
some of which are appropriated to motion (to voli-
tion) ; these proceed from the encephalon, or its de-
pendencies, to the extremities: the others belong to
sensation, and these proceed from the base of the en-
cephalon. The first are active, the second passive.

" We may consider the following propositions as esta-
blished : — When we wish to move any limb, our brain
sends to the muscles destined to execute the move-
ment a certain quantity of the nervous agent, which
produces contraction. This transmission is effected
by means of nerves shewn by anatomy ; and if we cut
them or tie them, it becomes impossible to execute the
motion ; paralysis ensues.* The same phenomenon
takes place with the nerves of sensation ; if they are
destroyed, sensibility is annihilated in the part to
which they proceed. These facts, known from time
immemorial, are incontrovertible, and generally ad-
mitted. They gave rise to the opinions, that the
function of innervation was an actual circulation : — -
that there were nervous vessels afferent, those of
the will ; and efferent, those of sensation. The la-
bours of M. Bogros proved experimentally that which
had been previously arrived at by reasoning. But
what is the nature of this agent ? The researches of
MM. Prevost and Dumas lead us to believe that the
strongest analogy exists between this agent and the
electric fluid. These physiologists demonstrated
that muscular contraction was the result of a real
electric shock. M. Beclard affirmed, that having laid
bare and cut through a nerve of considerable volume
in a living animal, he frequently caused the pole of
the magnetic needle to deviate, by bringing this nerve
in contact with the needle. It is known by all per-
sons, that galvanism, substituted for the nervous in-
fluence, forces the muscles submitted to its action to
contract. Galvani and Volta saw and proved the ex-
istence of a peculiar fluid which, at a later period, has
been recognised as identical with electricity.

" It is known, also, that certain animals possess the
singular property of secreting, by means of their
peculiar organisation, a large quantity of the electric
fluid, with which they give violent shocks ; so vio-
lent sometimes as to occasion the death of other fish,
or even of human beings, within a certain distance
from them. The Gyrnnotus electricus, the Silurua
electricus, the Tetraodon, the Torpedo unimaculata mar-
morata, and many others, possess this faculty. The
quantity of their electric fluid has been appreciated by
means of very delicate electroscopes and electrome-
ters. It has been ascertained that this fluid is se-
creted by the brain of these animals, since by re-
moving it, or the nerves which proceed to it, the
electric effects are annihilated — a result which does
not take place when the organs of circulation are
removed.

" Thus it is satisfactorily demonstrated, that in some
animals the brain secretes a portion of the electric
fluid ; that muscular contraction may be produced by
electric excitation, &c. — a consideration which gives
us strong reason to presume that the nervous agent is
either electric fluid, or a fluid very analogous to it.
We shall pass over in silence the proofs that might be
deduced from acupuncturation and perkinism,* &c.
But this agent does not confine itself within the mus-
cles and the skin ; it throws itself off with a certain
degree of force, and thus forms a real nervous atmos-
phere — a sphere of activity absolutely similar to that
which surrounds electrified bodies. This opinion is also
that of some of the first physiologists of our time —
Reil, Authenrieth, and M. Humboldt ; and being ad-
mitted, all the phenomena of magnetism appear to be
susceptible of a plausible explanation.

" The nervous and active atmosphere of the mag-
netiser, increased, no doubt, by the impulse of his voli-
tion, mixes, and is brought into contact, with the ner-
vous and passive atmosphere of the magnetised person,
which latter it augments to such a degree, that in
some cases there seems to be an actual saturation of
the nervous system, capable, when in excess, of put-
ting itself in equilibrium with surrounding bodies ;
and there is no way of explaining by any other hypo-
thesis the secousses sometimes experienced by the pa-
tients. The nervous system of the magnetised person
being thus influenced, and undergoing modifications
in proportion to his peculiar sensibility, would suffice
to explain all the perturbations observable, and would
perfectly account for the communication of the de-
sires, the will, and even thoughts, of the magnetiser.
These desires, this will, being actions of the brain,
it transmits them, by means of the nerves, as far as the
periphery of the body, and beyond it. In this sketch
the full mechanism of the production of magnetic
effects has probably not been unveiled. This hypo-
thesis, however, which does not depart much from the
physiological and physical facts generally admitted,
would explain, to a certain extent, the greater part of
the innumerable effects produced by animal mag-
netism, and may, perhaps, assist in revealing some of
the most astonishing mysteries of animal life."

There are many persons who, lam aware, object in
unmeasured terms to this theory of the magnetic
fluid ; but there are certain facts which I have related
in this volume, which are inexplicable on any other
hypothesis.

1. It is well known that if, during the magnetic
operation, the magnetiser, instead of magnetising from
above downwards, makes a counter-current ; if he in-
tentionally reverse the manipulation, directing the fluid
suddenly from below, upwards, the patient will become
much disturbed, and muscular spasms, or even convul-
sions, will be produced.

2. It has been proved that persons in proximity
with those who are being magnetised not unfrequently
receive the magnetic influence indirectly, and without
any intention or consent on the part of the magnetiser.
This can only arise from their being incidentally placed
within the sphere of a material effluence ; for here, on
the part of the magnetiser, no psychical cause is in ope-
ration.

3. It is experimentally proved that the fluid is pro-
pelled from the body in right lines, and that some few
objects can altogether intercept its progress.

Lastly. It is clearly established that the magnetic
fluid can be accumulated in certain inanimate objects,
which, when grasped in the hand, communicate a
shock somewhat similar to that which occurs under
similar circumstances in electrical experiments.

The above facts lead me, therefore, to adopt the
theory of a magnetic fluid being transmitted from the
nervous system of the magnetiser to that of the person
operated upon ; but it is not to be forgotten that great
mental energy, sustained concentration of the will, is
necessary to direct and control its influence. He then,
who is magnetised, passes into a state of complete physi-
cal insensibility, during which he awakens, as it were,
within himself, and enters into a new mode of existence
and relation with the external world, for all his percep-
tions are now exquisitely fine, and independent of the
instrumentality of mere corporeal organisation. And
if any person should ask what is the moral tendency of
the doctrine of animal magnetism, I should answer, that
it obviously tends to establish the spiritual ascendancy
of man over those material conditions which, in his or-
dinary state of being, fatally restrict the apprehensions,
capacities, and comprehensions of the soul ; and this
very manifestation of its existence, partially divested
of the grosser elements in which it is temporarily ob-
scured, affords a precursory evidence of a future
state of being, which belief in itself cannot fail to sug-
gest those principles of self-government and moral
conduct which can alone promote the real welfare and
happiness of society.

In the ordinary routine of life, persons act mag-
netically on each other, when perhaps they are least
aware of it ; thus, he who would obtain the esteem of
another, must mentally exert all his energies to establish
a reciprocity of feeling ; he must act and produce an
effect on the mind of the person he regards ; and if
he succeed, the affections of both subsequently become
commingled, so that a perfect intellectual unity is in-
duced ; and hence the novelist did not exaggerate
truth when he described two such beings as moving
with « one soul in a divided body." In various con-
ditions of life, we may observe the magnetical principles
are brought into operation. The orator, endeavour-
ing to move the feelings of his hearers, rouses up and
concentrates all his nervous energies to effect his ob-
ject, and led gradually away by the spirit of his per-
suasive eloquence, he passes into a state of excite-
ment almost identical with magnetic extase, during
which the divinest language flows almost unconsci-
ously from his lips, for he is sensible of no mental
effort in arranging the consecutive order of his
thoughts, and the construction of his sentences ; his
ideas crowd upon him unsought, and are evolved
with preternatural rapidity, so that he appears like
one who is inspired, until his enthusiasm is over, and
then, on returning to his ordinary state of being, he
finds himself unable to reconstruct with the same har-
mony, and beauty, and power of language, the very
oration he has just delivered.* Hence the ancients
drew a marked distinction between eloquence and
mere verbal oratory. " Eloquence, indeed," says
Pliny the younger, " is the privilege of very few, nay,
if we will believe Marcus Antonius, of none ; but that
faculty, which Candidus calls loquacity, is common to
numbers, and the talent which generally attends im-
pudence."* Again, the physician also, to be success-
ful, must act upon magnetical principles ; he must
constantly maintain a mental power or ascendancy
over the mind and nervous system of his patient, in
order that he may possess his entire confidence ; and
if this relation, or truly magnetic rapport, be not esta-
blished, all his skill will prove unavailing. It may, in-
deed, with truth be affirmed, that the psychical influence
of the physician over his patients, effects more good in
many cases than the physical remedies which he pre-
scribes. In domestic life, the magnetical sympathies
by which individuals are associated together, and their
affections consolidated, may often be strikingly ob-
served ; but many, perhaps, are not aware that the
proximity of two persons to each other, so intimately
commingles the nervous atmosphere by which each is
surrounded, that there is an actual transference of
vitality from the body of the one into the body of the
other. This is no nursery dream — no gossiping fic-
tion — but a fact which is well known to physicians.
Hence Dr. James Copland, in his learned and very
admirable Dictionary of Practical Medicine, observes,
that " a not uncommon cause of depressed vital power
is the young sleeping with the aged. This fact, how-
ever explained, has been long remarked, and is well
known to every unprejudiced observer. But it has
been most unaccountably overlooked in medicine. I
have on several occasions met with a counterpart of
the following case : — I was, a few years since, con-
sulted about a pale, sickly, and thin boy, of about four
or five years of age. He appeared to have no specific
ailment, but there was a slow and remarkable decline
of flesh and strength, and of the energy of the func-
tions — what his mother very aptly termed, a gradual
blight. After inquiry into the history of the case,
it came out that he had been a very robust and ple-
thoric child up to his third year, when his grand-
mother, a very aged person, took him to sleep with
her ; that he soon afterwards lost his good looks, and
that he had continued to decline progressively ever
since, notwithstanding medical treatment. I directed
him to sleep apart fom his aged parent, and prescribed
gentle tonics, change of air, &c. The recovery was
rapid. But it is not in children only that debility is
induced by this mode of abstracting vital power.
Young females married to very old men suffer in a
similar manner, although seldom to so great an extent ;
and instances have come to my knowledge where they
have suspected the cause of their debilitated state.
These facts are often well known to the aged them-
selves, who consider the indulgence favourable to
longevity, and thereby often illustrate the selfishness
which in some persons increases with their years."*

This transference of vitality is thus well marked in
cases of extreme disparity of years between the parties
approximated, as when the young are placed in con-
tact with the aged ; but the same transference, doubt-
less, will take place between persons of any age, al-
though, where the vital principle of the two persons
exists nearly in an equilibrium, the effects will be less
perceptible. Here, also, I would remark, that pre-
cisely on the same principle the mother acts magnet-
ically on her child ; she concentrates her thoughts and
feelings on the object of her solicitude, and infuses
into its yet unconscious bosom the elements of her
own physical and moral constitution, so that, by this
transference, the seeds of good or of evil are sown in
the tenderest years of infancy, and in this sense is to
be understood the scriptural phrase, that a tree shall
be known by its fruits ; not that the blind physical
organisation can lead of itself to any such consequence,
but that the spirit, which is the life even from within
the trunk, shall permeate the remotest branches, and
either give beauty to the flower and goodness to the
fruit, or impregnate both with poison more deadly
than the blight of the fatal Upas-tree, which is re-
ported to kill all that inhale the atmosphere around it.
The principles of animal magnetism thus lead us to
perceive relations between physical and moral con-
ditions of humanity, which were before a perplexing
mystery ; they throw light on a variety of facts hi-
therto deemed inexplicable, if not incredible, in the
early history of mankind ; they place us in possession
of a power whereby we can alleviate suffering and
restore health to the afflicted ; they lead us to enter-
tain also the spirit of a philosophy which is of the
most cheering description, annihilating as they do all
those dark attributes of materialism which have so
long thrown a gloom over the paths of Science. But
before these relations can be perceived, or these
consequences deduced, it is necessary that the facts
themselves should be clearly, distinctly, and most
unequivocally established. And how is this to be ef-
fected ? By positive evidence ; by ocular demonstra-
tion. Let me, therefore, once more entreat men of
science and literature to witness the facts, and scruti-
nise them as narrowly as possible ; and I feel assured
that many who may now lay this volume down with a
smile of incredulity, will be induced to rescind their
scepticism, and allow that I have t( given faithful re-
cord and fair inference," and, in the words of my
epigraph, " reared a superstructure on just grounds."



APPENDIX,



CONTAINING



REPORTS OF BRITISH PRACTITIONERS IN
FAVOUR OF ANIMAL MAGNETISM.



" The mere account of foreign cases is not enough. The sober
good sense of British practitioners requires that what was done at
Paris, or Vienna, should be capable of repetition in London."

Medical Quarterly Review. London, 1835.


APPENDIX.



i.

REPORT OF CASES TREATED MAGNETICALLY AT THE
NORTH LONDON HOSPITAL, BY DR. ELLIOTSON.

(Extracted from the Lancet, Saturday, September 9th, 1837.)

The first case was one of epilepsy, occurring in a girl
sixteen years of age, a housemaid of diminutive stature.
She had been subject for twelve months before her ad-
mission, on the 4th of April, 1837, to attacks of epi-
lepsy, which occurred about once a week, or oftener.
At twelve years of age she had a fall, by which she
was stunned : this was worthy of remembrance. She was
subject to almost constant headaches in the morning and
evening ; they also came on a short time previous >to the
occurrence of a fit, and sometimes shooting pains across
the occiput preceded the fit for a few days. She also
experienced before the fit came on a sensation of cold-
ness, which ran up the spine, and was attended with
numbness, which, when it reached the head, produced
the feeling of her being stunned, and then she lost
consciousness. The fit was characterised by convul-
sions, chiefly of the face and trunk; the extremities
were in a rigid state, the hands clenched, the face
variously contorted, the eyes rolled. This state was
not followed by coma, but with a restlessness and
sleeplessness, and a severe throbbing pain of the head,
which generally continued for three or four hours,
She had been cupped on the shoulders last January,
and had leeches applied to the temples, and took some
aperient medicine. She had a fit last night ; the fits
usually come on in bed during the state intermediate
between sleeping and waking. Complained on her
admission of headache, and sickness after food ; tongue
clean, appetite bad, bowels regular.

The peculiarity in this case consisted in the fact of
the patient, as soon as the convulsions of the epileptic
seizure were over, subsiding into a restless, fidgetty
state, which lasted three or four hours, instead of
falling into the state of coma, which is usual in this
affection. In the treatment of the case, at first, as the
pulse was not full, it was thought there was no necessity
for blood-letting, and low diet was considered suffi-
ciently active antiphlogistic treatment ; and on the 4th
of April quarter-grain doses of nitrate of silver were
commenced, and given three times a-day : the dose was
increased by a quarter of a grain gradually, until she
reached two-grain doses three times a-day. On the
9th, the report stated that since the last fit, which oc-
curred on the 6th, she had suffered from continual
pain in the temples, and, indeed, all over the head,
and it was found necessary to take blood, which was
buffed and cupped. She was now subject to similar
attacks, and it was found necessary frequently to
bleed her ; the pulse was hard and full. On the
16th of May she was bled to eight ounces; on the 20th,
to eight ounces ; and on the 23rd ten ounces were
taken away. The nitrate of silver was being increased
all this time gradually. She took this medicine for
six weeks from its first commencement ; he (Dr. E.)
never gave it during a longer period, for fear of dis-
colouring the skin. On the 27th of May, the fits
being as frequent as before, though the nitrate of silver
was given in two-grain doses, that medicine was dis-
continued, and the cuprum ammoniatum, in quarter of
a grain doses, was commenced, and given three times
a-day, the dose being increased by a quarter of a grain
twice a week. On the 5th of June she was taking one-
grain doses of the medicine ; this produced sickness,
though, as has been stated, she bore two-grain doses
of the nitrate of silver. As the copper produced this
nausea, the dose was diminished to three-quarters of a
grain; and as this now, also, produced sickness, on the
10th she took one minim of creosote with each dose of
it, and this effectually prevented the nausea, and the
copper was again increased to grain doses. On the
16th, the report states, that there has been no nausea
and no fit. On the 17th, however, the nausea re-
turned, and the creosote was increased to two minim-
doses, with the effect of checking the sickness, and she
bore the copper well. On the 20th, the dose was in-
creased to one grain and a quarter. On the 24th,
there had been no fit, and there was no nausea. Soon
after she began the copper, which had not produced
any decided effects, another agent was called into action
in the cure, and any alteration in the state of the case
he (Dr. E.) considered was to be ascribed to this.

Under this treatment, which he should shortly speak
of more fully, the fits ceased altogether, and instead of
the patient having convulsions as she used to have, she
was now seized with fits of somnambulism, or, as it had
been proposed to call the state, somno-vigilium — a much
more appropriate term, and one which expressed the con-
dition better, the patient being both asleep and awake,
and walking not being necessary for its existence, that
symptom being present in only one species of the
affection. All at once she would become perfectly
insensible, but her eyes would remain wide open, but
perfectly insensible to the effect of light : pulling her
hair produced no impression on her. Her sense of
hearing was lost to all ordinary sound. Though her
eyes were open, yet she was perfectly blind ; when you
dashed the fingers suddenly towards her eyes, there was
no winking. Her tongue was not tried, but it is pro-
bable her sense of taste was gone. She had never, in
her own recollection, had the sense of smell. Yet,
though now totally without external sensation, she was
constantly talking, and talked very sensibly, and wittily
too ; but from the great variety of topics her conver-
sation embraced, it amounted to rambling. She dis-
played, also, a great spirit of mimicry. This state had
been commonly called somnambulism ; somno-vigilium,
as he (Dr. E.) had said, was a better term, for this
patient could neither stand nor walk, but laid in bed
during the attacks. This state would cease as a fit
of epilepsy or hysteria ceases. She would become
suddenly still, look wild for an instant, rub her eyes,
be sensible of everything around her, and resume her
natural character, which was that of a quiet, modest
girl. These attacks were remarkable, both from the
sudden manner in which they came on, and the equally
sudden manner in which they went off. As she could
not be awakened by external impressions made on her,
Dr. Elliotson determined on trying what would be the
effect of producing a strong internal sensation in her,
and endeavoured to get her to believe she was likely to
fall to the ground. For this purpose she was lifted
from the bed, and it was found that she could not
stand ; she was then supported under the arms, and at
first she felt the ground slightly, then afterwards gra-
dually got a proper feeling in her feet, then by degrees
she began to step out, and, with assistance, at last
walked firmly. She suddenly awoke during the walk,
ceased to speak, appeared lost for a moment, then
moved her head, seemed astonished, and awoke, and
walked to bed well. She was shortly after laid on
her bed for repose, and no sooner was this done than
she fell again into the same state. In a moment she
again became senseless ; her eyes, again, though wide
awake, lost their sight entirely ; she talked again in the
same rambling way, and was again as rude in her
mimicry as before. She was again taken up, and
walked about, and was instantly restored, and remained
in her natural state for a week. At the end of a few
days the same kind of attacks again came on. Nothing
had made so great an impression on him (Dr. E.) as
to see the brain, as instanced in this case, completely
senseless, and yet the mind wandering and active, in
two or three moments the patient losing all external
sensation, which was suddenly again restored, again
lost, and again restored. Some similar symptoms were
observed in a common epileptic fit, such as the person
in a moment becoming perfectly senseless, and as sud-
denly becoming sensible, but the intellect, as in this
case, was not active during the state of external insen-
sibility. After a few weeks the character of these
attacks completely changed ; she still wandered in her
talk, displayed the same spirit of mimicry, sang,
whistled, danced, was rude, noisy, laughing, or miser-
able, by turns, but she also retained in these attacks
all her external senses ; she saw, heard, and walked
well, and the power over the voluntary muscles was
entire ; she was now in a state of what was called
ecstatic delirium ; the attacks coming on suddenly,
and as suddenly ceasing, no symptoms of phrenitis
being present, the attacks lasting a few hours, and
coming and going like attacks of epilepsy. There you
might see her in the ward singing, dancing, and mi-
micing every individual ; sometimes swearing, some-
times rather affectionate ; then the attack going off
as suddenly as it came on ; she seemed lost for a mo-
ment, then began to smile, look pleased, and at once
became herself again.

Now, they (the students) were aware, that when
affections of this nature attacked persons while asleep,
and they were partially awakened, the state they were
then in was called somnambulism; but when the
attacks came on while the persons were awake, and
they became half asleep, the result was ecstacy. The
one term he had employed, that of " sleep-waking,"
applied to both these states. Sleep-waking was much
more extraordinary in some persons than in others.
This patient recollected in one paroxysm what oc-
curred in former ones, but when out of the attacks she
forgot all that took place in them. She had a me-
mory of circumstances which happened in the fits
during the presence of the fits only ; but she also
remembered in the fits those things which occurred
out of them. The eyes of this patient converged
towards the nose, one rather more so than the other ;
he (Dr. E.) wished to know if she saw double ; she
appeared to see everybody; but her vision was much
disturbed, for she never winked when the fingers were
pushed suddenly towards the eyes, and when one
finger was held up she said there were two ; when two,
that there were four ; then she often said that people's
" eyes were turning round," &c. This double vision
was a common occurrence when one eye converged
more than another, and arose from the adductor
muscle on one side being drawn aside. When a watch
was held to her, she could not tell the minute hand
from the other, and it all appeared confused to her,
though she seemed to the looker-on to have perfect
vision. This symptom has been remarked in other
similar cases, as well as the effect also of light on the
iris, and pushing the fingers against the eyes, which
produced no winking.



II.

FURTHER REPORT OF CASES TREATED MAGNETICALLY
AT THE NORTH LONDON HOSPITAL.

(Extracted from the Morning Post, March 2nd, 1838.)

This singular subject is daily attracting more atten-
tion, and the contest respecting the reality or decep-
tiveness of the resulting phenomena is becoming more
and more interesting. Our readers may range them-
selves on either side, as they please (or rather, as they
must, for conviction is not a matter of choice.) We
shall not attempt to do violence to their opinions, but
shall content ourselves with laying before them the
result of a patient attendance, and, we trust, impartial
observation, on several occasions, within the last three
weeks, in the wards and lecture-room of the North
London Hospital, Gower-street. We trust that we
have taken time enough to allow our first impressions
and prejudices to subside, and may now safely recom-
mend our readers to go and judge for themselves.

We there saw Dr. Elliotson and his assistant, Mr.
Wood, in the course of their routine of visit, in
the midst of a crowd of pupils and visitors, produce
very extraordinary effects on two female patients,
Elizabeth O'Key and Hannah Hunter, apparently
with no geater mental and bodily exertion than what
would attend the act of steadily holding forth the hand
towards the forehead of the patient for a few minutes,
varying from two to twelve, till the effect is produced.
This treatment is, it appears, no longer looked upon
as a matter of experiment or curiosity in the hospital,
but as a portion of a regular (though very peculiar)
medical course, which has been found in these two
cases to be productive of decidedly good results. The
patient to be thus acted on is seated in a chair — the
doctor, or his assistant, silently extends one hand open
and the palm downward, towards (but not touching)
her eyebrows — and in a few minutes she breathes
heavily, and at once drops off into a state of insen-
sibility, which differs from sleep in some very extra-
ordinary respects. Both patients grow cold at the
extremities ; their pulse becomes so languid as to be
scarcely felt ; and they cannot be aroused by any of
the ordinary means which never fail to disturb the
slumber of the soundest sleepers. The extent to which
this has been carried ineffectually will be best seen in
the medical notes of the treatment of these cases, which
we subjoin. These we obtained from one of the pupils,
who took an especial interest in these proceedings,
and will doubtless be more acceptable to medical
readers than our own unprofessional observations.

The most interesting case is that of the girl O'Key.
Each time that we beheld her magnetised, or Mes-
merised, she fell at first (for a minute or two) into
the insensible state, and then stood up, exhibiting a
new condition of existence, in which the ideas, lan-
guage, and feelings, appeared thrown back into artless,
ignorant, puerile childhood. The dialect she then
gabbles volubly is scarcely English, thickly inter-
spersed with " what" or " whatten," and " such" or
(i suchen," which seem, by the emphasis she imparts to
them, to hold most important places in her vocabu-
lary as expletives and superlatives. In her ordinary
state she appears an intelligent gentle little girl, with-
out any peculiar defect in her language, very pale (the
effect of repeated bleedings, to relieve continual head-
aches), and is said to be, notwithstanding her sufferings
in this respect, possessed of an excellent temper and
affectionate disposition. Under the operation of mag-
netism, all her good sense appears lost, but her good
feelings remain in full force, and she evinces deep
sympathy with some one of the pupils present, in whom
she takes a particular interest. * * * *
****** * Her memory
in the trance appears remarkably tenacious on some
points — a perfect blank on others. When she first
awakes into her magnetic state (if we may be allowed
to use the expression), out of the preliminary minute of
slumber, she seems to enjoy at once a revival of her
previous magnetic-dreaming existence, inquires affec-
tionately for Dr. Elliotson or some friends who has
been lost to her mind's eye during her ordinary waking
intervals, and then begins to chatter away her gipsy
patois, free from headache, untroubled by prudential
considerations, unconscious of any operations, how-
ever painful, which may be performed on her — tells
comical stories, mimics the crooked-mouthed family,
who could not blow out the little farthing rushlight,
and whistles very prettily. Her senses meanwhile
appear but half awake — her fingers at times lose their
perception altogether, and her eyes the power of ad-
justing the optic axes, so that one finger held up
appears to her as two. Her appearance as she sits, as
pale and almost as still as a corpse, is strangely awful.
She whistles, to oblige Dr. Elliotson — an incredulous
bystander presses his finger on her lips — she does not
appear conscious of the nature of the interruption, but
when asked to continue, replies, in childish surprise,
"It can't." This state of magnetic semi-existence
will continue — we know not how long ; she has con-
tinued in it for twelve days at a time, and when
awakened to real life, forgets all that has occurred in
the magnetic one ! Can this be deception ? We have
conversed with the poor child in her ordinary state, as
she sat by the fire in her ward, suffering from the
headache, which persecutes her almost continuously
when not under the soothing influence of the mag-
netic operation, and we confess we never beheld any-
body less likely to prove an impostor. We have seen
Professor Faraday exerting his acute and sagacious
powers for an hour together in the endeavour to de-
tect some physical discrepancy in her performance, or
elicit some blush of mental confusion by his naive and
startling remarks. But there was nothing which could
be detected, and the Professor candidly acknowledged
that the matter was beyond his philosophy to unravel!
He was, however, after a brief lesson in " manipula-
tion," at the hands of Dr. Elliotson, able on the in-
stant to restore both patients to their states of ordi-
nary consciousness. The requisite movement is per-
formed by drawing the thumbs (or a finger of each
hand) from the top of the nose along the eyebrows,
outwards to the temples, quickly and steadily, two or
three times.

We shall now subjoin the professional notes bearing
on the cases of these two girls, only observing that
the medical student who drew them up employs the
word " Mesmerism" to express the operation or in-
fluence, which is, in ordinary, known by the name we
have employed as most familiar to the majority of
readers,— viz., " animal magnetism."

NOTES BY A PUPIL.

" Elizabeth O'Key, aged seventeen, was admitted
last April, labouring under epilepsy ; the fits came on
every few days, scarcely at longer intervals than a
week. Baron Dupotet commenced practising Mes-
merism in her case last summer. At first a deep sleep
was produced, and during the continuance of this pro-
cess, the fits came on at longer intervals. After a
time, a different effect was produced, and fits of deli-
rium, in which she lost entirely sensation, came on
spontaneously at intervals, and were always removed
by Mesmerism, but never caused without this pro-
cess. Latterly, it has been ascertained that this deli-
rium might be produced artificially by Mesmerism,
and that it might be done without the patient being
aware that the process was going on. In short, the
delirium may be induced and removed without her
knowledge. It is not necessary to the production of
this effect, that any movements should be made with
the hand, or even that the hand should be used at all.
Any person may produce this effect, and also remove
it. In this delirium she does not remember what takes
place in her natural state, nor in her natural state does
she remember what takes place in the delirium ; but
she distinctly remembers from one fit to another, * -
though she has no idea of time, saying that a circum-
stance which occurred a month ago happened within
a minute. She can recognise persons ; but is not
able to see the absurdity of a man being her mother !
To describe all the peculiarities of her case would be
almost impossible; it must be seen to be understood.
A few days since it was found necessary to place a
seton in the back of her neck. The insensibility was
produced in a few minutes in the ordinary manner ;
and while she was talking, and in the middle of a
sentence, the seton was thrust through at the back of
her neck. She took no notice whatever of it, finished
the sentence, continued talking, and evinced not the
slightest pain, nor could the least trace of suffering
be discerned in her countenance. The wound was
dressed, her clothes re-adjusted, and she was then
restored to her natural state in a few minutes, per-
fectly unconscious of having been the subject of any
operation, as was evinced by her saying, some time
afterwards, that she thought somebody had been pinch-
ing her neck, for it felt very sore, and was perfectly
astonished when told that a seton had been introduced.
Surely this circumstance alone is sufficient to justify
an inquiry into Mesmerism. If by this means painful
operations may be performed without the knowledge
of the patient, why do surgeons hesitate for one moment
to put its efficacy more extensively to the test ?

" What further advantage medicine may hope to
derive from the more extensive adoption of Mesmerism
remains to be proved; time alone can solve the question.
It is now upwards of three months since she had the
last fit."

" Hannah Hunter, aged thirteen, was admitted the
beginning of last month, having lost the use of her
legs entirely, and being unable even to sit up in a chair.
The treatment adopted was tonics, cold shower-baths,
and electricity. After these remedies had been per-
severed in for about three weeks, she so far improved
as to be able to sit up ; but was still unable to stand
alone. On the two first occasions of being Mes-
merised, drowsiness only was produced ; the third
time the peculiar sleep caused by this process was
induced and removed at pleasure. After this had
been continued for a few days, all the other means
of treatment were omitted, the sleep was induced
every day, and allowed to continue an hour or two.
For a few days there was no apparent change ; but
after that she began to improve, her strength in-
creased in proportion as the paralysis subsided, and
she is now able to stand very well, and even to walk
with very trifling assistance."*

* Let the reader compare this case with the facts stated at pages
188, 192, et seq. In these experiments at the North London
Hospital, it will be observed that all the physical phenomena of
Animal Magnetism were produced in a very marked manner ; so
also were all the psychical phenomena, with the exception of clair-
voyance and prevision, which only occur in the very highest degree
of the magnetic state ; these, I have no doubt, will in some future
cases be developed, if the magnetic treatment be persevered in.


III.

FURTHER REPORT OF CASES TREATED MAGNETICALLY
AT THE NORTH LONDON HOSPITAL.

(Extracted from the Globe, Tuesday, April 17th, 1838.)

We witnessed, yesterday, at the North London Hos-
pital, some of the experiments of Dr. Elliotson in this
so-called science. Without pretending to determine
the value of these operations, or the nature of the
conclusions to which they lead, we may describe, with as
much accuracy as we can, what we actually beheld.
So much, at least, is due to any individual who sub-
mits his professions to the test of publicity, and in-
vites and encourages open investigation.

The first persons submitted to the operation were
two boys of the same age, of apparently similar
physical organization, affected each with the same
disease, and both of whom had entered the hospital
at the same time. In the countenances of the two a
marked difference was however perceptible; and the
most casual spectator might have at once decided that
one was far more likely than the other to be affected
by anything that appealed to the imagination, or was
to work upon the nervous system. Accordingly, it was
proved, that while the one was easily and rapidly sub-
jected to the influence of the experimenter, the other
remained absolutely unmoved. Dr. Elliotson took his
station behind both, and commenced a conversation
with the spectators in front. During the course of
the conversation, without anything that might inform
the patients of his movements, he commenced his mag-
netising operation by pointing the fingers at the back
of the head. In less than a minute one boy fell into
a sound sleep, from which, however, he was easily
awakened ; the other, though the magnetising pro-
cess was continued for upwards of a quarter of an
hour, seemed to experience no effect of any sort. He
appeared, however, marvellously to enjoy his position ;
and more than once, as though to tantalize the curious
group around, he feigned to sleep for a moment, and
then, suddenly opening his eyes, laughed in the face of
those who were anxiously bending forward to witness
the unexpected success which they imagined was
crowning the experiment. The sleep of his com-
panion seemed natural and unfeigned, and after
having been wakened, he was again thrown into a
state of slumber by a repetition of the process. It
was stated, that the boy who had been magnetised had
not experienced a single fit since the first operation,
while the other, upon whom no effect had been pro-
duced, though treated in the ordinary and approved
method, had suffered from them every clay.

After the boys had been dismissed, a girl, ap-
parently of about fourteen years old, was brought
forward. She was operated upon in the same manner
as had been adopted in the former case. It was about
three minutes before any perceptible result was pro-
duced ; at the expiration of which period she was in a
state of profound and obviously unconscious slumber.
It should be stated, that she had been brought into the
hospital on account of the loss of all use of the lower
extremities, produced by an hysterical affection. She
had been treated in the ordinary way without success ;
but subsequently to her being magnetised, she had re-
covered the use of her limbs, and walked unsupported
into the room. Two or three attempts were made to
rouse her by lifting her arm, pulling her hair, calling
her, lifting her off the chair, and placing her upright,
but without the least effect. She was then half
awakened, or rather thrown into a state of somnam-
bulism, by the operator drawing his thumbs across the
eyebrow, from the insertion of the nose outwards ; and
in this condition, though still seemingly unconscious,
she was able to stand upright. After being kept in
this state for a short time, she was again thrown into
a sound sleep, and placed in a chair, while the next
subject was introduced. In this chair she slept for
about an hour and a half, through a hubbub that
might have awakened the seven sleepers.

Her successor was a girl of about the same age, of
quiet, demure, almost sullen countenance, subject to
occasional fits of delirium. She was speedily thrown
into a deep sleep, and was then somnabulised. When
in this state of partial consciousness — a consciousness
like that of true somnambulism, when the individual
is fully aware of what he does, though all memory of
it ceases with the cessation of his sleep — the whole ex-
pression of her countenance changed. It became
cheerful, animated, and intelligent. She noticed ob-
jects immediately in front, though of the presence of
all but these she seemed absolutely ignorant ; and she
made some not very complimentary observations upon
the appearance, dress, and manners of some of the
persons present. Many experiments were tried upon
her, of the most of which it was scarcely possible that
she should have been conscious, for the purpose of
sending her again into a profound slumber ; and these
were, so far as we could judge, uniformly successful.
One of the experiments consisted in the operator,
while standing at her back, placing his hands each near
one of hers, and then gradually extending his arms,
still keeping the fingers pointed towards her, when her
arms were, or seemed to be, drawn apart by an irre-
sistible power. This, however, was one of the cases
in which collusion appeared possible ; though on a
minute, and certainly rather sceptical scrutiny, we
confess that we feel by no means certain that it was
practised.

After this had been continued for some time, the
most searching test was introduced. A powerful mag-
netic galvanic battery was introduced, and the last-men-
tioned girl was exposed to its full influence. She stood it
without the movement of a muscle, except that her hands
were contracted; which is, we believe, the invariable
effect of the trial. Several gentlemen present, in order to
satisfy themselves that there was no deception, tried the
effect of the same apparatus, but could not endure, for
half a minute, what the girl had endured for three
minutes, and what she tried again without the slightest
reluctance, and with the same apparent unconsciousness.
The experiment was then tried upon the former girl.
While in the state of somnambulism she felt the pain,
though it did not wake her ; but when thrown into a
state of perfect sleep, though the muscles of her hand
and arm worked, there was no appearance of pain in
her face. Another girl, the sister of the second, was in-
troduced, and underwent the same test with perfect indif-
ference and seeming freedom from all pain.

We have thus stated what we actually witnessed.
That certain wonderful effects were produced was
beyond all doubt, and that no other means were em-
ployed than the pointing or waving of the hands of
the operator also seems clear. Of course we cannot
say how far training might have perfected the girls in
the part they played, if it was acting ; but, to say
nothing of the character of Dr. Elliotson, and the
securities which the publicity of the hospital affords
against any such practices, the appearance and manner
of the subjects experimented upon forbids the suppo-
sition that such was the case. It would seem that
there are powers and susceptibilities in the human
frame yet undeveloped, and whose existence is hardly
suspected ; and whatever may be the opinion formed
by any one of the absolute worth of these trials, they
cannot deny but that they open out a new and inter-
esting chapter in human nature. With these specu-
lations we have, however, nothing to do for the pre-
sent. We went as spectators, and our business is
merely to give a faithful narration of what we saw.*

* In the early part of this volume a variety of experiments are
reported — many of which, it must be admitted, were very cruel—
to establish beyond a doubt the absolute insensibility of the persons
operated upon; but none of these perhaps even equalled in inten-
sity that described in the above case, of a magnetised patient being
subjected to the shock of a galvanic battery without manifesting
the slightest sensation. This, too, was an experiment performed
in one of the public hospitals in London, in the presence of many
witnesses, not one of whom probably, at the time, believed even in
any of the subordinate phenomena of Animal Magnetism.


IV.

CASE OF HYSTERIA TREATED MAGNETICALLY, IN PRIVATE
PRACTICE, BY S. SANDYS, ESQ., SURGEON, 4, FRANCIS
TERRACE, CAMDEN TOWN.

(Extracted from the Medical Gazette, February 10th, 1838.)

A. S., aged about 42, a female of quiet and seden-
tary habits, her occupation being that of a sempstress,
has for several years been subject to dyspepsia, with a
remarkable though variable state of the tongue, the
whole or a part of the skin falling off about once in ten
days, leaving the exposed surface raw and painfully
sensitive ; in twenty-four to thirty-six hours it appears
as usual again. For this she has been under constant
treatment, of which daily exercise in the open air
formed a part. About the middle of November she
was affected with a constant vomiting, partially re-
lieved by creosote (the efferverscing saline having
failed), and completely removed by hydrocyanic acid.
This was accompanied by pain and weakness in the
back and loins. About a month afterwards she was
affected with retention of urine, requiring the constant
use of the catheter. Six or seven days after this she
was observed one evening to rise from her bed (about
nine, p.m.) in a state bordering on somnambulism. She
put her shawl over her shoulders, saying that she must
go out and take a walk : this she was with difficulty
restrained from doing, as her strength was much
augmented at the time, and she declared vehemently,
" she would go out, as Mr. Sandys had ordered her."
After a few minutes she began to tremble violently,
clinging for support to any one standing near her :
her strength gradually decreased, and she suffered
herself to be laid upon the bed, when she shortly
awoke sensible. This attack did not fail to come on
every evening, at first for a few days spontaneously,
afterwards in some way dependent upon the use of the
catheter, as it always supervened immediately after
that operation, though the time was purposely varied
at uncertain intervals, between half-past eight and
half-past ten, beyond which time, if the operation were
delayed, the attack appeared to come on spontaneously.

During the attack, she exhibits a most pointed aver-
sion to all females, not shewing any friendly recogni-
tion of her sister, or any of her friends or acquaintance,
positively denying their identity, and declaring that
they are all in league to keep her in confinement.

This paroxysm daily increased in violence and in-
duration.*' Persuasion, fear, and the cold " douche,"
having failed to quiet it, recourse was had to Battley's
sedative solution, in half-drachm doses, given shortly
before the expected time of the attack ; the strait
waistcoat was applied, and she was tied in bed. The
attack came on as usual, but gradually gave way under
the influence of the opiate; she slept about three hours.

* So violent had she now become, and so malicious were her
expressed intentions during the attack, both as regarded the de-
struction of herself and sister, the burning of the house, the fre-
quent attempts she made to jump out of the window, and to dash
her head against the wall, that more active means of restraint were
thought necessary.

Her state, during the next and three following days,
was, however, such as to forbid a perseverance in its
use ; she vomited her food constantly ; her head was
in racking pain ; she felt worse than usual, and, to use
her own expression, " perfectly wretched."

The duration of the attack at this time, if left un-
controlled, was usually two and a half to three hours,
when she gradually became quieter, though she still
continued muttering, and at length became sensible,
without, however, having once closed her eyes.

I now felt that as Mesmerism had the sanction of
so eminent a physician as Dr. Elliotson in these cases,
I was quite justified in trying it.

On the evening, therefore, of December 27th, the
usual passes were made, and continued for about fifty
minutes, beginning soon after the commencement of
the attack. From that day to this, a period of more
than a month, the manipulations have been followed
by one uniform result — a state of coma (if I may so
call it), or profound Mesmeric sleep, coming on gradu-
ally after a certain length of time (requiring fifteen or
twenty minutes before any effect is observed, and
about thirty-five to produce the full effect), the re-
spiration becoming slower, and so gentle as to be quite
inaudible ; at length a deep-drawn sigh, followed in
about five minutes by a second, after which we find the
extremities generally so rigid, that moving one leg
moves the whole body. There is also always a great
diminution, if not a total absence, of sensibility in the
skin, as evinced by the following tests : pinching,
pricking, scratching, and tickling, particularly the
soles of the feet, which at other times she cannot
endure.

Her sense of hearing seems equally dull, shewing no
sign of perception when her own name is shouted in
her ear ; not the slightest movement even of the eye-
lid being visible when a watchman's rattle is suddenly-
sprung at her bedside. Yet it has appeared to me
several times, that when in this state, certainly when
in progress towards it, she is sensible of any exertion
of the voluntary muscles, even of resistance without
motion, and this after all the ordinary sensibility of
the skin appears extinct.

She shews no consciousness when violently shaken,
and the use of the scarificator (having been cupped on
the loins when in this state) produced a short expres-
sion of uneasiness rather than of pain ; and she imme-
diately relapsed into her comatose condition, not having
in the morning the slightest recollection of what had
passed.

The catheter, if introduced while she remains in this
state, has the effect of partially rousing her, requiring
a few more passes of the hand to quiet her.

She was left for two successive nights without the
Mesmerism ; the attack each night came on as usual,
lasted about three hours, and left her low, exhausted,
faint, and sleepless ; each morning she expressed her-
self as not being nearly so well. Next day the Mes-
merism was resumed, and she was quieted as usual.

About ten days afterwards, the attack was one even-
ing allowed to remain for forty-five minutes, at which
time (her violence being undiminished) the usual
passes were made, and were soon followed by their
ordinary effect.

From this Mesmeric sleep she commonly awakens in
about three hours, quite sensible. I should here say,
that the above phenomena have as frequently been
produced by my pupil, Mr. W. Whitehouse, as by
myself ; indeed it was he who first, by persevering for
about fifty minutes, produced the marked effects above
described, though I had several times previously ob-
served a slight and transient drowsiness or quietude
result from a few passes.

The introduction of the catheter in the morning has
once or twice been followed by a short and slight at-
tack, similar to that of the evening ; this has likewise
sometimes preceded the operation.

There has throughout been a remarkable temporary
loss of power in the lower extremities. In the day-
time she can walk firmly ; whereas at night, during the
attack, when she sets her feet on the floor, the knees
sink under her, and she falls instantaneously, without
staggering, and without attempting to save herself.

The same results have uniformly followed the Mes-
merism if practised in the day-time, independently of
the attack, or of catheterism — the same succession of
symptoms — the same insensibility to external impres-
sions. It, however, requires less time to effect this —
twenty to twenty-five minutes being sufficient. From
this day-sleep she awakes in about three hours, much
refreshed.

In conclusion, I have only to add, that should any
member of our profession wish to convince himself,
and to be an eye-witness of the results obtained,
shall be happy to shew him the case at any time.


V.

CASE OF RHEUMATISM, WITH PERIODICAL FITS OF
DELIRIUM, TREATED MAGNETICALLY, IN PRIVATE
PRACTICE, BY THOMAS CHANDLER, ESQ., PARADISE-
STREET, ROTHERHITHE.

(Extracted from the Lancet, April 14th, 1838.)

Mr. D., aged 18, had a severe attack of rheumatism in
January, 1837, which was at first confined to the
knees, but on the third day, the 8th, it suddenly at-
tacked the scalp; pulse 120, and other symptoms of
fever ; he was bled to |xij, and took calomel and
opium.

9th. Better in the morning, but in the afternoon all
the symptoms returned with increased violence, and
late in the evening he became suddenly delirious, and
remained so all night, although he was again bled,
which quieted him a little.

10th. Remains much in the same state as last night ;
his head was shaved, and spirit lotion applied ; very
soon after the application of the lotion he became
sensible, after having been delirious sixteen hours.

He had no return of the delirium until the evening of
thellth, when, at seven, another attack occurred, which
lasted two hours, though without violence. The lotion
was again used, and also sinapisms to the feet, with
decidedly beneficial effect. He continued to have a
fit every evening, varying not more than an hour in its
time of commencement, and lasting from one to two
hours; his nights were sleepless, but during the day
he appeared tolerably well.

Quinine was now used, grs.ij. every four hours, and
grs.vj. an hour before the attack ; this had the effect
of shortening the fit and making it later every night,
until at last, after intermitting one evening, it left al-
together. The attack lasted twelve days ; but one fit,
produced by excitement, occurred five nights after.

He remained perfectly well until Dec. 6th, when he
was again attacked with rheumatism, which was fol-
lowed in two days by periodical fits of delirium much
more violent than in January. Quinine was again
used in much larger doses, but apparently without
effect. Dr. Blundell was consulted, and prescribed
musk, and afterwards arsenic with it, under which
treatment he again recovered about the 23rd.

January 22nd, 1838. I was again sent for, and
found him suffering from rheumatism ; in the evening
he had an attack of delirium (of the same character as
formerly, but still more violent), which recurred every
evening with such violence that three strong men
with difficulty restrained him, snapping at all who
approached him, and biting the sheets and pillows.
Cold applications to the head aggravated instead of
relieving him ; musk, arsenic, quinine, carbonate of
iron, and creosote, all in large doses, failed giving the
slightest relief ; five drops of Scheele's hydrocyanic
acid, on the second night, increased to eight, appeared
to moderate, in some degree, the violence of the fit.
On the seventeenth day of the attack — viz., 8th Feb.,
the fits had gradually increased in duration to three
hours. This evening Dr. Eiliotson saw him during
the attack, and tried Mesmerism, but apparently
without effect. He, however, persuaded me to try it
again on the following evening.

Friday, February 9th. Commenced Mesmerism at
eight, p.m., and continued two hours and a quarter ;
the fit came on about nine, and lasted one hour and a
quarter. The stages of the fit were very evident,
though he remained so quiet that he did not require
the slightest restraint; it went off suddenly in a burst
of laughter, after several attempts. To-day he took
his medicine as usual — viz. carbonate of iron, |iv,
sulphate of quinine, £>j, in the course of the day, and
grs. viij of hydrocyanic acid and grs.xij of creosote an
hour before the fit.

February 10th. Commenced Mesmerism at a quarter
past eight, and continued it an hour and a half ; the
attack then ceased as last night ; medicines as yester-
day. He now allows that there is some influence in
this marvellous remedy, which he at first treated with
contempt.

11th. Commenced at ten minutes past eight, and
continued an hour and a quarter ; the fit lasted fifty
minutes ; it appeared more violent as he raised his
head from the pillow, and stared much more than on
the previous evenings, but between these movements
the sleep was more profound. He now sleeps about
three hours at night, which he has not done since the
commencement of the illness.

12th. The acid and creosote were now omitted.
Began manipulating at eight, p.m. ; continued one
hour ; the fit lasted forty-five minutes.

18th. Thinking the fit might be brought on at any
hour, commenced at half-past seven ; it came on in
five minutes, and lasted twenty-five.

14th. Has passed a very quiet night, and appears
much better this morning. Mesmerised him at eight,
p.m. ; fit came on in eight minutes, and lasted twenty-
five ; symptoms much as usual ; but in the intervals
the sleep is much more profound.

15th. Omitted all medicine but a tonic. Com-
menced at a quarter before nine ; fit came on in four
minutes, and lasted twenty-four ; sleep very profound
in the intervals ; and when the fit went off he did not
awake as usual until I made some transverse passes
with the hand before his eyes, which instantly aroused
him. After the fit he is troubled with violent headache
for half an hour, followed by intense itching of the
scalp, lasting for about two hours.

16th. Commenced at ten minutes to nine ; fit came
on in three, and lasted twenty -two minutes.

17th. Mesmerised him at seven; fit came on in
three, and lasted twelve minutes. I terminated it thus
early thinking it might be shortened at pleasure, as it
was so brought on; he awoke the instant the trans-
verse passes were made, and appeared much better
than usualj dressed himself again, and remained up
two hours, ate a hearty supper, and slept well.

18th. As his nose had bled rather profusely for two
nights, ordered a few leeches to be applied to his
temples in the evening, to which he strongly objected,
and was much irritated by my suggesting them, as his
father insisted on their being applied. Grown bold
by experience, resolved to magnetise him earlier in
the day ; commenced accordingly at a quarter past
four ; though dreadfully excited at the time, he was
sound asleep, and the fit came on, in five minutes.
Fearing to terminate it as quickly as yesterday, al-
lowed it to last seventeen minutes, when I awoke him
as usual, and he appeared more tranquil.

19th. Magnetised him at a quarter before one ; he
was sound asleep in two minutes, though perfectly-
cheerful before ; a slight fit came on, which I ter^
minated in seven minutes; he remained well all the
rest of the day.

20th. Omitted the manipulations ; he had no at-
tack, nor has he had one since ; from this time he may
be considered well.

Two experienced medical men, besides the mem-
bers of the family, witnessed the effects of the remedy,
if so it may be called.

N.B. — Any medical men who may feel interested by
this account, and wish to learn further particulars of
the case, can apply to the author, and may, through
him, procure an interview with the father of the
patient, who will feel much pleasure in corroborating
these facts.*

* It should be distinctly understood, that this testimony in
favour of animal magnetism is on my part unsolicited. It is the
voluntary attestation of medical practitioners, who have been in-
duced to try experimentally the magnetic treatment, and as such,
it ought certainly to have considerable weight with the profession.

VI.

CASE OF EPILEPSY TREATED MAGNETICALLY, IN PRIVATE
PRACTICE, BY J. N. BAINBRIDGE, ESQ., SURGEON, 86,
ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON.

(Extracted from the Lancet, April 28th, 1838.)

Sarah Overton, aged twenty, a simple and undesigning
girl, had become an inmate of the workhouse of the
parish of St. Martin, in consequence of her being
unable to get a living for herself on account of epilep-
tic fits, to which she had been subject from two years
of age. She has been under my care during the last
three years, and I have ransacked the whole Pharma-
copoeia for medicines for her. She has been repeatedly
cupped, bled, blistered, had setons in the neck, and her
diet has been regulated, without any except an occa-
sional slight alleviation of her complaint. She generally
had two or three fits daily, and they sometimes lasted
four, five, and even six hours ; she was perfectly insen-
sible during their continuance, and often required three
or four persons to hold her down ou the bed to prevent
her injuring herself.

On Tuesday last, April 10th, I was going round the
wards of the infirmary ; she was then in a fit, and had
been so for six hours. Having seen the accounts in
the Lancet regarding Mesmerism, and Dr. Elliotson
being an authority in its favour, although I had never
seen it practised, and was rather sceptical regarding its
existence, I determined the next day to try it upon this
patient. Without the girl being informed, or having
the least knowledge of what was going to be done, or
for what purpose, the process was commenced by my
pupil, Mr. Vidal, and I sat beside, watching the pro-
gress. In about ten minutes she complained of in-
creased weight and pain in the head ; I joked with her,
and told her it was all fancy. In about five minutes
more I found her pulse lower in frequency ; she occa-
sionally sighed, and there was a slight twitching of one
hand ; on being asked a question she attempted but
could not answer me, and in twenty minutes her head
fell back, and she was in a profound trance. I tried
many efforts to arouse her, such as tickling the face
and neck with a piece of tape, which I also passed up
her nose ; I lifted her arm up two feet from the chair
and let it fall,- and she was shaken by the nurse, — all
without the least effect ; she was carried to bed, where
she was allowed to remain half an hour, when, after
about half a dozen transverse passes over the eyebrows,
she awoke. From that time to the present, (Tuesday,
the 17th,) she has never had a fit, and she has been in
every respect perfectly well. Whether they will return
I cannot say, but certainly the effect has been most
remarkable.

I have six or seven other epileptic cases in the
infirmary, which I shall subject to the same process,
and shall communicate the results to the public.

VII.

REPORT OF HERBERT MAYO, ESQ., PROFESSOR OF PHYSI-
OLOGY, IN FAVOUR OF ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

(Abridged from the Medical Gazette, April 21st, 1838.)

I must premise, that many of the effects which I
have to mention are such as I should have given no
credit to, unless I had seen them repeatedly produced
(so that they were evidently reproducable at plea-
sure), not by one or two only, and by the initiated,
but by several, including myself, indifferent spectators,
and that under such a variety of circumstances as en-
tirely to do away with the possibility of deception.
Different persons arrive at conviction upon points of
questionable probability in different ways : some are
most influenced by authority ; with myself, I will
frankly admit, in the present instance, authority went
for nothing. The facts which had been narrated to
me appeared perfectly incredible till I saw that they
were certain.

The Mesmeric trance may exist in two degrees, one
analogous to sleep, the other analogous to somnam-
bulism. Dr. Elliotson, on the occasions to which I
advert, exhibited three patients, girls, of ages between
thirteen and seventeen, who displayed in succession
these two states, alternating with each other, or with
the rational waking state, at the pleasure of the
operator. These two states may be called Mesmeric
coma, and Mesmeric sleeping-walking. — Mesmeric
coma is a state of profound insensibility, in which the
pulse is slightly quickened, the breathing gentle and
natural, the pupil as ordinarily, but turned up or roll-
ing away when the eyelids are opened, contracting on
exposure to light. The insensibility is so profound as
not to be disturbed by a strong electric shock, or by
the sustained action of a magneto-galvanic battery,
each so intense as to be intolerable to most persons.
It should be mentioned that the muscles were con-
vulsed under the influence of the galvanic discharge,
while it appeared to be unfelt by the patient. The
lesser stimuli of pinching or pricking the skin, or pull-
ing the hair, produce no effect whatever. It is not to
be doubted that any surgical operation might be per-
formed upon a person in this state without her feeling
it. — In Mesmeric sleep-walking, the patient is to a
certain degree awake to external objects, and is able
to support herself, and to walk about, but with hesita-
tion and insecurity : she sees, but the eyes remain
fixed for distant vision, so that objects close at hand
appear double : she hears, but has no perception of
the direction of sound, so that she does not turn her
head to one addressing her standing by her side ; if
the voice is a familiar one, she recognises it, and is
anxious to know where the person is, and looks in
search of the person, but looks straight before her
only. The insensibility to touch is as great as in the
Mesmeric coma : neither pinching the skin, nor pulling
the hair, nor touching the surface of the eye, nor the
electric or galvanic shock, provoke sensation any more
than in the former state. Whether the muscular
sense, and taste, and smell, are suspended, is not yet
ascertained. Dr. Elliotson inclines to think that the
former is preserved ; Mr. Wheatstone is of opinion
that, together with taste and smell, the muscular sense
is temporarily extinguished. Citric acid, and soda,
which Mr. Wheatstone placed on the tongue succes-
sively, seemed to excite no sensation. Snuff does not
produce sneezing. But one of these little patients,
having two different weights placed in her hands,
lifted more readily, and said that it was easier to lift
the lighter than the heavier. The extent to which
reflection and volition are awake in this state, appears
to differ in different individuals. Two of the three
young patients talk fluently, with great readiness of
apprehension and reply, and some humour, in the
state of somnambulism ; the other, who is younger,
and when awake, of a more quiet and gentle disposition,
hardly answers more than yes or no. The difference
probably has to do with two causes : one, natural
character, the other, the passing or permanent tendency
to ordinary somnambulism and fits of delirium. One
of the three patients shewn by Dr. Elliotson, after
being thrown into the Mesmeric coma, spontaneously
and suddenly awakes into the state of somnambulism,
with an appearance of pleasure and delight at her re-
turned consciousness, and instantly begins addressing
observations to persons or objects around her. One
of the two others requires to be artificially, and by
a peculiar manipulation, aroused from the state of
coma into that of somnambulism. The period in
which one or both of the others would remain in the
state of coma seems to be indefinite. Dr. Elliotson
mentioned that one had been kept in this state twenty
hours. With the state denoted by the term " Mesmeric
coma" I know no spontaneous disorder of the system
that has been proved to be identical ; but it is highly-
probable that in some other trances, and in some
hysteric fits, insensibility as profound exists
" When the state of coma supervenes, the iris con-
tracts, as it does when one drops asleep ; but the con-
traction is transient, and goes away suddenly. It may
be seen coming on for three or four seconds, while
the coma is supervening ; the moment that is com-
plete, the pupil becomes natural again, and maintains
the same degree of contraction or dilatation as under
the same light in the waking state. From the state of
coma, it has been mentioned that one, if not two, of
Dr. Elliotson's patients, spontaneously, in about a mi-
nute, wakes into the Mesmeric somnambulism. In
the others, or in one of them certainly, this change
does not take place spontaneously. To produce it a
manipulation is used, which is equally effective with
all three. If with both thumbs the eyebrows are once
or twice strongly rubbed from the nose outwards, the
little patient opens her eyes, and is at once in the state
of somnambulism above described, and can hear and
speak. A similar manipulation used on the forehead,
or the cheek, or the chin, is totally useless, and the
patient is left in the same state of coma as before.
The same manipulation continued longer, restores the
patient to perfect waking and the natural condition of
the mind and body. When she is in the state of som-
nambulism, the least motion directed towards the pa-
tient by any spectator, not only when near, but when
several feet off, instantly produces the state of coma.
This effect takes place with more certainty if the mo-
tion is in front of the patient. Not only on moving
the hand downwards, but on bowing, or on raising the
foot before the patient, with a direction towards her,
she drops into total unconsciousness. The coma is
produced with equal certainty if a thick screen of
board is interposed between the operator and the pa-
tient, as if he is standing immediately before and seen
by her ; but the effect does not then ensue as soon as
otherwise. One mode of inducing the state of coma
upon somnambulism is to blow upon the patient's eye-
lids. What makes this effect the more singular is,
that when the patient has thus been rendered coma-
tose, blowing upon the eyelids awakens her into som-
nambulism ; so the patient's sleep-walking senses may
be blown out, and afterwards blown in again.

Of the instances already given of the production of
Mesmeric phenomena, some are quite incompatible
with the notion that they are excited by impressions
made upon the mind, through the common avenues of
sensation. The following, on the one hand, help to
put that alternative supposition quite aside, and on the
other, determines some of the conditions necessary for
the operation of the Mesmeric influence When
Dr. Elliotson's little patients are in a state of Mes-
meric somnambulism, if you place your hand near
their hands or feet, and move your fingers, the fingers
of the hands, or feet of the patients, likewise begin to
move.* If, then, or after having simply held your
hand near the hand or foot of one of the somnambu-
lists, you draw your hand slowly away, the hand or
foot of the patient follows your hand. After the hand
or foot has followed your hand a short distance, the
patient drops from the state of somnambulism into the
state of coma, — that is to say, the effect thus pro-
duced is twofold. The influence of your hand is first
to drag the hand or foot of the somnambulist after it;
secondly (like every other movement directed at the
somnambulist), to determine coma. And these re-
sults ensue equally, whether you are before the patient
and seen by her, or at her side, or out of the sphere
of vision, or behind her, a thick wooden screen being
interposed A pasteboard screen being inter-
posed between Dr. Elliotson and the little somnam-
bulist, when he advanced his hand, with one finger
lifted, towards her, she became mute and dull, but
did not fall ; when .he repeated the experiment with a
dose of three fingers, she fell at once. This must
necessarily appear ridiculous, unless you saw it, and
saw it repeatedly succeed, as I have. There is, how-
ever, some seeming caprice in all these results ; some-
times it happens that, no sensible cause having inter-
fered, for many minutes no Mesmeric phenomena can
be produced ; sometimes the cause may be traced.
When, for instance, the little somnambulists are much
interested in anything going on before them, the
efforts of the magnetiser are temporarily baffled.
The Mesmeric influence shown in the production of
coma may be conveyed from one person in the state
of somnambulism to another. — The three little pa-
tients, in the state of Mesmeric waking, were seated in
three chairs, holding each others hands. A sheet of
pasteboard was then interposed between the first and
second. The first was then thrown into the state of
coma ; the other two immediately fell into the same.
On trying then to wake the first to the state of som-
nambulism, the ordinary means failed ; the influence
of the coma of the two others beat the means em-
ployed to wake the first. On separating her hand
from that of the second, she was awakened at once by
the common means. — The Mesmeric influence will not
travel through a person not in the state of somnam-
bulism — from one Mesmeric somnambulist to another.
Dr. Elliotson sat down in the place of the middle one
of the three engaged in the last experiment, holding a
hand of each of the others. On throwing one of the
latter into coma, the other was unaffected, and re-
mained, as before, in the state of somnambulism. —
The Mesmeric influence, shewn in the production of
muscular movements, may be conveyed from one
person in the state of somnambulism to another. The
three little patients being disposed as in the last in-
stance but one, and a pasteboard screen being inter-
posed between the first and second, on exciting mo-
tions in the unengaged hand of the first by the prox-
imity of the hand of the operator, similar motions
took place in the unengaged hand of the third, and
some motion in the clasped hands of the second and
the question — Cui bono the limited Mesmerism which
you admit ? Some one on a similar occasion made
the same inquiry of Franklin, who replied to the
question of the minute philosopher, by asking another

— What is the good of a new-born infant ? As it
happens, our infant at its present birth has shewn
practical prowess and utility ; it has vanquished in its
cradle an epilepsy and an hysteric palsy.*

* In conclusion, Mr. Mayo declares, that although prepared to
expect that other phenomena may be obtained, yet he disbelieves,
" as wild extravagance, the pretended Mesmeric clairvoyance."
This is a rash, because premature, declaration. It has been
already stated by Mr. Mayo that he would not have believed in
the facts he has attested, unless he had personally witnessed them ;
and it is not to be expected, reasoning a fortiori, that he will
accredit the phenomena of clairvoyance, unless he also witness it.
The professors of animal magnetism do not pretend that clair-
voyance is an ordinary phenomenon : on the contrary, they aver
that it is only occasionally developed in the highest degree of the
magnetic state. It is evident that the circumstance of Mr. Mayo
not having yet witnessed this state, is no more an argument against
the existence of this phenomenon, than the circumstance of Mr.
Mayo not having witnessed, six months ago, the facts he has now
attested, could have been then any legitimate argument against
their existence. Furthermore, I do not understand why all
authorities in attestation of the ostensible facts of animal mag-
netism are to be repudiated : " With myself," says Mr. Mayo, " I"
will candidly admit that in the present instance authorities went
for nothing." Why so? In this case, Mr. Mayo has given him-
self a great deal of unnecessary trouble, in publishing the details
of his own experience ; for, on the same principle, it is competent
for any member of the profession to turn round on Mr. Mayo,
and retaliate : " Yes, this is all very well ; but authorities, in the
present case, go for nothing ; I do not believe one fact you have
attested." This would certainly be a very unjustifiable impeach-
ment of Mr. Mayo's veracity, or competency as a man of science ;
yet it is the inevitable consequence of the assumption upon which
he denies, in the face of all authority, the possibility of Mes-
meric clairvoyance. There is no fact in the whole history of the
experimental sciences better and more clearly authenticated than
the occurrence of clairvoyance. I have myself repeatedly wit-
nessed it ; and I have no doubt, that as Mr. Mayo's experience
in animal magnetism increases, he will do so likewise.

VIII.

REPORT OF THE CASE OF LUCY CLARK, TREATED BY
BARON DUPOTET DE SENNEVOY, AT NO. 20, WIG-
MORE STREET, CAVENDISH SQUARE. COMMUNICATED
BY GEORGE DENTON, ESQ., SURGEON, TOTTENHAM.

Lucy Clark is eighteen years old. In her thirteenth
year she was suddenly seized with a fit, for which she
could assign no cause. A fortnight afterwards she
had a second ; in her fourteenth year she had a third ;
and in her sixteenth year a fourth, when she became
so constantly subject to them, that for three months
she scarcely passed two days without a fit. During
this time many remedies were administered ; at last a
seton was applied to the neck, and for the four months
it was allowed to remain there she had no recurrence
of her fits. The seton had scarcely been removed a
fortnight when her fits returned. For one month
various remedies were tried, which failing, the seton
was re-applied, and worn for seventeen months.
During this period many plans of treatment were
adopted, and the seton was frequently removed, some-
times accidentally, and sometimes intentionally, in
order to observe if the fits would return, which they
invariably did. She was subject to the fits even while
she wore the seton, if it did not discharge.

The last time she had a fit was when the seton was
accidentally removed, on the 15th of July last ; and
on the 16th, after replacing it, I magnetised her. I
was so surprised at her susceptibility of the mysterious
influence of its effects, that I was led to introduce her,
at the North London Hospital, to the Baron Dupotet,
whose patient she has continued ever since.

For some time I was constantly present while the
Baron magnetised Lucy Clarke, and heard her re-
peatedly state, long before the 29th of October, that
that was the day her seton should be removed, but
that the Baron should continue to magnetise her until
the 30th of November, and that then her fits would be
cured. Accordingly, the seton was removed on the
day above stated. In the month of November she
received a very severe blow on the head, which she
said would protract her cure one month.

The girl has had no fits since the day she was first
magnetised, and, until this last month, has taken no
medicine. The Baron still magnetises her once a
week.

For the blow she received on the head it was found
necessary twice to bleed her, which was done, at her
own request, during her magnetic state of insensibility.



Reports of other cases treated magnetically
in the public hospitals, and also in private practice, are
being daily communicated to Baron Dupotet ; but as
he cannot delay the publication of the present volume
to give them insertion, they will appear in the work
which he has already announced.

20, Wigmore Street, May 5th, 1838.



T. C. Savill, Printer, 107, St. Martin's Lane.



4*
