THE SCIENCE 

... • 

* 

OF ALCHYMY 


“SAPERE 


AUDE” 








THE SCIENCE 

0F 

ALCHYMY 

SPIRITUAL AND MATERIAL 


AN ESSAY BY 


“SAPERE AUDE” 


t 


Fra. R.R. et A.C. 
£ - Ck Oerw \ 




THE THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY, 

7, Duke Street, Adelphi, London, W.C., 

‘‘The Path,” 144, Madison Avenue, New York, U.S.A 
“The Theosophist” Office, Adyar, Madras, India. 







THE SCIENCE OF ALCHYMY. 


BY S. A. 


The subject of Alchymy is one of great interest, both to 
the members of the Eastern Theosophic school and to 
Hermetists; but it is preferable to approach the con¬ 
sideration of the science of Alchymy from the stand¬ 
point of the Western Occult Philosophy, handed down 
to us from the sages of mediaeval Europe, and which 
they obtained from three principal sources. First, from 
the Arabs, who almost alone preserved the ancient 
sciences through the dark ages. Secondly, from Jewish 
scholars, Rabbis of Hebrew culture, who had received 
the traditional lore now identified by the name 
“ Kabalah,” that tradition of high magic to which 
ancient Chaldea and Babylon so largely contributed. 
Lastly, from Egypt, the ancient Egypt of the Pharaohs, 
ruled by those mighty priest kings of old, whose wisdom 
instructed Moses, and whose training enabled him to 
supersede all minor professors of magical arts, and to 
rule with some success a turbulent and rebellious people 
t —the early Hebrews. 

If we look upon the subject from the point which 
affords the widest view, it may be said that Alchymy 
has two aspects : the simply material, and the religious. 
The dogma that Alchymy was only a form of chemistry, 
is untenable by any one who has read the works of its 
chief professors. The doctrine that Alchymy was 
religion only, and that its chemical references were all 
blinds, is equally untenable in the face of history, which 





4 


shows that many of its most noted professors were men 
who had made important discoveries in the domain of 
common chemistry, and were in no way notable as 
teachers either of ethics or religion. 

Firstly, then, Alchymy must be regarded as a science 
uniting ancient chemistry with a religious basis. 

Secondly, it is convenient and permissible to discuss 
the merits and aims of Alchymy from a Triple point of 
view, for it has a Cosmic, Human and Terrestrial side. 
Cosmic, in that by analogy its conclusions when true 
must be universal as well as particular. Human, 
because as aforesaid, it has a religious side; and 
Terrestrial, when it is concerned with mere earth, 
metals and minerals. 

Thirdly, as Blavatsky said, Alchymy, like many of 
the religio-scientific myths of antiquity, is a suitable 
subject for consideration under Seven Heads. For 
Seven is the number of the Key whose action is most 
general throughout the universe. 

Fourthly, the Hermetic Kabalist will be justified in 
demonstrating to his pupil the complete fitness of the 
Sephirotic scheme of the Decad to illustrate the secrets 
of Alchymy, even as he has found that the Sephiroth 
have never failed to furnish a symbolic allegory of all 
the forms of manifested creation. 

Yet, fifthly, there is the Key of the Twelve ; but this 
special form of attribution is somewhat limited in use ; 
referring to time and space, rather than form or 
thought. 

No attempt can here be made to follow up these 
several schemes to their logical conclusions. Space 
will alone permit of a superficial view of the common 
exoteric knowledge of the science and of its professors ; 
followed by a glance at Alchymy in its most material 
aspect, its relation to chemistry, and the reconciliation 
of chemistry to Alchymy; and alternately a short con¬ 
sideration of the subject as a form of religious and ethical 
instruction. 


5 


Chemistry, the modern science which investigates the 
constitution of material substances, is the lineal de¬ 
scendant of Mediaeval and Ancient Al-Chymy. The 
syllable AL is the Arabic definite article—like the 
Hebrew He’, meaning “ The ” chemistry, the Higher 
chemistry; treating of the essential nature of the Ele¬ 
ments, metals and minerals ; while modern chemistry 
rejoices rather in being a science devoted to utilitarian 
and commercial uses. The earliest use of the word 
“ Alchymy ” is believed to be found in the works of 
Julius Firmicus Maternus, an Astronomer, who lived in 
the time of the Emperor Constantine. 

Firmicus wrote: “he should be well skilled in Alchymy, 
who is Born when the Moon is in the house of Saturn.” 

The Imperial Library of Paris is said to possess the 
oldest Alchymic Volume known ; it is by Zosimus of 
Panopolis, written in Greek, and entitled, The Divine Art 
of making Gold and Silver , and was written about a.d. 400. 

The next oldest tract upon Alchymy known to exist 
is by ZEneas Gazeus, written in Greek, about a.d. 480. 
The Mediaeval authors often call Alchymy the “ Her¬ 
metic Art,” implying an origin from Hermes Trisme- 
gistus of Egypt, the prehistoric demigod, or inspired 
teacher, to whom we owe the “ Emerald Tablet,” which 
has been not inaptly described as being a resume of all 
alchymic science on a single page. 

During the earliest Christian times all the sciences 
flourished at Alexandria, where men of learning were 
fostered by the rulers ; but with Roman predominance 
there came a change, so far at least as Alchymy is con¬ 
cerned, for the Roman Emperors, partly from jealousy 
of the subject city, partly because they feared the reality 
of the Pharaonic claim to gold making, and that by 
such means the Egyptian nation might be supported in 
its efforts at independence, issued orders for its sup¬ 
pression. History tells us that the Emperor Diocletian 
ordered that all books relating to the Egyptian ancient 
arts and sciences should be collected and destroyed. 


6 


From this time, science took refuge among the Arabs, 
whose sages cultured it for centuries, and introduced 
the sciences into Spain, whence they spread into Ger¬ 
many, where Alchymy, one of the Eastern sciences, was 
adopted by the monks, who seem in many places to 
have been permitted to study and investigate, although 
the clergy in general persecuted laymen who practised 
the art. 

Lenglet du Fresnoy, who made a long and patient 
investigation among the old Alchymic authors, states as 
the result of his researches, that he has traced ten famous 
authorities previous to the Christian era, setting aside 
the almost unknown works of the Egyptian Magi, whose 
remains are found among the papyri of Egyptian mum¬ 
mies and the inscriptions of the Tombs of the Nile 
Valley ; Berthelot has lately, in Paris, published a 
volume of most instructive extracts from these most an¬ 
cient documents. Lenglet discovered twenty-one alchy- 
rnic authors in the first 1000 years after Jesus, five in 
the nth century, three in the 12th, eleven in the 13th, 
fifteen in the 14th, seventeen in the 15th, thirty in the 
16th, and sixty-seven in the 17th century of our time. 

Amongst the most famous names of European Al¬ 
chymy we note that several were men who rose to hold 
high dignities in the church: such were Pelagius, Lyne- 
sius a Bishop, Heliodorus a Bishop, Cremer, Ripley a 
Canon, Albertus Magnus a Dominican, Aquinas, Basil 
Valentine a Benedictine, Raymond Lully a Francis¬ 
can, Trithemius an Abbot of Spanheim, and Pope John 
XXII. 

A Short Catalogue of the more Famous 
Alchymists is here given. 


Geber, an Arab philosopher. 

Circa 

730 A.D. 

Rhazes, an Arab physician 

)> 

920 „ 

Alfarabi, an Arab chemist 

5 J 

954 „ 

Avicenna, the Arab physician 


1036 „ 

Kalid, a king in Egypt 

5 J 

mo „ 


Albertus Magnus, Bishop of Ratisbon Circa 1289 a 
T homas Aquinas, a theologian ,, 1260 

Artephius - - - - - - 1160 

Alain de Lisle ..... 1298 

Arnold of Villanova, Professor at the 

University of Barcelona - - - 1305 

Peter of Abano, or Apone - - - 1300 

Raymond Lully, a Spanish prelate - - 1314 

Roger Bacon, the inventor of gun powder 1270 
Pope John XXII.* - - - - 1316 

Jean de Meung, author of the Romance of the 

Rose. - I 34° 

Nicholas Flamel, a benefactor of the poor 

of Paris. ..... 1415 

George Ripley, Sir, a canon of the Church 1490 
Basil Valentine, prior of a monastery. I 45° 

Bernard of Treves or Trevisanus. - - 1490 

Trithemius of Spanheim ; an abbot. - 1516 

Cornelius Agrippa, a very famous occult 

philosopher. ..... 1536 

Paracelsus, physician and professor. Circa 1541 

Agricola. .1555 

Denis Zachaire. - - - - 1560 

Dee, John, an English clergyman. - - 1608 

Kelly, Edward, a notary. - - 1595 

Seton the Cosmopolite. .... 1603 

Sendivogius, Michael. .... 1636 

Libavius, Andrew. ----- 1609 

Oswald Croll. - - - - - 1617 

Michael Maier, author of the A talantaFugiens. 1619 
Jean d’Espagnet, author of the Hermetic 

Arcanum. ------ 1620 

Robert Fludd, theologian and mystic. - 1638 

Van Helmont, Jean Baptiste. - - - 1643 

Eireneus Philalethes, i.e ., Thomas Vaughan. 1645 
George Starkey. ..... 1646 


*Villani says he left a fortune of 25,000,000 florins. 



8 


Elias Ashmole, the antiquary. 
Rudolf Glauber, physician. 
Robert Boyle, chemist. 

Olaus Borrichius. 


1648 A.D. 
t cn 



Matthieu Dammy, one of the last famous 

Parisian Alchymists. - 1739 ,, 

Jean Christophe Kunst, a German professor. 1737 ,, 

In 1404, here in England, the art of transmutation 
was made a felony by 5, Hen., IV. c. 4 ; this Act was 
repealed in 1689. 

In its most material form the science of Alchymy 
taught that all substances were essentially and primor- 
dially derived from one basic “ hyle ” or foundation. 
From this basis differentiation arose, and by myriad 
steps the immense variety of material substances—such 
as we now see around us—originated by progression. 
From che comm an minerals were developed the metals, 
also in gradation of purity and excellence, until an acme 
was reached in the two so-called Perfect Metals—Silver 
and Gold. From this theory arose the Art of Alchymy, 
the Art of Transmutation, by which it was sought to 
produce Silver and Gold from other metals the next 
below them in the series, notably from Mercury, Anti¬ 
mony and Lead. Many indeed were the processes 
devised, but there was a general consensus of opinion 
that the last three stages of the chemical process were 
notable by a series of colour changes, from Black, 
through White to Red; this red matter was the Philo¬ 
sophers’ Stone, or Red Elixir, which could not only 
transmute Silver into Gold, but could also procure 
health and prolong life. 

Modern chemistry has, above all things, prided itself 
on its complete severance from the Alchymy of the 
Ancients. No modern science has shown more intoler¬ 
ance towards its ancestors than the chemistry of our 
era has shown to the discoveries of those Egyptian, 
Arabian and Mediaeval sages who were the founders of 
chemistry in the dim and distant past. 


9 


The discovery of the Elements has been the grand 
achievement of modern chemistry, and sure and certain 
renown has for half a century been granted to any 
chemist who has added a new Element to the existing 
catalogue. But if we may trust one of the most emi¬ 
nent chemists of the day, Professor Crookes, the future 
will change all this system, and a niche in the Temple 
of Fame will in the future be allotted by preference to 
one who succeeds in dividing one of our present ele¬ 
ments into its constituents. The Chemistry of the 
Future is to destroy the present theory, and to gain the 
power of reducing all compounds, and all the Elements 
to one primordial matter, to be named PROTYLE. In 
other words the most ancient chemical doctrine of the 
7 TpcoTTj v\rj, or FIRST MATTER, is to become para¬ 
mount. This, then, is the Reconciliation of the Future. 

No sooner is the modern Doctrine of Elements laid 
aside, than the discoveries of the Primordial Matter, the 
Transmutation of Metals, and the Elixir of Life re¬ 
appear and once more enter the range of the possible. 
Ancient Alchymy claimed no Elements, in our modern 
sense. An element being defined as “ a body which 
cannot be decomposed,” or “ a something to which we 
can add, but from which we can take away nothing,” 
or “ a body which increases in weight with every 
chemical change,” or “ a body different from all others, 
yet having constant characters itself, and indivisible 
except into parts of itself.” True, the word element 
was applied to the group of four properties which 
they so highly esteemed, viz., Fire, Air, Earth, 
and Water. But a close study of the oldest authors 
show that these four names are types of four modes of 
matter, and further that they are four correlative terms, 
implying states mutually related and dependent, and in 
no way independent and opposed entities. They were 
names of the four states, 

Heat and Dryness = Fire, 

Heat and Moistness = Air, 


IO 


Cold and Dryness = Earth, 

Cold and Moistness = Water, 

as is amply demonstrated even by Aristotle, who shows 
that the one matter, simple, or combined with its de¬ 
velopments, may exist in each of these states. 

The Alchymist affirmed the existence of the Primum 
Ens, or First Being, or First Matter; two opposites or 
contraries; three principles; and four elementary states 
of matter. 

Beyond these came the seven metals, as forms of 
matter, essentially stable, except in the hands of the 
skilled operator, to whom might be given the power of 
Transmutation, or of changing one of them into the 
other. Gold as the most perfect one, was the effect of 
the greatest transmutation, which process once known 
rendered all others of no importance. Hence all the 
efforts of the greatest Alchymists were directed to this 
the crowning achievement of the work. For this pro¬ 
cess one substance was requisite, the Philosopher’s 
Stone, the Quintessence, Son of the Sun, our laton: this 
was to be derived from the Philosophical Mercury, Salt 
and Sulphur, and had to pass in the process through 
the colours Black and White to the Red. This Stone, 
all powerful for Transmutation, was expected to be also 
the basis of the Great Elixir of Life when employed to 
affect living beings, and so confer the power of indefinite 
prolongation of earthly existence. 

Historical proof may be wanting that the Stone of 
the Philosophers was ever found and used, but no 
candid observer can doubt that the life-long labours of 
the Alchymists, and especially their discoveries in Syn¬ 
thesis, and their modes of chemical manipulation and 
their utensils, have laid the foundation of our modern 
chemistry, which having mounted by the alchymic 
ladder to a proud position, now contemptuously spurns 
that ladder from beneath its feet. 

The argument from Analogy is a very powerful one 
in favour of a Protyle or primordial matter. In the 


II 


Spiritual or Ideal world, there is no proof of definite 
bounds and independent existences, but rather of a 
Great Ain Soph, proceeding into forms by successive 
emanations. In the Animal and Vegetable Creations, 
again, there is evidence that although species are dis¬ 
tinct for long periods, they are but stagey in a long 
series of forms, one proceeding from the other, and all 
traceable to a primordial monad of life. 

The most recent advances in knowledge which offer 
the greatest evidence of the want of elementary 
characters in our modern elements are the Spectroscope, 
and the intense heat and light obtainable from elec¬ 
tricity. Several elements exposed to the intense heat 
of the latter show in the spectroscope that they are not 
simple bodies ; and spectroscopic examinations of rays of 
light from the sun and stars points out that while some 
of our elements are shown by their spectra to exist in 
them, other elements are certainly broken up in those 
regions of intense heat, and their constituents are dis¬ 
seminated and otherwise associated, thereby proving that 
in the solar regions such elements are compound bodies. 

Modern chemists have catalogued up to the present 
time about seventy substances as elements ; why should 
there be seventy elements, any more than thirty-two in 
1720, the days of Lavoisier—any more than sixty-four, 
as in 1876, or eighty next year perhaps ? There is no 
reason, and none have been suggested. Analogy, or 
the Kabala, might have pointed out a certain number, 
if elements there be; but there has been no such sug¬ 
gestion. The statement of seventy elements is a con¬ 
fession of ignorance, a temporary dogma, which the 
alchymists wisely abstained from propounding. Profs. 
Crookes and Faraday now say, “To decompose the 
metals, to re-form them, to change one into another, 
and to realise the once absurd notion of transmutation, 
are the problems given to the chemist of the future for 
solution.” And this is the Science which a braggart 
has called “the wise daughter of a foolish mother.” 


12 


But this is a world of progression ; every true science 
is progressive, and if such an one goes astray, it must 
retrace its steps and begin over again the toilsome 
ascent of the Mount of Wisdom, of Olympus, of Meru. 

It seems then that a true and ancient doctrine of 
Occult Science has been once more recognized, and 
bids fair to be the dogma of the future— Magna est 
Veritas, et prcevalebit. 

Some examples of Alchymic descriptions of processes 
entirely on the material plane should here be added. 
But space will not permit the quotation of long ex¬ 
amples, and it cannot be denied that the Alchymists 
were given to many words, with which the)'' covered up 
their meaning. 

From the Open Entrance to the Shut Palace of the King , 
by Eirenaeus Philalethes, is this clearly chemical 
passage. 

“Take four parts of the perfected Stone, either red or 
white ; melt them in a clear crucible. Take one part of this 
powdery mixture to ten parts of purified Mercury; heat the 
Mercury until it begin to crackle, then throw in your mixture, 
which will pierce it in the twinkling of an eye : increase your 
fire until all be melted, and you will have a medicine of an 
inferior order.” 

The following is from Jean d’Espagnet, and shews 
the use of Alchymic imagery. 

“ Take a red dragon, courageous and warlike, to whom no 
natural strength is wanting : take also seven or nine noble 
virgin eagles, whose eyes will not wax dull in the rays of the 
Sun : cast the Birds in with the Beast into a clear prison, shut 
them up strongly; under which let a bath be placed, that 
they may be incensed to fight by the warm vapour: in a short 
time they will enter upon a hard contention; until about the 
fiftieth day the eagles begin to tear the beast in pieces : this 
one dying will infect the whole prison with black poison, 
whereby the eagles also being injured, they will also be soon 
constrained to give up the ghost.” 

It may be easily perceived that this allegory is con¬ 
vertible into a description of chemical processes, thus:— 


i3 


v 


Take one part of a red powder a, and add seven or nine 
parts of the liquid b, which is volatile, i.e., able to fly; 
mix them, put the mixture into a glass retorts the clear 
prison ; hermetically seal the opening, that is, shut 
them up strongly ; set the vessel on a water bath, and 
then the heat will make the liquid attack the solid 
powder and dissolve it, and the result will be the pro¬ 
duction of a black substance, and both the red powder 
and the liquid will have lost their chemical characters. 

However limited the size of this pamphlet, space 
must be found for the beautiful verses put by Ainsworth 
into the mouth of the Sylph of Ruggieri; they differ but 
slightly from the authentic prose Canons of Jean 
d’Espagnet, recorded in the Hermetic Arcanum. They 
are as follows :— 

I. 

Within the golden portal 
Of the garden of the Wise, 

Watching by the seven sprayed fountain 
The Hesperian Dragon lies. 

Like the ever-burning Branches 
In the dream of holy seer; 

Like the types of Asia’s churches, 

Those glorious jets appear. 

Three times the magic waters 
Must the Winged Dragon drain, 

Then his scales shall burst asunder 
And his Heart be reft in twain. 

Forth shall flow an emanation, 

Forth shall spring a shape divine, 

And if Sol and Cynthia aid thee, 

Shall the charmed Key be thine. 

II. 

In the solemn groves of Wisdom, 

Where black pines their shadows fling 


H 


Near the haunted cell of Hermes, 
Three lovely flowerets spring : 

The Violet damask tinted 
In scent all flowers above; 

The milk white vestal Lily, 

And the purple flower of Love. 

Red Sol a sign shall give thee 

Where the sapphire violets gleam, 
Watered by the rills that wander 
From the viewless golden stream ; 
One Violet shalt thou gather,— 

But Ah—beware, beware !— 

The Lily and the Amaranth 
Demand thy chiefest care. 

III. 

Within the lake of crystal, 

Roseate as Sol’s first ray, 

With eyes of diamond lustre, 

A thousand fishes play. 

A net within that water, 

A net with web of gold, 

If cast where air bells glitter 
One shining fish shall hold. 

IV. 

Amid the oldest mountains 
Whose tops are next the Sun, 

The everlasting rivers 

Through glowing channels run ; 
Those mountains are of silver, 

Those channels are of gold, 

And thence the countless treasures 
Of the Kings of Earth are rolled. 
But far, far must he wander 
O’er realms and seas unknown 
Who seeks the Ancient Mountains 
Where shines the Wondrous Stone. 


I 5 


In the Mytho-Hermetic Dictionary an explanation, 
upon the material plane, is supplied by an anonymous 
author. 

The old Alchymic books, then, have been shewn to 
be definitely of chemical nature, let us now turn to the 
other aspect and note in them how clearly also they are 
religious works, and provide ethical standards. 

So long as modern criticism contented itself with 
abuse of the Alchymists as being either crazy or as 
charlatans, there was general surprise and much cheap 
indignation poured forth at the presumption and imper¬ 
tinence of the Alchymists in introducing so many of their 
volumes with pious reflections, and in interlarding them 
with prayers and religious imagery. 

When presently it became the fashion to insist that 
all Alchymy was theology, if not religion, then the 
professors were abused for including in their works 
obvious chemical formulae. 

But this treatment was at any rate less severe, than 
the reception which did meet the ancient Alchymist 
himself, who was on the one hand accused of being in 
league with the devil and so rendered liable to persecu¬ 
tion by the dominant clergy ; while on the other hand, 
every king and powerful baron was on the look out for 
him, to cajole the Alchymist into his dominions and 
power, there to convert him into a gold manufac¬ 
turing slave, working under threats of torture and 
death. 

A third class of critics, ever ready to abuse someone 
as a trade, combined the condemnations of the realist 
and of the idealist, by summing up the character of the 
unfortunate Alchymist, in asserting : “ That he was a 
limp, flabby being, without the courage of his convic¬ 
tions, offering sops at once to the Cerberus of the world, 
and to the Pope and his myrmidons.” 

The following are quotations from the works of 
eminent Alchymists, which illustrate their religious 
attitude. 


i6 


Geber:— 

“ Our stone has been described by me in a way agreeable 
to the Most High, the Blessed Sublime and Glorious God, as 
it has been infused by the grace of his goodness, who gives 
and withholds as it pleases him. Study with great industry 
and labour and by continued deep meditation : be sons of 
Truth and you shall have most excellent gifts of God.” 

Flamel:— 

“ God reserves to himself to reveal to a select few of such 
as fear and love him certain things of knowledge, which 
therefore ought not to be written.” 

In the book Aureus of Herfnes is the following 
passage:— 

“ My Son, before all things I admonish thee to fear God, 
in whom is thy strength ; whatsoever thou hearest consider 
it rationally.” “ It behoves thee to give thanks to God, who 
has bestowed liberally of his bounty to the wise, and -who 
delivers us from misery. I am proven by the fulness of his 
substance and his wonders, and humbly pray that while we 
live we may come unto him.” 

The Water Stone of the Wise. Anon :— 

“ In the first place the practice of Alchymy enables us' to 
understand, not merely the marvels of nature, but the nature 
of the Great Divine One himself in his unspeakable glory. 
It shadows forth in a wonderful manner how Man is an 
Image of a Divine Trinity; he represents the Union of Sub¬ 
stances, as well as the difference of Persons. It illustrates 
our purification from sin, and in brief all the Christian faith, 
and the reasons why man must pass through much tribulation 
and anguish and fall a prey to death before he can rise again 
to a new and higher life. All this we see in our Art as in a 
Mirror.” 

And then in the next sentence reverts to the practi¬ 
cal chemical part, adding— 

“ Secondly, its earthly use consists in changing all imper¬ 
fect metals, by means of a Tincture, into pure Gold, as I shall 
try to show.” 


i7 


From about the year 1650 the work of the real 
Alchymists has ceased to be given to the world, either 
by MSS. or by printed works. 

Private traditions have, however, always affirmed the 
permanence of both the theory and art of transmutation, 
and considerable evidence could be laid before a bond 
fide seeker, that even to-day the mystery exists and 
could be put into practice. 

So far as regards publication, however, there was a 
considerable period of Alchymic obscuration. This 
silence was at last broken by the appearance of a new 
school of philosophers, who espoused almost entirely the 
principle of demonstrating the reality of Alchymy upon 
the Higher planes. Many minor writers tried their 
pens upon this theme, and some of their works have 
made an ephemeral reputation. 

Dr. Kopp, in his History of Chemistry , takes this view ; 
and there is a masterly volume by E. A. Hitchcock, 
entitled Remarks upon Alchemy, where he shews that Man. 
was the “ Matter ” of some of the Alchymists. But the 
greatest success attended one who wrote a most valuable, 
learned and highly spiritual tractate upon the transcen¬ 
dental side of the writings of the old Alchymists. This 
Author, who was a clergyman of the Church of England, 
published his book anonymously, naming it An Enquiry 
into the Hermetic Mystery. So great, however, was the 
pressure put upon him by his friends and fellow Chris¬ 
tians, who were more orthodox than himself, that he 
was induced to destroy all that remained of the edition, 
and to call in all the copies already dispersed, so far as 
he could do so. 

The moral and spiritual aspects of the so-called 
“ Higher Alchymy ” have been of late years particularly 
illustrated by the late Anna Kingsford and her co¬ 
worker, Edward Maitland. The semi-esoteric, but not 
private, Hermetic Society which they conducted, and of 
which I was elected an Honorary Member, frequently 
listened to discussions upon the question of how far the 


i8 


ancient Alchymic books had a spiritual aspect, and on 
what lines a spiritual demonstration could be made of 
their hidden meaning. Anna Kingsford succeeded in 
many cases in drawing very real explanations of 
Alchymic language by means of Hermetic allegory, and 
she succeeded also in demonstrating an Alchymic mode 
of thought and allusions to transmutation on the 
ethical and higher planes from some of the possible but 
improbable narratives found in the early books of the 
Bible. 

For example, when alluding to a supposed derivation 
of the word “Alchemy” from Khemi—black earth— 
the alluvial land of the Nile banks, she refers to the 
connection between this word and Khemi or Cham, or 
Ham, one of the sons of the Biblical Noah. Of this 
Ham it is said he was a son, the offspring of Noah, but 
that he should be a servant to others. Ham, she 
asserted, referred to Matter as the lowest mode of Spirit, 
the opposite polar state of that substance of which 
manifested spirit is the highest aspect, named in the 
context Noah—a word comparable to the Greek nous , 
the higher intellectual mind. Ham as son to Noah, she 
taught, is an allegory of matter proceeding from spirit 
by downward steps, each stage more dense as it is more 
removed from its source: until the gross material 
cognizable by our senses is reached, this so-called 
Matter being well described as our servant, which is set 
to do the bidding of the human reason. 

The keynote of Alchymy upon this basis is of course 
the implied possibility of the material once again taking 
on the spiritual aspect by successive purifications, 
which may be suitably described by terms allied to the 
art of chemistry. 

Similar terms of art were, she pointed out, eminently 
suitable to describe the processes of purification by 
means of external forces and the influence of others, 
which are observable in the moral sphere of personality, 
and which are the essential aims of those schemes of 


19 


moral, ethical and spiritual purification which we call 
Religion. For Religion should mean the processes 
which relegate us or re-unite us fallible and erring 
creatures to our Higher Genius or, as some phrase it, to 
our God, or God-part. 

The common ideal of a God outside created man and 
created nature, is a somewhat modern notion, and was 
certainly not a universal concept in that ancient world 
which gave birth to so many of the greatest philoso¬ 
phies which really are the basis of all modern modes of 
thought. 

We must bear this present development of religious 
thought in mind as a departure from the antiquas vias 
when we seek comparisons and illustrations of the 
writings of the sages of a long past age. A neglect of 
this precaution has rendered some persons unable to 
grasp the reality of some suggested explanations of old 
allegories, which when the different basis of speculation 
has been noted, become much more clearly apparent. 

The Higher Alchymy then is almost identical with 
Religion, as distinct from Theology. The function of 
Religion and the Great Work of the Alchymist is 
Spiritualization. The separation of the subtle from the 
gross; the redemption of spirit, while still seated in 
matter, from the taint inevitable to the lowest planes of 
manifestation. Or again, the transmutation of the low 
forms of the human forces which are in man, in excess 
of the bodily needs of sheer subsistence, into the more 
refined emotions, the more delicate shades of feeling, 
the purer and higher manifestations of spirit which even 
the human entity is plainly susceptible of. 

From another point of view, and by the use again of 
other but allied terms, is perceived that aspect of men¬ 
tal purification and that form of transmutation into 
higher powers which is expressed by the ideal of Atone¬ 
ment, or as Anna Kingsford loved to write it, At¬ 
onement : the reunion of the spark to the flame, of the 
offspring to the parent, of the ray to the sun, of the 



I 


20 

personal thinker to the divine type of the Christos, the 
Higher Self, or the overshadowing Divine spirit ; from 
which each one of us has emerged upon a long course 
of experience to last for ages, until such time as we 
shall be again reunited by personal effort, enthusiasm, 
and self-sacrifice to the source of all emanation. To 
quote from the words of Edward Maitland :— 

“ The steps leading by inward purification to at-one-ment 
are the secret and method of the Christ, a term denoting the 
culmination of humanity by union with and immergence in 
divinity : this process is Regeneration, and from Genesis to 
the Apocalypse this is, in all its mystical books, the theme of 
the Bible, which thus becomes plainly to our eyes essentially 
a work on Alchymy.” 

The Alchymic expression of “ Solve et Coagula,” 
meaning “ volatilize and fix,” as two contrasted changes 
seen alike in chemistry, physics and in human develop¬ 
ment, are traceable in the Biblical allegories of the 
descent of divinity into man, by the putting on of coats 
of skin, when the human monad becomes material and 
fixed and suffers the consequent loss of the power of 
direct spiritual communion with the source divine; 
while on the other hand, we have the allegory of the 
Resurrection of the son of the divine one, who obtains 
re-union with the godhead by casting off the cloak of 
matter and returning to his father and to our Father ; 
and this resurrection is promised to all who seek it. 
By birth upon earth man’s thinker or Manas is fixed, 
coagulated and fettered by his environment. By death 
and by the throwing off of scoria, slag, refuse and his 
precipiolum, man is released from his grosser bondage 
and passes at once to a plane of the Arupic worlds, 
even if his final absorption into Nirvana, or into Para¬ 
dise be delayed, so that he may still further function as 
an entity of superior type and more exalted possibilities. 

It is not difficult to furnish other examples of the 
spiritualization of Alchymic terms on the lines of the 
Hermetic Science. Numberless quotations might be 


21 


selected in which, beside the important analogies already 
alluded to, the use of such terms as Sol and Luna, 
which in chemistry refer to Gold and Silver, these terms 
of art may be well understood as referring on the spiritual 
plane to the Soul and Body. Mercury, Sulphur and 
Salt too do clearly in many instances refer to spirit, 
illumination and substance. Again these three terms 
have been used as synonyms of some divine triads of 
spiritual force ; as Anna Kingsford has noted, the repre¬ 
sentation by these terms of the Trinity : a divine Father, 
Mercury or Spirit; a divine Mother—passive principle— 
salt ; and of a Son, or seed and efficient force in mani¬ 
festation by the Sulphur. As a last example the Black 
Dragon of putrefaction which by time and force can 
become fashioned into the White Swan of purity, has 
been clearly established as a beautiful symbol of the 
change in man, from a sin-laden reprobate to the 
purified personality—to the man purified by suffering, 
chastened by humility, and fit to commune with the 
holier ones. 

The relation of the Alchymy of the Mediaeval 
European world, being directly in relation to the 
Western or Hermetic system of philosophy, and so 
referring to both ethics and religion, can only be ex¬ 
pected to show indirect analogies with the Theosophic 
school of thought, which has been evolved from the 
special teachings of the Eastern world and more par¬ 
ticularly from those of the East Indies and the Buddhist 
nations of Thibet. Yet as the Hermetic doctrines are 
in general parallel to the Theosophic conceptions, as 
regards Man—the Microcosm, and the Universe—the 
Macrocosm, so many Alchymic dicta can be illustrated 
in Theosophic terminology. 

It is commonly stated that the mystical books of 
India do not bear any references to Alchymic processes, 
but this is not quite exact, as will be shown by a study 
of the book called Sarva Darsana Samgraha. Some portions 
of this work of chemical philosophy refer to the inter- 


22 


actions of “ mercury ” and some substance, apparently 
“ mica.” The word “ Sulphur ” does not appear to be 
used ; but this variation is of no importance, because 
the European Alchymists by their word “ Sulphur,” 
did not mean what chemists now refer to by that name. 

I make no claim to have investigated Sanscrit 
authorities farther than this; but my learned friend, 
Madame Blavatsky, certainly told me that the ancient 
books of India contained certain other treatises upon 
transmutation ; although the Indian magical arts tended 
more in other directions; less in the direction of wealth 
production, and more in manifestations of power over 
the forces of Nature, such as the phenomena of thought 
transference, the stimulation of the growth of plants, 
the disintegration of solid bodies and their precipitation 
into previous forms, and the higher processes of the 
interaction of minds, and intellectual achievements 
by communion with higher and supra-mundane intelli¬ 
gences. 

However this may be, it seems manifest that the 
writings of the mediaeval European true Alchymists 
enshrine a doctrine at once exalted, fascinating in 
formulation, eloquent in language, and worthy of the 
serious study of such of us moderns who have any 
leisure to spare from the time devoted to the race for 
wealth and fin de siecle respectability. 


A series of volumes Collectanea Hermetica is in course 
of publication by the T. P. Society. This series is 
edited by Wynn Westcott, Supreme Magus of the 
Rosicrucian Society in England, and Master of the 
Quatuor Coronati Lodge, and will include many 
Alchymic treatises. The first volume is the Hermetic 
Arcanum. 


Women’s Printing Society, Limited, 66, Whitcomb Street, W.C. 
