iy I tol TU ki tka, te, 3 
A hay ie gre kr sine Tw ott] 
+ My O ME vss se A 





x 


Dr. W. 





NN. WESTGOTT. 
1002 








Che History of Astrology, 


WM. WYNN WESTCOTT, 
S.W., Soc, Ros. in Angha, IX”. 


Tne nations of the ancient world were all more or less of opinion 
that the movements of the heavenly bodies, the occurrence of 
eclipses, and the appearance of comets exercised an influence over 
the fate of the human race, and the destinies of men. They 
feared the extraordinary manifestations of the sky, and saw por- 
tents destined for their instruction in the eclipses of the sun and 
moon, and in notable conjunctions of the planets. Eclipses of the 
sun especially, which caused a temporary darkness, seemed to 
them to be warnings of the anger of their gods, and signs of coming 
punishment. 

The Greeks and the earlier Romans do not a 
Greeks and Roman literature can show, to have practise 














thought seems rather to hav 


| e had its origin among the Chaldeans 
of Babylonia, from whom it came to the notice of the more 


but professors of the Chaldean magical art of 2 rology spread 


among them, and we find astrological notions become notable 


in the later years of the Roman Republic, and were well marked 


in the curious jumble of Eastern and Western science which 


existed in the third and fourth centuries of our era. 

The Greeks made a considerable study of Astronomy, and so 
were in a position to understand the claims made by the Chaldeans 
for their views of the influence of the stars upon human destinies. 
Having learned the elements of the strange astrologic doctrines, 
the later Greeks sought for references to them in their own earlier 
-writers ; and especially in the venerable works of Homer and 
Hesiod, possibly because’ they disliked to acknowledge that any 
sort of learning was not in the possession of their ancestors. 

So far as can be judged the deities of the early Greeks were not 














| e earlier Greeks looked upon the Sun as driving his 
chariot through the sky, but the Sun was not an Olympian God, 
and held a minor rank in the earliest Pantheon. Venus, the 
planet, was calle esperus, as tne evening star, and there was 





> 


A 


smi 





| y- by | 
erman savant, in his treatise on Mythology, that the E ER 
Greek myths were few, and they were not closely related to their 
religion. 

In the Iliad of Homer, neither the Sun nor Moon is spoken of 
as driving a chariot, but in the Odyssey Aurora, the Dawn is so 
described. 

According to the much later Roman author Manilius, the chariot 
of the Sun had four horses, and the chariot of the Moon only two. 

Aristotle is the earliest writer whose works are extant in Greek, 
who mentions the circle of the Zodiac. Euripides, however, 

| ghter of Chiron, as eing able to divine future 
events by means of observ s of the stars. | 
t is of course true that recent writers on Greek myths have 
asserted relations between the incidents of these myths and astro- 
nomical facts, and have explained that Greek and Roman religions 
ideals were connected with the worship of the Sun, Moon, and 
Stars. 


The probably mythical Orpheus is said to have first taught 


es Z ji 
Astronomy to the Greeks. 


There are t ree lande which contest the claim to the earliest 


















o uncer ain area, to which succeeded loman civilization 
with which the Chaldeans and Hebrews were later associated. 
China also y | mown antiquity for its 
astronomic learning, and Astrology has always flourished among 
“ the Chinese. There are really no data yet discovered which can 
prove which land was the source of Astronomy; most probably the 
study was undertaken not only separately, but at much the same 
early period. 

The Akkadian or pre Chaldean civilization is only of recent 
discovery, and has been obtained from studies of excavations in 
the regions of Babylonia. 

From literary evidence derived from antiquity we have some 
proofs of very early astronomic observations made by all these 
ancient nations. The old Greek and Roman authors refer the 
source of Astronomy variously to Egypt, to Chaldea, and to Persia, 
and the papyri recently discovered in Egypt also show astronomi- 
cal allusions; while of course the py Eg 



























searches into Sanscrit nem AV students of Eastern 
lore to the belief that the inhabitants F India in the earliest times 


E 
— According to Isaac Meyer there is reason to think that the 
Akkadian observations of the stars date back to aout d: 4310 B.C., 
1 ured 1 






3 


The earliest allusion to actual divination by the stars in Greek 
literature is found in the “ Timeus™ of Plato. Eudoxus became 
acquainted with Chaldean Astrology. 

Diodorus the historian, who flourished about 80 s.c., states that 
the Chaldeans foretold the death of Antigonus in 315 p.c. 

Vitruvius states that Astrology was introduced into (Greece by 
Berosus, who settled in Cos, and held a school there. Berosus 
was a Chaldean and was a contemporary of Alexander the Great. 

From his time Astrology become naturalized among the Greeks. 
It was much cultivated by the Stoic philosophers. 

From Greece the study passed naturally to Italy and to Rome. 
Cato the Elder refers to it. 

Cneius Octavius had an astrologic figure found on his 
when he was slain in the days of Marius, 

Sylla was advised by the Chaldeans. Cicero speaks of divina- 
tion received by Pompey and Crassus. Lucian also states that 
Julius Cesar noted the revolutions of the stars. 

Nigidius Figulus was famous as an astrologer in the later years 
of the Roman Republic, and foretold the supremacy of Augustus 
Cesar. | 

These Roman astrologers became generally known as Chaldeans, 


















fame in the early century of the Empire, but later were restrained 
by legal decisions, from the overt practice of their Art. 

“ Tlieogenes, a citizen of Apollonia, was consulted by Augustus 
Cesar. 

Thrasyllus was the astrologer 
consuited by Nero, 

Ptolomeus advised Otho, and Seleneus gave warnings to 
Vespasian. These facts are narrated by the historian Tacitus. 
The astrologer Heliodorus was the adviser of the Emperor Valens. 

Juvenal mentions the a: gers on several occasions. 
| iristian fathers all condemned judicial astrology, 
among these ‘Tertullian, Augustine and Isidorus were most 
famous. 

Apart from mythological fancies, the first man of whom it can 
be proved that he had astronomical knowledge is Thales, a citizen 
of Miletus, and the founder of the Ionic system of philosophy ; he 
died about 546 B.c. He predicted an eclipse, the horrid darkness 
of which stopped a battle between the Medes under Cyaxares, and 
the Lydians led by Alyattes, 

He was believed to have gained his knowledge of y 
bodies from Egyptian sources ; Josephus and Plutareh both say he 
went to Egypt to study astronomy. 

The Greeks seem to have recognised a meteorologie astrologv, ` 
but not a divinatory form. The chief outflow of Chaldean lore 
over Greece was during the first three centuries before Christ. | 
The Greek philosophers had good reasons for adopting its notions, 
first because their Oracles had ceased to speak and they needed an 
alternative mode of divine gui 


ar; his son was 





of Tiberius 




























+ 


the idea of a personal genius for each man, and so took kindly to 
the astrological ideal of a planetary guardianship and influence, 
and lastly as many Greeks taught that uls eat 
became stars, so ny stars must have a relation to men still 
living on earth; this idea especially was related to the stars of the 
Via Lactea or Milky Way. The poet Manihus has left some 
verses on this subject. 

The astrology of the early Romans was an intricate and difficult 
1; its professors were called the Mathematici. 
time throughout the years even to Kepler, who died 1630, it may 
be said that every astronomer was also an astrologer to some 
extent. From his time the tendency to renounce astrologie claims 
has continually increased, until at the present day it is rare to find 




















Turanian Chinese history. From Chaldea logy came to 
Persia and Asia Minor, to Greek culture, to Roman cities, and to 
| the Jews who overspread all these parts after the destruction of 

Jerusalem. 

It is said that the Arabs knew of the science even before the days 
of Mohammed; the Saracens carried it to Spain about 711 a.D. and 
the Moors from North Africa brought it afresh to Western Europe 
by their invasion of Spain in 1287. From the seventh to the thir- 
teenth century the minds of these Arabian-descended conquerors in 


great renown of Messalah, Albumazar, 
Ibn Yunis. 

Our English Astrolo; 
East, and from the Moors through Spain ; 
only from the time of the invention of printing that we have many 
records of the science. Some of the earliest volumes treating_of 

rology | 3 Co $ oints as our treatises 
written to-day, and most astrological authors of the last two hundred 
years, have merely copied one from another; even in our own times 


the most recent books tell us little more than do the works of Lill 


Gadbury, Salmon, Heydon, and Coley. 

One recent new departure may be noted, by W. G. Old who has 
introdueed a mode of rectifying nativities by the Pre- Natal E - 
which he claims to be more accurate than tl 




















t) 


historian of the Jews asserts that Adam was instructed by divine 
inspiration in Astrology | 
e wrote about a.p. 66. The annals of t umpire, and 
the history of the Mohammedan rulers in Asia, Africa and Spain, 
teem with narratives of astrological predictions, and supernatural 
warnings which helped to arouse the enthusiasm of these hardy and 
superstitious warriors. Osman the First, the founder of the Otto- 
man Empire in 1299, is said to have been much guičed by a sheik 
who professed Astrology. Timour or Tamerlane, the Tartar Chief, 
was induced to make war with Bajaz 1e Sultan of Turkey about 
the year 1400, ing received by the Astrologer Abdullah 
Lissan, and defeated him, as had been foretold. 

The sudden death of Murad the Second about 1451, who was a 
Sultan of Turkey, and in good health, was prophesied by the astro- 
logic divination of a dervish; he died three days after. 

The glories of the reign of Mohammed the Second was foretold 
by the astrologers; he ruled from 1452 to 1480; he it was who 
took Constantinople. An astrologer foretold with correctness the 
fates of Selim the First, 1520, and of his son Suleyman who was 
born in 900th year of the Hegira. In the reign of Selim the 
Second, 1572, there appeared a comet regarding which the astro- 
logers prophesied great floods, which subsequently occurred, caus- | 
ing immense damage to three cities. | 

Mohammed the Third received a prophecy from a dervish that 
he would die in fifty six days, and it so happened in 1608. 

Murad the Fourth was warned by a sheik astrologer in 1640 that 
he would have an unpropitious fate at an early date, and he did die 
according to the terms of the warning in 1640. 

We possess a record of a celebrated astrologer Giamasp, sur- 
named Al Hakim the wise, a physician wno flourished in the reign 
of King Darius Hystaspes of Persia, about 500 p.c, He is said to | 
have foretold the coming of Jesus, the future founding of a great | 


religion by Mahomet, and that the Magian faith should be aban- | 
doned: see tho Classic work of Dr. Hyde on the ancient Persians. 

The Old Testament has several references to astrology, and to 
soothsayers who judged of human events, divining them by the 
stars. These refer to the Chaldean philosophers, who were called 
Magi. Consult these references :—Isiah xlvii. 18.—" Let now the 
astrologers stand up, and save thee from these things." Daniel i. 
20.—The King found Daniel better than all the astrologers in his 
realm. Daniel ii. 27.—Daniel asks the King if the astronomers 
cannot show the secret to the King. Daniel iv. 7.—The astrologers 
failed to explain a dream. Daniel v. 7, 11.—The King calls on the 
astrologers to explain a writing. Genesis xli. 8.—The magicians 
are called on to explain a dream of Pharoah. 

In the New Testament, consult:—Acts xix. 19.—Men who 
possessed curious books burned them before Paul. 

As regards Divination in general, this magical art is represented 
by three Hebrew words—Maguesem, Kasiphim, and Lachash. In 
Numbers xxii. 7.—The elders of Moab and of Midian have rewards 













G 


for Divination. In Deuteronomy xviii. 9-10.—Diviners are con- 
demned, and the Jews are to consider them as an abomination. 
In Ezekiel xii. 24.— The Lord denies the use of Divination to the 
people of Israel. In Ezekiel xiii. 7, 23.—Diviners are forbidden, 

In the New Testament we find a note in Acts xvi. 16.— A damsel 
has powers of divination, she brought her masters much money; 
Paul cast out the spirit, and she lost her powers. 

In the Bible there are many references to the stars, planets and 
Zodiac. Mazzaroth is a word found in Job xxxviii. 32, and is now 
believed to refer to the Signs of the Zodiac. Genesis i. 14.—" Let 
the lights of the firmament ..... be for signs,” Deuteronomy 
Xxxili. 14.—* Blessed be the Lord for the precious things put forth 
by the moon.” The Pleiades, called Kimah, and the constellation 
Orion as Kesib, are found mentioned in Job ix. 9 Orion appears 
to have been also a name applied to Nimrod the mighty hunter 
ruler. 

Amos v. 8 speaks of the seven stars, rion. 

The name Arcturus, called Ash and Aish is believed by some to 
be the stars of Ursa major, and not the star now so called. In 
Job xxxviii. 32, Arcturus and his sons are referred to, 

Jupiter, as Zeus, either as pagan god, or as a planet, is referred to 
in Acts xiv. 12; and in 2 Maccabæus vi. 2, we read that Antiochus 
sent to the Jews a messag | ly Temple was to be dedi- 
cated to Jupiter Olympus. 

In Judges v. 20 we read.—'' The stars in their courses foucht 
against Bisera "; which seems to imply an astrologic ideal of stellar 
influence over the fates of men. 

ucifer, the morning star or planet which paled before the rising 
sun, and in Hebrew called Hilal, was the Greek Eosphoros. This 
<-name was not applied to Satan until Jerome so used it; Milton 
adopted it. The Moon was called Irak and Levanah, or Labanah, 
and was considered the ruler of night. 

The Sun was named Shemesh, and Chamah, and Cheres; and 
was called the ruler of day. 

The Hebrew word for star in general was Kukab, but this word 
was also applied to the planet Venus, especially by the Kabalistic 
rabbis of the middle ages. 

I may mention a few notable astrologers individually :— 

Claudius Ptolemy lived at Alexandria in Egypt, the great centre 
of learning in the first century, a.D. His works illustrated | 
the earlier systems of Astronomy, which have come down to us, and 
many astrological treatises are extant w ar his name. He 
was the eminent student who rescued the labours of Hipparchus, 
who lived 200 years before him, from oblivion. His most famous 





































volume is the '' Almagest,” and from thi | later authors 
have largely extracted the treatises called ‘‘ Tetrabiblos” and 





ipartite," or the Four Books of Astrology. There is a 
edition, printed at Basle in 1551, still to be found in a 
few libraries. 


The Venerable Bede is said to have studied astrology; he died 





7 


Albumazar, a famous Arab astrologer flourished in a.p. 800. 

Roger Bacon who lived from 1214 to 1292 was much addicted to a 
Eino. 

About 1300 a Franciscan monk, named Guido Bonatus, was a 
famous Italian astrologer; he divined that his patron, the Earl of 
Monserrat, should fight a certain battle with success, but should be 
wounded in the knee, and so it fell out in both events. He wrote 
“De Astronomia,” tractatus x.; these were printed at Basle 
in 1550, 

Henry Cornelius Agrippa was one of the most famous of the old 
occult philosophers and his works are full of astrological ideas. He 
was born, 1486, at Cologne, he was astrologer to Francis the First 
of France about 1524 and lost that office because he foretold un- 
favourable-events. His three volumes on Occult_Phi hy were 
published about 1530. He 1s said to have formed in Paris and in 
London secret societies of astrologic and alchymie students, which 
some think formed one of the sources of the rise in Freemasonry. | 
He died in 1535. A later fourth volume appears to be spurious. 

Florent de Villiers was famous as an astrologer at the court of 
Louis the Eleventh of France about 1465; he carried on a school 
of astrology and King Charles the Seventh, the father of Louis the 
Eleventh, is said to have attended these classes. 

Lord Burleigh calculated the nativit 















ueen zla 






= Toto 
who was certain y to some extent a charlatan ; he lived from 1527 | 
to 1608. 

Michael Seott, who lived in the thirteenth century, was famous 
for his astrological knowledge and was much d 
Emperor Fr 
as he ha | Tivined the manner of his « own lenih 
by the fall of a sne and this oceurred in a church by the falling | 
of a stone from the roof. 

Julius Firmicus Maternus wrote an astrologic treatise in Venice, 
1497. Valentine Naibod, adua, foretold danger to h 
from a sword wound, and many years after was murdered by 
thieves in his house—they stabbed him. He wrote “ De celo et 
terra," libri 3, Venice, 1578. 

Nostradamus (Michel de Notre Dame) was one of the most 
famous astrologers of France; he was the physician of King 
Henry the Second, and became especially notable about 1555. 
His astrologic prophesies were written in a thousand stanzas of 
four lines each. Catherine de Médicis made him her special 
favourite. He died in 1566 as physician to King Charles the 
Ninth ; the best edition of his “ Prophecies'' is that of Amsterdam, 
1668. 

Antiochus Tibertus flourished in the Romagna of Italy in the 
oa century, and was astrologer to Prince Malatesta of 

Imini 

Elias Ashmole of Oxford, the famous antiquarian, speaks of the 
Annual Astrologers’ Feast, and mentions the Rev. M. Butler, 


innual Astrologers Feast, 
















5 


Saunders, Town Clerk of London, Thomas Vauglian, Sir Edmund 
Dering, and Wm. Backhouse as noted astrologers. 

The astrologie works of William Lilly are still consulted ; he 
was born in 1602. He was a great admirer of the “ Ars Notoria " 
of Agrippa. He published an astrological almanac from 1644 
until his death in 1681. In 1651 he issued two hieroglyphical 















£ 5 and 1666, and he even fell under sus- 
picion of having been privy to the cause of the Great Fire of 
London. King Charles the First also consulted Lilly when im- 
prisoned in Carisbrooke Castle in 1647, and was a vised to travel 
< eastward for safety, but instead he journeyed to the West with 























strology,” edition 1647, there is a valuable catalogue of astro- 
logical books. 

John Gadbury was a_pupil of William Lilly. He became a 
famous astrologer and published a series of almanacs; he died in 
1691. He published his “ Genethlialogia, or Doctrine of Nativi- 
ties,’ in 1658; “Celestial Ambassador,” 1656; ‘ Nativity of 
King Charles the First," in 1659, and the '' Nature of Prodigies " 
in 1660. 

Francis Barrett was the author of “ The Magus,” published in 
London in 1801; it is a compendium of the oceult lore of his time. 
The printing of the Hebrew words teems with errors. 

In 1828 there appeared “ The Manual of Astrology,” by Raphael, 
which contains coloured prophetic pictures ; it is a sound and com- 
prehensive astrological treatise. 

“The Familiar Astrologer,” 1849, and “The Astrologer of the 
Nineteenth Century," 1825, were also published by this anonymous 
astrologer. 

It has been asserted that Sir Isaac Newton began his study of 
astronomy on account of the interest which astrological books nad 
aroused in his mind. He was born in Lincolnshire on December 
95 (old style), 1642; he showed from the laws formulated by 
Kepler the nature of the forces which conduct the planets in their 
courses. 

The astronomical labours of Tycho Brahe, who died 1601, were 
tinctured by astrological ideas, za his successor Kepler, who died 
in 1630, was also a student of the works of the old astrologers. 

Geronimo Cardan, born at Paris in 1501, has left a large 
number of volumes which testify to his researches into the laws 
of astrology ; he was both an M.A. and an M.D. 

A short list of noted English astrological books is here added. 
It includes the volumes most frequently referred to :— 

Lilly, William. “ Christian Astrology,” 1647. 

« Christian Astrology Modestly Treated,” 1659. 
Eland, ©. “A Tutor to Astrologie,” 1670. 
Gadbury, J. ‘‘ Thesaurus Astrologi,” 1674. 
Coley, Henry. “ Clavis Astrologie elimata," 1676. 














9 


Partridge, John. “Opus Reformatum,” 1694; + Defectio Geni- 
turarum,” 1697. 

Ball, R. “ Astrology Improved,” 1728. 

Derham, Wm. “ Astro-Theology,” 1755. 

Heydon, ©. “The New Astrologie,” 1786. 

ss The Conjurer's Magazine,” 1792. 

Wilson, John. “ A complete Dictionary of Astrology,” 1819. 

Ashmand, J. M. “The Tetrabiblos of Claudius Ptolemy,” 1822. 

s The Spirit of Partridge,” 1825. 

Raphael. ' The Astrologer of the Nineteenth Century,” 1825. 

Varley, John. “ Zodiacal Physiognomy," 1828. 

Zadkiel. ““ The Horoscope,” 1834, 1841. 

Zadkiel. “The Introduction to Astrology,” 1885. 

Ebn Shemaya. “ The Star,” 1839. 

Simmonite, W. J. “ The Prognostic Astronomer,” 1851. 

Hermes. “The Astrologer's Vade Mecum,” 1851. 

Zadkiel. “ The Grammar of Astrology,” 1852. 

“ A Plea for Urania,” 1854 (by C. Cook). 

Wilson, John, * The lost Solar System of the Ancients,” 1856. 

Wilson, John. “ The Tetrabiblos of Ptolemy.” 

Zadkiel. '' Handbook of Astrology,” 1861-62. 

Christian, Philip. “ Histoire de la Magie,” Paris (1870 ?). 


Kingsford, Anna. “ Astrology Theologized," 1886. 
. Raphael. ' Horary As ry : 

Simmonite, W. J. Astrology,” 1890. 

Simmonite, W. J. “The Daily Guide,” by Jno. Storey, 1891. 

Pearce, A. J. “ Zadkiel's Science of the Stars," 1892. 

Old, W. Gorn. ' Lectures on Astrology,” 1898. 

Charubel. ‘ The Degrees of the Zodiac Symbolized,” 1898. 

Green, H. S. “The Theoretical Value of the Degrees of the 
Zodiac,” 1898. 

Old, W. Gorn. “ New Manual of Astrology,” 1898. 

Raphael, R. Cross. ‘The Guide to Astrology,” 2 vols., 1877, 
4 editions. 

Hindoo Astrology :—'' The Siddhanta Siromani,” Calcutta, 1860. 
“The Brihat Sanhita of Vahari Mihira,” 1884. “The Brihat 
Jataka," 1885. Brennand, W. “Hindoo Astronomy,” 1896. 

A very sympathetic reference to Astrology as the forerunner 
of astronomy will be found in “Old and New Astronomy” by 
Richard A. Proctor, London, 1892. He says—'' None of the races 
of antiquity rose above a certain level of civilization without develop-. 
ing a belief in the influences of the heavenly bodies, and wi 
evising systems for reading and ruling the planets. 

According to Lalande it was not until the time of Saint Clement 
of Alexandria in the second century, that natural became distin- 
gnished from judicial astrology, and astronomy from astrology. 

Astrology then has been a science from the earliest times, and 

made it a study, or 


eminent men of all ages have either have | 


















sought the advice of astrologers. Its attractiveness has led many 
men to a serious study of astronomy, a more tangible science, 


10 


which has developed into enormous importance. That Astronomy 
has supplanted Astrology is certain, and yet astrological ideals are 
still very much of interest to a great number of people. The hope 
of a possible science of knowing the unknown is doubtless at the 
root of the matter. Man is always seeking to know what is hidden, 
and the renewed interest in all forms of occult science is one of the 
phenomena of our own times. 

Men and women are no longer persecuted for occult learning, but 
they are still subject to mild rebuke, and some public slights if they 
openly avow a hope of the possibility of any form of divination, a 
proceeding condemned by the Christian faith. 

This objection is made light of by many students, because history 
shews that all forms of even recognised science were at one time 
condemned by the Church; they have not forgotten the persecu- 
tions of Galileo. It is still an open question whether there is any 
stellar or planetary influence upon man, beyond the recognised 
action of the sun and moon. All other heavenly bodies are 
certainly very far off and have hardly any appreciable scientific 
action upon our earth and must have still less on individual man. 
Still gradation of influence is more in keeping with nature’s laws 
than is abrupt termination or absence of influence. Occasional 
successful astrological results point to the exi » basis 
truth in t 

rofessors certain! | 
from being accurate. modern science can shew the astrologer, 
y some ultra-astrological explanation, why some of his results have. 
been correct, the astrologers may claim to believe that the methods 
and principles of divination have some basis in the workings of 
nature. 




















M 
