THE 

COMPLETE 
GOLDEN  DAWN 
SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ISRAEL  REGARDIE 


FOREWORD  BY 

CHRISTOPHER  S.  HYATT,  PH.D. 


Number 


NEW  FALCON  PUBLICATIONS 


TEMPE,  ARIZONA  U.S.A. 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Copyright  © 1984  THE  ISRAEL  REGARDIE  FOUNDATION 
Photographs  and  Drawings  Copyright  © 1984  FALCON  PRESS 


All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  book,  in  part  or  in  whole,  may  be  reproduced,  transmitted,  or  utilized, 
in  any  form  or  by  any  means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the  publisher,  except  for 
brief  quotations  in  critical  articles,  books  and  reviews. 

International  Standard  Book  Number:  1-56184-037-8 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  83-81664 

Master  Index  by  Jim  Strain 

First  Edition  1984 
Second  Printing  1985 
Third  Printing  1987 
Fourth  Printing  1990 
Fifth  Printing  1994 


The  paper  used  in  this  publication  meets  the  minimum  requirements  of  the  American  National 
Standard  for  Permanence  of  Paper  for  Printed  Library  Materials  Z39.48-1984 

Address  all  inquiries  to: 
email:  info@newfalcon.com 
website:  http://www.newfalcon.com 

New  Falcon  Publications 
1739  East  Broadway  Road  #1-277 
Tempe,  AZ  85282  U.S.A. 

(or) 

320  East  Charleston  Blvd. 

#204-286 

Las  Vegas,  NV  89104  U.S.A. 


2 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


DR.  W.  WYNN  WESTCOTT 


3 


4 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ISRAEL  REGARDIE 

Born  — November  17,  1907  — Died  March  10, 1985 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


6 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE 

COMPLETE 

GOLDEN  DAWN 
SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Other  Titles  From  New  Falcon  Publications 
What  You  Should  Know  About  the  Golden  Dawn 
The  Eye  in  the  Triangle:  An  Interpretation  of  Aleister  Crowley 
The  Legend  of  Aleister  Crowley 
The  Golden  Dawn  Audio  CDs 
by  Israel  Regardie 

The  Enochian  World  of  Aleister  Crowley 

by  Aleister  Crowley,  Lon  Milo  DuQuette  & Christopher  S.  Hyatt,  Ph.D. 

Cosmic  Trigger:  Final  Secret  of  the  Illuminati 
Prometheus  Rising 

TSOG:  The  Thing  That  Ate  the  Constitution  by 
Robert  Anton  Wilson 

Undoing  Yourself  With  Energized  Meditation  & Other  Devices 

Secrets  of  Western  T antra 

The  Psychopath's  Bible 

To  Lie  Is  Human 

The  Rosary  of  the  Qabalah 

by  Christopher  S.  Hyatt,  Ph.D. 

Sex  Magic,  T antra  & Tarot:  The  Way  of  the  Secret  Lover  Aleister 
Crowley ’s  Illustrated  Goetia 

Taboo:  Sex,  Religion  & Magick 

by  Christopher  S.  Hyatt,  Ph.D.  & Lon  Milo  DuQuette 
Rebels  & Devils:  The  Psychology  of  Liberation 

Christopher  S.  Hyatt,  Ph.D.,  with  William  S.  Burroughs,  Robert  Anton  Wilson,  et  al. 

Urban  Voodoo 

by  S.  Jason  Black  & Christopher  S.  Hyatt,  Ph.D. 

Ceremonial  Magic  and  the  Power  of  Evocation 
Kabbcdistic  Cycles  and  the  Mastery  of  Life  by 
Joseph  C.  Lisiewski,  Ph.D. 

Info-Psychology 

by  Timothy  Leary,  Ph.D. 

Beyond  Duality 

by  Laurence  Galian 

Condensed  Chaos:  An  Introduction  to  Chaos  Magick 
Prime  Chaos:  Adventures  in  Chaos  Magick  by  Phil  Hine 
PsyberMagick 

The  Chaos  Magick  Audio  CDs 
by  Peter  J.  Carroll 
Zen  Without  Zen  Masters 
by  Camden  Benares 

Monsters  & Magical  Sticks:  There’s  No  Such  Thing  as  Hypnosis? 
by  Steven  Heller,  Ph.D.  & Terry  Steele  Shaping 
Formless  Fire 

by  Stephen  Mace 
Infernal  Texts 

by  Stephen  Sennitt 

For  the  latest  information  on  availability  and  prices,  please  visit  our  website 
at  http://www.newfalcon.com 


8 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


DEDICATION 

It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  dedicate  this  book  to: 

CARR  P.  COLLINS,  Jr. 
who  has  been  of  invaluable  help, 
and  to 

CHRISTOPHER  S.  HYATT 

without  whose  counsel  and  aid  this  book  would  never  have  seen  the  light, 


10 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


MASTER  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTORY  SECTION 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  27 

A NOTE  ON  STYLE  29 


PERSISTENCE  AND  DETERMINATION 31 

FOREWORD  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  33 


INTRODUCTION 37 

VOLUME  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

VOLUME  ONE THE  MAGICAL  ALPHABET 

VOLUME  TWO THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  DIVINATION 

VOLUME  THREE THE  CORE  OF  THE  TRADITION 

VOLUME  FOUR BASIC  TECHNIQUES 

VOLUME  FIVE MAGICAL  FUNDAMENTALS 

VOLUME  SIX OUTER  ORDER  RITUALS  AND  COMMENTARIES 

VOLUME  SEVEN RITUALS  OF  THE  R.R.  ET  A.C.  WITH 

THOSE  OF  WAITE’S  FELLOWSHIP 

VOLUME  EIGHT  OTHER  ORDER  RITUALS  AND  MAGICAL  DOCTRINES 

VOLUME  NINE  THE  TAROT 

VOLUME  TEN  THE  ENOCHIAN  SYSTEM 


12 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  ONE 
THE  MAGICAL  ALPHABET 

Introduction 1 

Initiation  5 

The  Western  Esoteric  Tradition 6 

Self  Initiation 8 

A Cautionary  Note 12 

The  Proper  Attitude  Toward  Mind-Body 17 

The  Magical  Alphabet  22 

The  Magic  of  the  Hebrew  Alphabet  25 

The  Mysticism  of  the  Alphabet 26 

Concerning  Hebrew  Pronunciation 29 

Introduction  to  the  Kaballah  Unveiled  31 

Concerning  the  Hierarchies  43 

Tetragrammaton 54 

On  the  Least  Amount  of  Work  Actually  Necessary 59 

Elitism  61 

IMPORTANT  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Albath 34 

Aiq  Bekar 35 

Sephirotic  Hierarchies 46-48 

Planetary  Hierarchies 48-49 

Elemental  Hierarchies  50-51 

AHIH-IHVH 55 

Three  Trinities 57 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  TWO 

THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  DIVINATION 

Divination  1 

Fundamentals  of  Tarot,  Geomancy  and  Astrology 3 

The  Tarot 3 

Notes  on  the  Tarot 8 

Tarot  Trumps 12 

Notes  on  Geomancy 27 

Astrology 32 

Esoteric  Astrology 33 

Introductory  Paper  on  the  Tattwas 35 

The  Tattwas  of  the  Eastern  School 41 

Course  of  the  Tattwas 44 

The  Tattwa 45 

Meditation  and  Mastery  Over  the  Tattwas  47 

Cure  of  Diseases  48 

Forecasting  the  Future  49 

Alchemy  50 

Alchemy  by  Hans  Nintzel 52 

The  Vision  of  the  Universal  Mercury 61 

Translation  of  and  Notes  on  the  Mercury  Paper  63 

IMPORTANT  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Anagrams  of  Tarot 4 

Selection  of  Significator 6 

Rough  Sketches  of  Tarot  Cards  by  Israel  Regardie  [©1934]  10-12 

Acquisitio 29-30 

Table  of  Astrological  Corrections 34 

Tattwa  Attributions  45 

The  Flying  Mercury 61 


14 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  THREE 
THE  CORE  OF  THE  TRADITION 

The  Pillars 1 

The  Pillars  II  2 

The  Pillars  III 6 

The  Words  of  the  Departed  Spirit  Osiris,  Son  of  God 9 

The  Pillars  IV  10 

The  White  Pillar 10 

The  Black  Pillar  13 

The  Garden  of  Eden  Before  the  Fall  14 

The  Garden  of  Eden  After  the  Fall 15 

On  the  General  Guidance  and  Purification  of  the  Soul 19 

Shem  ha-Mephoresch  — The  72  Fold  Name 21 

The  72  Angelic  Names  and  Their  Meanings 24 

The  Magical  Images  of  the  Decans 26 

Hodos  Chamelionis  31 

The  Microcosm-Man  36 

Task  Undertaken  by  the  Adeptus  Minor 43 

Of  Traveling  in  the  Spirit  Vision 44 

Concerning  the  Microcosms  of  the  Macrocosm 45 

Of  Obsession,  Trance,  Death 47 

On  the  Work  to  be  Undertaken  Between  Portal  and  Adeptus  Minor 47 

The  Tree  of  Life  in  the  Aura 55 

The  Knowledge  Lectures 63 

Meditations 87 

Developmental  Exercises 89 

Sensitivity  Training 91 

Holy  Ground 93 

The  Qabalistic  Cross 94 

The  Holy  Spirit 95 

The  Cleansing  Breath 95 

Prithivi  96 

Vayu  96 

Love 97 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


SOME  IMPORTANT  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

The  Two  Pillars  1 

Pillar  Diagrams  7-8 

Symbolic  Representation  of  YHVH 21 

Hexagram  of  the  Angels  of  Aries 23 

Seventy-Two  Angelic  Names 24-26 

Triangular  Permutations  of  YHYH  30-31 

Color  Scales  32 

Color  Scales  in  the  Four  Worlds 35-36 

Elements  of  the  Four  Fingers 37 

The  Planets  and  the  Cranial  Apertures  40 

The  Sephiroth  on  the  Human  Body 50 

Diagrams  for  the  Knowledge  Lectures 63-86 

Pentagrams 68 

Serpent  of  Wisdom 73 

Fylfot  Cross  76 

Caduceus 76 

Caduceus 77 

Moon  on  the  Tree 77 

Geomantic  Attributions 78 

Solid  Greek  Cubical  Cross  79 

The  Solid  Triangle 79 

The  Greek  Cross  80 

The  Cup  of  Stolistes  80 

The  Symbol  of  Mercury 81 

Symbol  of  Ain  Soph  81 

The  Holy  Family 82 

The  Calvary  Cross  of  Twelve  Squares  83 

Pyramid  of  the  Elements  84 

The  Calvary  Cross  of  Ten  Squares 84 

Hegemon’s  Badge  85 

Venus  on  the  Tree  85 

An  Alternative  Tree  of  Life 86 

The  Reflection  of  the  Elements  86 

Sigil  of  Eheieh 90 


16 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  FOUR 
BASIC  TECHNIQUES 

General  Orders  1 

Techniques  of  Invocation  8 

The  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram 9 

Supreme  Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram 15 

The  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram 17 

The  Four  Forms  25 

The  Lesser  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram 26 

Addendum  28 

The  Magic  Sword 32 

The  Four  Elemental  Weapons  35 

Ritual  of  Consecration  of  the  Four  Elemental  Weapons 38 

The  Lotus  Wand 44 

Consecration  of  the  Lotus  Wand 47 

The  Description  of  the  Rose  Cross 50 

Note  of  Making  the  Rose  Cross 54 

Consecration  of  the  Rose  Cross  54 

The  Ritual  of  the  Rose  Cross 57 

The  Use  of  the  Rose  Cross  Ritual  60 

IMPORTANT  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Spirit  Pentagrams  10-11 

Invoking  and  Banishing  Pentagrams  12 

Zodiacal  Pentagrams  13 

Symbols  and  Names  on  the  Pentagram 14 

Supreme  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram 15-17 

Hexagram  Attributions  18 

Banishing  and  Invoking  Hexagrams  18-22 

The  Four  Forms  of  the  Hexagrams  25-28 

Unicursal  Hexagram 29-32 

The  Magical  Sword 32 

The  Wand  of  Fire 35 

The  Dagger  of  Air  36 

The  Water  Cup 37 

The  Earth  Pentacle  37 

Diagram  of  the  Lotus  Wand 44 

Whirls  of  the  Petals 45 

The  Attributions  of  the  Lotus  Wand 45 

Astrological  Attributions 46 

More  Astrological  Attributions  49 

Letters  on  the  Rose 52 

The  Rose  Cross  of  the  Order 53 

Rose  Cross  Symbol 57 

Format  of  Rose  Cross  Symbol  58 

Analysis  of  Key  Word 58-59 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  FIVE 
MAGICAL  FUNDAMENTALS 

The  Geomantic  Talismanic  Symbols 1 

Qualities  of  the  Figures 6 

Talismans  and  Flashing  Tablets  8 

Mode  of  Formation  of  Talismans  and  Pentacles 14 

The  Lineal  Forms  of  the  Names  of  the  Sephiroth  on  the  Tree  of  Life 15 

Polygrams  and  Polygons 21 

The  Cross  Within  the  Circle  38 

Sigils  39 

Telesmatic  Figures  48 

Telesmatic  Attributions  of  the  Letters  of  the  Hebrew  Alphabet  52 

The  Vibratory  Mode  of  Pronouncing  the  Divine  Names 55 

An  Alternative  Method  of  Vibrating  the  Divine  Names 56 

Geomancy  59 

Skrying 84 

On  Skrying 99 

IMPORTANT  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Geomantic  Symbols  1 

Geomantic  Symbols  on  a Pentagram  2 

Geomantic  Symbols  on  Hexagrams 3 

Geomantic  Tree  of  Life 4 

Attributions  of  Geomantic  Symbols  to  Enochian  Letters  5-6 

Geomantic  Talismanic  Forms 10-14 

Circular  Talisman 15 

Tree  of  Life  16 

Geomantic  Symbols  on  the  Tree 17-20 

Polygrams  and  Polygons 

The  Triangle 21 

The  Square 22 

The  Pentagon  23 

The  Pentangle  23 

The  Hexangles 24-25 

The  Heptangles 26-27 

The  Octangles  27-28 

The  Enneangles 29-30 

The  Dekangles 31-32 

The  Endekangles  33-34 

The  Dodekangles  35-37 

The  Endekangles  37 

Four  Basic  Symbols 38 

Rose  for  Sigil  Making  39 

Sigils  40-41 

Sigils  from  Kameas  43-46 

Olympic  Planetary  Sigils 47 


18 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Telesmatic  Image 53 

Male  and  Female  Qualities  of  Alphabet 54 

Sound  Experiments 57 

Geomantic  Divinatory  Form 60 

Plan  of  Geomantic  Divination 61 

Geomantic  Attributions 63-64 

The  Four  Mothers 65 

The  Four  Daughters 65 

Table  of  Houses  68-69 

Placing  of  the  Twelve  Houses 69-70 

Description  of  the  Symbols 70-78 

Table  of  Dignities  79 


19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  SIX 

OUTER  ORDER  RITUALS  AND  COMMENTARIES 

Introduction  to  the  Original  Golden  Dawn  Rituals  1 

Opening  of  the  Neophyte  Grade  3 

Discussion  of  the  Z-Documents 24 

Z-2 32 

Z-l  53 

Z-3 73 

The  Ceremony  of  the  Equinox 84 

Opening  of  the  Zelator  Grade 87 

IMPORTANT  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Temple  of  the  Neophyte  Grade 2 

Officers  during  Obligation 11 

Signs  of  the  Grades  16 

Altar  for  Alchemy 51 

General  and  Particular  Exordium  53 

Lamen  of  the  Hierophant 57 

The  Cross  on  the  Hierophant’s  Robe 58 

Lamen  of  Hiereus 61 

Lamen  of  Hegemon 61 

Lamen  of  Kerux  63 

Lamen  of  Stolistes  63 

Lamen  of  Dadouchos  64 

Lamen  of  Sentinel  64 

Weapons  of  Main  Officers 71 

Sash,  Cloaks  and  Weapons  of  Officers 72 

Temple  in  Zelator  Grade 87 

The  Flaming  Sword  with  Kerubs  93 

Zelator-Second  Temple  Plan  95 

Table  of  Shew  Bread 97 

Seven  Branched  Candlestick 98 

Temple  Plan  for  Theoricus 103 

Temple  Plan  for  Theoricus  Ceremony 111 

Temple  Plan  for  30th  Path 125 

Temple  Plan  for  Practicus  Ceremony 129 

Temple  Plan  for  Philosophus 134 

Temple  Plan  for  28th  Path 141 

Temple  Plan  for  27th  Path 145 

Temple  Plan  for  Philosophus 149 


20 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  SEVEN 

RITUALS  OF  THE  R.R.  ET  A.C.  WITH 
THOSE  OF  WAITE’S  FELLOWSHIP 

Ritual  of  the  Portal 2 

Adeptus  Minor  Grade 30 

The  Fellowship  of  the  Rosy  Cross 62 

The  Adeptus  Minor 92 

The  Adeptus  Major  Ceremony 127 

IMPORTANT  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Temple  Plan  for  the  Portal  Ritual  2 

Seven  Palaces  of  Holiness 12 

Temple  Plan  of  Rite  of  Pentagram  14 

Temple  Plan  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  Grade  30 

Temple  Plan  for  the  Second  Point 46 

Temple  Plan  for  the  Third  Point  50 

Drawings  in  Vault 57 

Wall  of  the  Vault 58 

Side  of  the  Pastos  58 

Four  Crosses  of  the  Grade  59 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  EIGHT 

OTHER  ORDER  RITUALS  AND  MAGICAL  DOCTRINES 

Ceremony  of  the  Equinox 1 

Watchtower  Ceremony 14 

The  Consecration  Ceremony  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepti  17 

Concerning  the  Use  of  the  Vault 28 

More  About  the  Vault 29 

The  Symbolism  of  the  Seven  Sides  34 

Requiescat  in  Pace 39 

An  Alchemical  Ritual 43 

Invocation  of  the  Angel  Chassan  45 

The  Canopic  Gods 58 

The  Egyptian  God-Forms  of  the  Neophyte  Grade 62 

Lamens  and  Examination  for  the  Grade  of  Practicus  Adeptus  Minor 67 

The  Ring  and  the  Disk 69 

IMPORTANT  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Obverse  and  Reverse  Side  of  Pentacle  45 

Circle  and  Triangle  of  Evocation 46 

The  Ring 69 

The  Disk 70 

Spellings  of  the  Goddess  Thmah 73 

Diagram  of  the  Whorl 74 


22 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  NINE 
THE  TAROT 

The  Complete  Golden  Dawn  System  of  the  Tarot  1 

Titles  of  the  Tarot  Cards 3 

Note  on  the  Tarot 29 

An  Alternative  Method  of  Selecting  the  Significator 32 

Unofficial  Description  of  the  Tarot  Trumps 54 

The  Tree  of  Life  as  Projected  in  a Solid  Sphere 60 

More  Notes  on  the  Tarot  79 

The  True  System  of  Astrological  Divination  90 

IMPORTANT  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Ankh  of  the  Tarot 2 

Major  Arcana 4 

Minor  Arcana 5 

Decans  and  Days  of  the  Week 14 

Rules  of  Counting 31 

An  Example  of  Reading  Layout 32 

The  First  Cut 34 

Horseshoe  of  the  First  Cut  34 

Second  Layout  in  the  Houses  37 

Horseshoe  of  the  Second  Layout 38 

The  Third  Layout 39 

The  Fourth  Cut  41 

The  Fourth  Horseshoe 41 

Cards  Arranged  as  the  Tree  of  Life  44 

Final  Horseshoe  Layout 45 

Brief  Delineation  of  Small  Cards 46-49 

Brief  Meaning  of  the  Trumps  49-50 

A Few  Examples 51-52 

Star  Map  of  the  Northern  Hemisphere 61 

Star  Map  of  the  Southern  Hemisphere  62 

The  Decans  Applied  to  the  Golden  Dawn 71 

Six  Charts  Showing  Sephiroth  Points  on  a Solid  Sphere 73 

Movement  of  the  Aces 77 

Order  of  Movement  of  Elements  77 

The  Thread  of  Ain  Soph 82 

Hour  Glass  Connection  of  Malkuth  and  Kether 84 

Direct  Creeping  Formula  86 

Looped  Formula 87 

Leaping  Formula 88 

Revolving  Formula 89 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  TEN 
THE  ENOCHIAN  SYSTEM 

An  Introduction 1 

Enochian  Numbers 9 

The  Enochian  Language 12 

The  Enochian  System  17 

General  Note  on  the  Tarot  Attributions  31 

The  Book  of  the  Concourse  of  Forces 38 

The  Enochian  Tablets 47 

The  Fourty-Eight  Angelical  Keys  or  Calls 53 

Titles  of  the  Thirty  Aethyrs 72 

An  Addendum  75 

Part  2 of  the  Addendum  85 

Pyramid  Gods  and  Their  Attributions 95 

Gods  of  Egypt  and  the  Enochian  Tablets 98 

Instruction  on  Chessmen 109 

Chess  and  Tarot  Ill 

Numerical  Structure  of  Enochian 128 

Enochian  Dictionary 143 

Glossary  165 

TABLE  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS,  DIAGRAMS  AND  CHARTS 

The  Ring 4 

The  Archangelic  Square 4 

Attributions  5 

Sigillum  Dei  Aemeth 7 

Round  Table  of  Nalvage 8 

The  Gematric  Code 9 

Digital  Code 10 

The  Enochian  Alphabet 18 

Basic  Arrangement  of  the  Four  Tablets 19 

The  Formation  of  the  Name  of  the  King 22 

The  King  and  Six  Seniors 22 

Attribution  of  Tetragrammaton  to  the  Great  Crosses 24 

The  Great  Cross  of  the  Air  Tablet 27 

Upper  Squares  on  the  Sephirotic  Crosses 28 

The  Water  Angle  of  the  Air  Tablet  29 

Basic  Attributions  of  the  Water  Angel  of  the  Air  Tablet  30 

Two  Drawings  of  the  Tablet  of  Union 31 

The  Numbered  Sides  of  a Truncated  Pyramid 33 

Three  Examples  from  the  Unea  Spiritu  Sancti  33 

Two  Further  Examples  from  the  Unea  Spiritus  Sancti 34 

A Sephirotic  Cross  35 

Variant  of  the  Sephirotic  Cross  35 

An  Example  of  a Servient  Square 36 

An  Example  of  a Square  from  the  Tablet  of  Union  37 


24 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Sigils  of  the  Four  Tablets 39 

Arrangement  of  the  Four  Tablets  and  Lesser  Angles 41 

Sphynx  and  Pyramid  44 

Directions  for  Making  Pyramid 45 

Angelic  Figure  46 

Sphynx  in  Pyramid  47 

The  Earth  Angle  of  the  Fire  Tablet 48 

Directions  in  Space  for  Use  with  Skyring  49 

Attributions  of  the  Seniors  to  the  Greek  Cross 51 

Sigils  of  the  Governors 81-82 

Tablets  with  Sigils  83 

Enochian  Sigils  and  Names  of  Planets  86 

Baskets  of  Enochian  Letters 87 

Enochian  Symbol  of  Malkuth  89 

Angelic  Sigil  of  Azdobn  92 

Angelic  Name  from  Angelic  Square 92 

The  Osiris  Squares  on  All  Four  Tablets  101 

Zodiacal  and  Elemental  Emblems  of  the  Osiris  Squares  103 

Various  Enochian  Boards 116-125 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


26 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  thank  the  following  for  their  generosity  and  courtesy  as 
follows: 

Mr.  Carr  P.  Collins  Jr.,  for  giving  me  free  access  to  his  vast  collection  of  Golden  Dawn 
manuscripts,  many  dated  before  the  turn  of  the  century.  And  who  on  two  occasions  visited  England 
to  bring  me  back  a complete  set  of  Golden  Dawn  documents  for  the  express  purpose  of  writing  this 
book;  The  late  Gerald  Yorke  for  giving  Carr  Collins  copies  of  a complete  set  of  all  the  Golden  Dawn 
documents  rangingfrom  Neophyte  to  Adeptus  Minor  issued  to  Frater  De  Profundis  ad  Lucem  (Mr. 
Leigh  F.  Gardner),  circa  1894-1896;  Robert  A.  Gilbert,  (now  writing  a biography  of  A.E.  Waite)  for 
his  gift  of  two  rituals  from  Waite's  Fellowship  of  the  Rosy  Cross;  Francis  King  for  permission  to  use 
lengthy  excerpts  from  his  books  Ritual  Magic  in  England  and  The  Rebirth  of  Magic;  Gerald  Suster  for 
his 

contribution  of  a critique  of  Ellic  Howe's  book  on  the  Golden  Dawn;  Thomas  Head,  Ph.D., 
who  wrote  the  learned  introduction  to  the  Enochian  system;  Ms.  Patricia  Monocris  for  her  Ritual 
"Requiescat  in  Pace";  Mr.  Farry  Epperson  for  his  ritual  on  the  Evocation  of  the  Spirit  Chassan  to 
visible  appearance;  Edwin  Steinbrecher  for  permission  to  quote  at  large  from  his  Inner  Guide 
Meditation;  Ithell  Colquhoun  for  the  portrait  of  Mathers 

painted  by  Moina  Mathers,  the  background  of  which  I had  lightened  to  bring  his  face  more 
clearly  into  the  foreground;  Stuart  R.  Kaplan  for  his  kind  permission  to  quote  from  his 
Encyclopedia  of  Tarot  and  to  use  some  cards  of  the  Golden  Dawn  Tarot  (U.S.  Game  Systems);  Dr. 
Robert  Wang  for  the  photograph  of  his  model  of  the  Tree  of  Life  projected  into  a sphere;  Hans 
Nintzel  for  the  use  of  his  essay  on  Alchemy;  Mr.  Neville  Armstrong  of  Spearman  Ltd.  (England)  for 
his  permission  to  use  the  portrait  of  McGregor  Mathers  and  that  of  Dr.  Wynn  Westcott;  Finally  to  the 
Wizard  Book  Shelf  for  permission  to  quote  from  their  edition  of  The  Zohcir  translated  by  Nurho  de 
Manhar  (San  Diego,  Calif.  1978),  and  to 

Victor  A.  Endersby  for  the  quote  from  The  Hall  of  Mirrors. 

Finally  I would  like  to  express  my  deepest  gratitude  to  the  staff  of  Falcon  Press  and  in  particular 
S.L.  Slaughter  for  his  artistic  work  and  persistence,  Kris  Morgan  for  her  contribution  of  the  Rose 
Cross,  the  Ring  and  the  Disc,  and  the  Seven  Palaces  of  Holiness;  Corey  Hogan  for  his  never  ending 
determination  and  guidance  in  seeing  that  production  proceeded  on  schedule,  and  Christopher  S.  Hyatt 
both  for  his  help  in  editing,  his  original  contribution  of  ideas  and  his  neverending  "push"  to  insure 
that  all  went  as  well  as  possible. 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


28 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


A NOTE  ON  STYLE 

In  addition  to  the  official  and  unofficial  documents  of  the  Order  in  this  book,  there  are 
a number  of  papers  and  articles  contributed  by  various  authors.  What  has  to  be  noted  about 
all  these  documents  is  a difference  of  style  in  writing  and  of  spelling  out  some  of  the  basic 
terms  used  in  the  Qabalah  and  Magic.  1 t was  my  original  intention  to  render  style  and 
spelling  uniform  in  this  book,  but  upon  more  prolonged  reflection  1 have  decided  to  let  the 
individuality  of  each  author  speak  for  himself.  As  a result  the  reader  will  note  that  there  are 
discrepancies  here  and  there  where  the  most  basic  technical  names  are  used.  For  example, 
Sephirah  is  often  spelled  without  the  final  letter.  Of  course  this  is  minor,  but  at  the  same 
time  it  is  symptomatic  of  a trend  which  may  prove  confusing  if  he  neglects  this  warning.  1 n 
other  words  do  not  pay  too  much  attention  to  the  trivialities  of  style,  set,  and  spelling  but 
rather  try  to  grasp  what  each  writer  is  attempting  to  say.  On  the  whole  we  have  tried  to 
remain  faithful  to  each  writer's  wishes  and  intent  even  to  such  a degree  as  to  include  some  of 
their  lesser  errors  and  arrogances. 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


30 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


PERSISTENCE  AND  DETERMINATION 

Over  the  years  I have  been  asked  over  and  over  again  what  are  the  most  important 
qualities  that  a student  should  possess  in  approaching  the  Great  Work.  Other  than  normal 
intelligence  and  emotional  stability.  I find  two  other  qualities  which  are  essential  for 
success.  They  are  best  summed  up  in  the  following  quotation. 

Nothing  in  the  world  can  take  the  place  of 
persistence. 

Talent  will  not;  nothing  is  more  common 
than  unsuccessful  men  with  talent. 


Genius  will  not;  unrewarded  genius  is 
almost  a proverb. 

Education  will  not;  the  world  is  full  of 
educated  derelicts. 

Persistence  and  determination  alone  are 
omnipotent. 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


BANNER  OF  THE  EAST 


32 


QABALISTIC  TREE  OF  LIFE 


TREE  OF  LIFE  IN  A SPHERE 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  HIGHER  AND  DIVINE  GENIUS  RESTORATION  ON  THE  LID  OF  THE  PASTOS 


34 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


KERUB  OF  EARTH 


KERUB  OF  WATER 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


KERUB  OF  AIR  KERB  OF  FIRE 


36 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


GARDEN  OF  EDEN  BEFORE  THE  FALL  GARDEN  OF  EDEN  AFTER  THE  FALL 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


38 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


: t t : 


ENOCHIAN  CHESS  PIECES  (FIRE) 


ENOCHIAN  CHESS  PIECES  (AIR) 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  ONE 


THE  MAGICAL  ALPHABET 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


42 


VOLUME  ONE 


VOLUME  ONE 

THE  MAGICAL  ALPHABET 

INTRODUCTION 


One  of  my  preoccupations  over  the  last  fifty  years,  ever  since  I have  been  actively  involved  in 
the  study  as  well  as  the  dissemination  of  the  basic  principles  of  Magic,  Qabalah  and  Occultism  in 
general,  is  the  discrepancy  between  what  the  system  teaches  and  the  character  structure  of  the  average 
student  and  even  leaders  of  the  occult  groups.  For  awhile  it  created  a good  deal  of  anxiety  simply  because 
it  appeared  to  me  that  there  should  be  some  degree  of  coincidence  between  student  and  system. 

It  was  not  until  many  years  afterwards  that  I came  to  be  aware  of  the  function  of  therapy.  At  that 
time  1 had  some  dear  friends  who  had  amongst  their  acquaintances  some  psychotherapists  in  London 
where  I then  resided.  Some  of  them  I met  socially  when  we  discussed  this  particular  problem  that  was 
haunting  me.  A few  agreed  with  me  that  there  was  only  one  remedy  for  this  discrepancy  and  that  was 
to  enter  therapy  as  a patient.  I did  this,  remaining  in  therapy  for  several  years  and  I must  say  it  benefited 
me  enormously.  Even  today,  three  or  four  decades  later  I still  get  an  occasional  letter  from  a student 
here,  there  and  anywhere  making  the  statement  that  I seem  to  be  one  of  the  few  sane  writers  on  the 
subject.  True  or  not,  they  perceive  that  there  is  a difference  in  one  who  has  had  therapy  and  another  who 
has  not. 


Today  therefore  I am  adamant  both  to  correspondents  and  visitors  alike  that  to  obtain  the 
greatest  benefit  from  Magic  which  is  as  it  were  a post-graduate  study  there  should  be  some 
undergraduate  work  in  a personal  therapy.  The  dividends  are  enormous. 

For  a long  while  it  seemed  to  me  that  Jungian  therapy  provided  the  answer  to  this  problem. 
However  from  time  to  time  I would  meet  or  hear  from  a correspondent  who 


1 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


complained  that  that  form  of  therapy  was  like  Ain  Soph,  without  end.  So  I have 
concluded  that  Jungian  analysis  can  be  likened  to  herpes  genitalis,  that  is  it  is  forever.  This 
has  resulted  finally  in  entertaining  serious  doubts  about  the  efficacy  of  Jung's  system  as  a 
therapy;  as  a philosophy  1 have  little  quibble,  even  if  many  authorities  in  the  occult  field 
feel  that  this  is  the  only  form  of  spiritual  therapy.  Of  course  this  is  nonsense.  In  therapy 
one  is  not  concerned  whether  its  contents  are  spiritual  or  otherwise,  but  whether  it  enables 
one  to  face  and  deal  with  one's  own  latent  infantility  which  is  eternally  getting  in  the 
way.  Whether  magical  or  occult  authorities  like  it  or  not  Freudian  analysis  is  infinitely 
more  effective. 

Out  of  the  Freudian  school  there  has  evolved  an  entirely  new  and  different 
approach  to  this  problem  which  curiously  enough,  though  it  makes  no  claim  in  this 
direction,  is  far  more  spiritual  in  its  effects  and  its  results  than  anything  else  I know. 
Wilhelm  Reich,  originally  an  ardent  disciple  of  Freud,  developed  a system  of  therapy 
which  astonishingly  enough  is  a bridge  from  orthodox  psychotherapy  to  the  occult 
world.  He  himself  would  never  have  admitted  this.  And  in  fact  he  would  rather  have  died 
than  recognize  this,  but  facts  are  facts  which  can  not  be  denied.  My  experience  as  a 
psychotherapist  extending  over  some  thirty  years  or  more,  has  surprised  me  in  the 
discovery  that  many  patients  who  prior  to  therapy  had  no  talent  for  Magic  etc.,  found 
themselves  profoundly  involved  in  what  might  be  called  mystical  or  religious  experiences 
on  the  couch  at  the  end  of  a session.  Therefore  after  all  these  many  years  I still  insist 
that  the  student  of  this  subject  involve  himself  deeply  in  therapy  but  nowadays  I make 
the  proviso  that  it  be  a form  of  Reichian  or  neo-Reichian  therapy.  A great  deal  of  time, 
money  and  heartache  will  be  spared  the  student  if,  when  he  decides  to  follow  my  counsel, 
he  attempts  to  seek  out  a therapist  or  teacher  who  is  trained  in  these  techniques. 
Admittedly  there  are  problems  in  this  direction  but  these  are  not  insurmountable.  Any 
student  anywhere  in  this  country  desirous  of  following  my  counsel  but  is  unable  to  find 
an  adequate  therapist  is  invited  to  do  one  of  two  things.  First  to  write  to  me  directly  in  care 
of  my  publishers  Falcon  Press  in  Phoenix.  I promise  to  reply  at  once,  giving  counsel  on 
whom  they  should  consult.  Second,  write  to  my  friend  and  colleague  Chistopher  Hyatt, 
also  care  of  Falcon  Press  for  further  advice.  He  is  not  only  a first  rate  therapist  himself 
with  extensive  training  in  both  experimental  and  psychoanalytic  therapy  but  is  at  the 
same  time  a very  perceptive  and  intuitive  therapist  and  teacher  of  many  years 
experience.  In  addition  Hyatt  has  a strong  background  in  occult  subjects,  particularly 
with  meditative  and  Eastern  techniques.  This  with  his  Western  knowledge  makes  him 
an  ideal  choice  for  those  students  seriously  involved  with  the  occult.  At  the  very  least  if 
he  is  not  personally  available  he  too  can  make  recommendations  to  other  practitioners 
in  the  field. 

In  other  places  I have  dogmatically  stated  that  the  Golden  Dawn  as  a functioning 
occult  Order  has  been  defunct  for  years.  It  gives  me  pleasure  to  state  that  in  the  past  several 
years  a new  group  of  young  students  have  attempted  to  formulate  actively  functioning 
Temples  employing  the  traditional  techniques.  There  are  now  a few  Temples  scattered 
throughout  the  country  to  which  I would  be  glad  to  refer  the  interested  student. 


2 


VOLUME  ONE 


The  Hermetic  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  issued  its  own  account  of  its  history.  It 
claimed  to  be  "an  Hermetic  Society  whose  members  are  taught  the  principles  of  occult 
science  and  the  Magic  of  Hermes.  During  the  early  part  of  the  last  century,  several 
prominent  Adepti  and  Chiefs  of  the  Order  in  France  and  England  died,  and  their  death 
caused  a temporary  dormant  condition  of  Temple  work."  It  goes  on  to  state  that  these  adepts 
"received  indeed  and  have  handed  down  to  us  their  doctrine  and  system  of  Theosophy  and 
Hermetic  Science  and  the  higher  Alchemy  from  a long  series  of  practical  investigators  whose 
origin  is  traced  to  the  Fratres  Roseae  Crucis  of  Germany,  which  association  was  founded  by 
one  Christian  Rosenkreutz  about  the  year  1398  A.D..  . 

"The  Rosicrucian  revival  of  Mysticism  was  but  a new  development  of  the  vastly 
older  wisdom  of  the  Qabalistic  Rabbis  and  of  that  very  ancient  secret  knowledge,  the  Magic 
of  the  Egyptians,  in  which  the  Hebrew  Pentateuch  tells  you  that  Moses,  the  founder  of  the 
Jewish  system,  was  'learned',  that  is,  in  which  he  had  been  initiated." 

This  is  the  Golden  Dawn  historical  claim.  Many  have  questioned  its  veracity.  That 
really  does  not  concern  us  at  this  moment.  Perhaps  by  far  the  best  and  most  objective 
account  of  its  history,  short  and  concise,  was  written  by  Aleister  Crowley  in  Liher  LXI  vel 
Causae.  The  first  few  paragraphs  are  so  well  stated  as  to  warrant  quotation  here: 

"Some  years  ago  a number  of  cipher  MSS.  were  discovered  and  deciphered  by 
certain  students.  They  attracted  much  attention,  as  they  purported  to  derive  from  the 
Rosicrucians.  You  will  readily  understand  that  the  genuineness  of  the  claim  matters  no 
whit,  such  literature  being  judged  by  itself,  not  by  its  reputed  sources. 

"Among  the  MSS.  was  one  which  gave  the  address  of  a certain  person  in  Germany, 
who  is  known  to  us  as  S.D.A.  Those  who  discovered  the  ciphers  wrote  to  S.D.A.,  and  in 
accordance  with  instructions  received,  an  Order  was  founded  which  worked  in  a semi- 
secret manner. 

"After  some  time  S.D.A.  died;  further  requests  for  help  were  met  with  a prompt 
refusal  from  the  colleagues  of  S.D.A.  It  was  written  by  one  of  them  that  S.  D.  A.'s  scheme 
had  always  been  regarded  with  disapproval.  But  since  the  absolute  rule  of  the  adepts  is  never 
to  interfere  with  the  judgments  of  any  other  person  whomsoever  --  how  much  more,  then,  one 
of  themselves,  and  that  one  most  highly  revered!  --  they  had  refrained  from  active 
opposition.  The  adept  who  wrote  this  added  that  the  Order  had  already  quite  enough 
knowledge  to  enable  it  or  its  members  to  formulate  a magical  link  with  the  adepts. 

"Shortly  after  this,  one  called  S.R.M.D.  announced  that  he  had  formulated  such  a 
link,  and  that  himself  with  two  others  was  to  govern  the  Order." 

There  is  another  source  of  historical  material  in  a small  pamphlet  written  by  Dr.  W. 
W.  Westcott,  in  which  it  is  stated  that  "In  1887  by  the  permission  of  S.D.A.,  a continental 
Rosicrucian  Adept,  the  Isis-Urania  Temple  of  Hermetic  students  of  the  Golden  Dawn  was 
formed  to  give  instructions  in  the  mediaeval  occult  sciences.  Fratres  M.E.V.  with  S.A.  and 
S.R.M.D.  became  the  Chiefs,  and  the  latter  wrote  the  rituals  in  modern  English  from  old 


3 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Rosicrucian  manuscripts  (the  property  of  S.A.)  supplemented  by  his  own  literary 
researches." 

These  several  statements  then  give  the  beginning  of  the  Hermetic  Order  of  the 
Golden  Dawn.  Since  its  inception  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century  it  has  exerted 
far  greater  influence  on  the  growth  and  dissemination  of  practical  occult  information  and 
knowledge  than  can  be  realized  by  most  present  day  students.  At  first  its  membership  was 
recruited  from  a broad  spectrum  of  English  intellectuals  and  artists  and  even  the  clergy,  but 
later  came  to  include  quite  ordinary  men  and  women  from  every  segment  of  society  and  life. 

I n accord  with  the  spirit  of  the  times,  it  cloaked  itself  in  a glamour  of  mystery  and 
secrecy.  Regardless  of  the  various  rumors  that  circulated  about  it,  it  came  to  be  very  difficult 
to  join  this  Order.  Even  A.  E.  Waite,  who  some  regard  as  an  occult  authority,  sarcastically 
remarked  in  his  autobiography  that  his  first  application  was  black-balled.  It  was  after  a 
period  of  time  that  he  reapplied  at  the  urging  of  some  of  his  friends  and  only  then  was  he 
accepted. 

Its  teachings  and  methods  of  instruction  were  surrounded  by  oaths  and  various 
penalties  attached  to  the  most  awe  inspiring  ritual-obligations  to  ensure  secrecy.  You  will  see 
what  these  are  in  various  rituals  that  are  given  in  the  body  of  the  text.  It  is  now  common 
knowledge  that  Arthur  Machen,  Florence  Farr,  W.  B.  Yeats,  Algernon  Blackwood,  Aleister 
Crowley,  Dion  Fortune,  and  A.  E.  Waite  --  to  mention  only  a few  --  were  members  of  this 
prestigious  organisation.  It  should  be  self-evident  then  that  some  of  its  members  were  not 
the  usual  flakey  nit-wits  some  critics  are  disposed  to  believe,  but  prominent  and  intelligent 
people. 


Perhaps  some  attention  should  be  given  to  the  secular  names  of  some  of  those  whose 
Order  mottoes  have  been  given  above.  Sapere  Aude  and  Non  Omnis  Moriar  were  the 
mottoes  chosen  by  Dr.  William  W.  Westcott,  a London  physician  and  a coroner  by 
occupation.  M.E.V.,  or  Magnum  est  Veritas  was  the  motto  of  Dr.  William  R.  Woodman,  an 
eminent  Freemason  of  the  last  century,  who  died  in  1891  very  shortly  after  the  Order  was 
founded  and  therefore  did  not  play  much  of  active  role  in  its  governance.  S.R.M.D.  or  S. 
Rhiogail  Ma  Dhream,  the  motto  of  Samuel  Liddell  Mathers  also  known  as  McGregor 
Mathers,  was  the  most  active  of  the  chiefs  of  the  Order.  He  also  used  the  motto  Deo  Duce 
Comite  Ferro.  He  has  been  described  at  some  length  in  a biographical  study  The  Sword  of 
Wisdom  by  Ithel  Colquhoun,  well  worth  reading  in  this  connection. 

Westcott  was  the  author  of  a couple  of  minor  little  books  and  the  editor  of  an 
hermetic  and  alchemical  series  of  writings,  well  prized  today.  He  was  prominent  in  certain 
Masonic  circles  of  his  day. 

Mathers  was  the  translator  of  three  mediaeval  magical  texts.  The  Greater  Ker  of  King 
Solomon , The  Book  of  the  Sacred  Magic  of  Abramelin  the  Mage,  and  The  Kaballah  Unveiled  (which 
consisted  of  certain  portions  from  Knorr  von  Rosenroth's  Latin  rendition  of  parts  of  the 
Zohar  --  more  distinguished  however  by  a relatively  long  introduction  of 


4 


VOLUME  ONE 


considerable  erudition  and  which  well  warrants  re-publication  by  itself  as  an 
introduction  to  the  study  of  the  Qabalah.) 

In  this  connection  1 would  like  to  recommend  The  Rosy  Cross  Unveiled  by 
Christopher  McIntosh,  which  purports  to  give  a history,  mythology  and  the  rituals  of  an 
occult  order  (published  by  Aquarian  Press  Ltd.  1980). 

In  as  much  as  both  Mathers  and  Westcott  had  dual  mottoes,  it  should  be  remarked 
that  one  was  for  use  in  the  Outer  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  the  other  being  reserved  of  the 
Inner  Order  of  the  R.R.  et  A.C. 

S.D.A.  was  the  abbreviation  of  the  motto  Sapiens  Dominabitur  Astris  chosen  by  a 
Fraulein  Anna  Sprengel  of  Nuremberg.  Though  polemics  are  outside  the  scope  of  this 
introduction,  in  all  fairness  to  the  enquiring  student  I should  mention  a highly  critical  and 
destructive  study  of  the  Order  entitled  The  Magicians  of  the  Golden  Dawn  by  Ellic  Howe.  It  is 
mentioned  here  because  amidst  all  of  its  prejudicial  criticism  which  is  not  difficult  to 
demolish,  there  is  some  significant  historical  data  of  considerable  value. 

There  is  also,  I should  mention,  my  own  account  of  the  Golden  Dawn  history  at 
some  length  --  What  You  Should  Know  About  the  Golden  Dawn  (Falcon  Press,  Phoenix, 
Arizona,  1983).  In  addition  to  tracing  some  of  the  obscurities  relating  to  the  origins  of  the 
Order,  it  provides  a bird's  eye  view  of  its  teachings  that  might  be  of  value  to  the  current 
reader.  The  Order  provided  initiation  into  the  Mysteries  in  a highly  organized  and 
systematic  manner. 


INITIATION 

Initiation  is  the  preparation  for  immortality.  Man  is  only  potentially  immortal. 
Immortality  is  acquired  when  the  purely  human  part  of  him  becomes  allied  to  that  spiritual 
essence  which  was  never  created,  was  never  born,  and  shall  never  die.  It  is  to  effect  this 
spiritual  bond  with  the  highest,  that  the  Golden  Dawn  owes  all  its  rituals  and  practical 
magical  work. 

Initiation  means  to  begin,  to  start  something  new.  It  represents  the  beginning  of  a 
new  life  dedicated  to  an  entirely  different  set  of  principles  from  those  of  what  Wilhelm 
Reich  once  contemptuously  termed  "homo  normalis."  With  the  enormous  development  of 
scientific  pragmatism,  it  is  conceivable  that  sometime  in  the  near  or  distant  future,  robots  or 
computers  will  be  invented  that  will,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  free  man  from  the  daily 
drudgery  of  common  toil.  If  and  when  that  occurs,  what  will  the  average  man  do  with  his 
leisure  time?  Despite  the  claims  of  various  protagonists  of  the  free  future  of  man.  I doubt 
that  many  will  turn  their  time  and  energy  to  the  pursuit  of  the  Great  Work  in  any  of  its 
forms.  Most  of  them  will  continue  to  hunt,  fish,  travel  in  recreation  vehicles,  drink  beer  and 
grow  fat,  watch  television  more  and  more,  concentrate  on  spectator  sports,  and  continue 
their  lives  on  a thoroughly  prosaic  and  mundane  level.  If  there  are  excursions  into  outer 
space,  with  a view  of  setting  up  colonies  outside  of  the  earth,  I am  far  from  certain  that  the 


5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


same  fate  will  not  await  them  as  it  did  all  ventures  into  utopian  communities.  There 
are  only  a mere  handful  who  can  tolerate  more  than  a glancing  casual  look  at  other  than 
the  superficial  aspects  of  what  life  presents  to  them. 

For  this  handful,  the  Golden  Dawn  system  presents  itself  as  the  answer  to  their 
innumerable  questions.  The  system  itself  is  timeless.  It  did  not  owe  it  origins  to  the 
formation  of  that  particular  Order  called  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  latter  part  of  19th 
century.  The  greater  part  of  it,  in  one  form  or  another,  has  existed  for  centuries  --  actually 
forever  --  not  necessarily  in  the  open  where  it  could  be  attacked  by  secular  and 
ecclesiastical  authorities,  but  under  cover,  secretly  and  safely.  Those  who  were  in  need  of 
its  teaching  and  work  would  inevitably  be  attracted  to  some  one  or  other  of  its  members, 
and  undergo  initiation.  This  process  occurred  in  the  past  even  as  it  does  today.  When  the 
time  comes  for  the  inner  awakening,  as  it  may  be  called,  all  sorts  of  synchronicities,  as 
Jung  might  call  them,  occur  which  lead  them  inevitably  in  the  right  direction,  to  the 
Western  Esoteric  Tradition. 

THE  WESTERN  ESOTERIC  TRADITION 

There  are  a many  legends  circulating  within  the  occult  field  that  may  clarify 
what  is  commonly  called  the  Western  esoteric  tradition  as  being  opposed  to  the  so-called 
Eastern  tradition. 

It  is  held  that  several  centuries  ago  a group  of  wise  men  gathered  in  the  Near  East 
to  discuss  ways  and  means  of  disseminating  the  ageless  wisdom  so  that  no  opposition 
from  vested  interests  would  be  encountered,  and  at  the  same  time  evoke  recognition  from 
those  who  had  evolved  to  a state  of  psycho-spiritual  "readiness".  After  much  discussion, 
it  was  agreed  that  they  should  devise  a set  of  pictures  that  could  be  circulated  as  playing 
cards.  Pictures  that  would  tell  a story  relative  to  man,  and  who  he  was,  as  well  as  where 
he  came  from.  Pictures  that  would  relate  him  as  a person  to  the  greater  world  in  which  he 
found  himself.  I n a word,  the  Tarot  cards  came  into  being  to  serve  such  ends.  Originally 
employed  as  playing  cards  or  for  fortune  telling,  they  were  carried  all  over  the  Near  East 
and  Europe  by  gypsies  and  other  travelling  bodies,  and  eventually  permeated  all  civilized 
countries  in  the  Western  hemisphere. 

The  other  legend  is  to  be  found  in  a document  circulated  early  in  the  17th  century, 
the  Puma  Fraternnatitas.  It  purports  to  narrate  the  history  of  one  Christian  Rosenkreutz,  a 
young  man  who  was  educated  in  one  of  the  monasteries  in  Germany.  He  wandered  to 
North  Africa  and  the  Near  East  where  he  was  well  received  by  the  wise  men  resident  there. 
They  taught  him  Alchemy,  Astrology  and  Qabalah,  together  with  other  occult  subjects. 
When  he  left  he  had  acquired  a liberal  education  in  the  occult  arts  which  he  took  with  him 
to  Germany,  to  the  monastery  from  which  he  originally  came.  Gradually  he  conveyed  his 
knowledge  to  a monk  here  and  there,  until  there  were  enough  more  or  less  enlightened 
monks  to  comprise  an  organizational  body  that  came  to  be  known  as  the  Rosicrucians. 


6 


VOLUME  ONE 


A great  deal  of  the  above  is  legend.  Many  modern  authorities  insist  that  that  is  all  it 
is  --  a legend.  This  runs  counter  to  some  of  the  more  common  pseudo-Rosicrucian 
orders  of  today  that  claim  an  impossible  antecedence  for  their  own  group.  Be  that  as  it 
may,  the  legend  itself  gives  evidence  to  the  belief  that  there  was  a definite  body  of  occult 
knowledge  in  existence  which  could  be  and  was  communicated  in  an  orderly  manner. 

A third  factor  that  should  never  be  overlooked,  but  which  often  is,  relates  to  the 
nature  of  the  monasteries  in  Roman  Catholic  Europe.  These  were  the  primary  centers  of 
learning  in  an  otherwise  ignorant  world  --  the  Europe  of  those  dark  days.  They  kept  alive 
the  learning  of  every  kind  then  known,  and  passed  it  on  faithfully  to  succeeding 
generations.  We  know  that  many  of  the  faithful  studied  and  practiced  both  alchemy  and 
astrology.  It  is  also  known  that  the  Qabalah  of  the  Hebrews  was  also  studied,  even 
though  the  motive  exoterically  seemed  to  be  that  it  was  a valuable  tool  with  which  to 
convert  the  unhappy  Jews  to  the  joys  and  blessings  of  Christendom. 

The  Catholic  Church,  and  also  the  Church  of  the  Byzantium,  has  a glorious 
history  of  great  mystics,  of  men  and  women  to  whom  the  highest  vocation  called,  the 
quest  for  God.  I here  were  teachers  of  mystical  meditation  and  interior  prayer  in  many  of 
the  monasteries  so  that  the  proper  preparation  for  such  a high  calling  would  not  be  lost. 
They  were  of  many  persuasions,  these  teachers,  and  so  were  the  mystics  who  came  out  of 
these  institutions.  They  have  left  their  mark  on  the  Church,  despite  its  apparent 
antagonism  to  mysticism  as  such,  due  to  fear  it  might  challenge  the  Church's  demand  for 
conformity  to  fixed  inherited  dogma. 

There  is  another  most  interesting  set  of  circumstances  too  often  glossed  over  or  not 
well  understood.  It  relates  to  one  of  the  most  crucial  and  interesting  periods  of 
European  history.  At  one  time,  it  must  be  recalled  that  the  Arabs  had  invaded  Europe 
and  had  virtually  conquered  a part,  if  not  all  of  Spain.  They  brought  with  them  not 
merely  a victorious  army,  but  Islamic  culture  as  well.  That  included  not  solely 
mathematics,  though  it  is  well  to  reflect  on  what  this  one  item  did  to  European 
knowledge,  but  in  addition  the  Greek  classics  and  literature,  from  Aristotle  on.  Their 
contribution  included  alchemy  as  well,  astrology  and  the  other  occult  arts.  Above  all  it 
brought  Islamic  mysticism,  Sufiism.  It  flourished  not  merely  in  North  Africa  but  in  Spain 
as  well.  From  there  it  was  carried  by  one  means  or  another  to  all  parts  of  Europe  and  to 
every  center  of  learning. 

Simultaneously,  Christian  mysticism  was  flourishing  in  Spain  and  Europe,  and 
some  great  and  wonderful  people  were  active  spreading  mystical  knowledge  far  and  wide. 
It  was  a period  of  rejuvenation  and  spiritual  growth  for  Spain  and  for  the  Church  as  a 
whole. 


Furthermore,  what  must  not  be  forgotten  was  that  a favorable  climate  was  also 
being  evolved  for  the  wandering  and  exiled  Jewish  people  to  flourish  in.  They 
contributed  enormously  to  Spanish  culture  and  scientific  knowledge,  and  at  the  same 
time  a specific  Hebraic  mysticism  was  taking  shape  and  form.  This  included  some  of 
the  pre-Zoharic  literature,  as  well  as  some  of  the  greatest  names  in  Qabalistic  history. 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


It  is  well  to  remember  that  in  Spain  at  that  time,  therefore,  there  was  a favorable  climate  for  the 
emergence  and  blossoming  of  Islamic,  Christian,  and  Jewish  mysticism  which  has  never  since  been 
surpassed,  if  not  equalled.  Each  religious  mysticism  cross  fertilized  the  other  in  a magnificent 
manner. 


All  of  these  trends,  and  they  were  powerful  each  in  its  own  specific  way,  contributed  to  a body 
of  esoteric  knowledge  and  experience  that  was  peculiarly  Western.  It  may  have  had  numberless 
resemblances  to  the  traditions  extant  in  the  East,  but  they  also  had  their  own  individual  differences  that 
characterized  it  as  a system  wholly  apart  from  its  Eastern  counterpart.  It  is  this  that  today  we  call  the 
Western  esoteric  tradition.  It  has  reared  its  head  in  different  times  and  places  and  in  different  ways.  On 
many  occasions  it  may  seem  to  have  been  wiped  out  and  disappeared  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  But 
always  it  seemed  to  reappear  revivified  by  its  absence,  spreading  wider  and  wider,  influencing  more 
and  more  people,  leavening  always  the  institutions  most  hostile  to  its  continued  existence. 

From  time  to  time,  organizations  were  formed  here  and  there  as  means  of  perpetuating  the 
hidden  Hermetic  knowledge.  The  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  was  another  of  these  Orders  which 
sprang  up,  using  the  wisdom  of  prior  ages,  exclusively  western  knowledge,  in  order  to  initiate  mankind 
into  a higher  level  of  psycho-spiritual  functioning. 

Parallel  to  all  of  this,  there  is  a concurrent  "legend  or  statement  of  fact  that  there  is  a hidden 
Order,  whether  on  the  inner  spiritual  planes  or  here  on  the  mundane  level  where  most  of  us  live,  of 
Adepts  and  enlightened  beings  who  watch  over  mankind  and  its  travails.  They  seek  to  further  the 
evolution  of  mankind  without  interfering  with  the  apparent  free  choice  of  human  beings  to  determine 
their  own  destiny  either  towards  personal  destruction  or  the  attainment  of  communion  with  God.  From 
time  to  time,  it  is  said,  these  beings  permit  or  direct  the  appearance  of  an  external  organization  such 
as  we  have  previously  described.  It  is  also  believed  that  periodically,  either  towards  the  end  of  a century 
or  in  some  historical  crisis,  one  of  them  makes  a public  appearance  in  one  guise  or  another  in  order  not 
merely  to  ward  off  wholesale  disaster  but  to  guide  some  few  or  many  in  a new  creative  direction. 

They  also  are  the  embodiments  of  the  Western  Esoteric  Traditions,  and  rather  than  an  external 
organization,  are  the  custodians  of  its  teachings. 

SELF  INITIATION 
By 

V.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 


The  Neophyte  Ritual  and  that  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  Grade  are  the  most  important  and 
effective  rituals  of  the  Order.  Those  in  between  are  the  so-called  elemental  rituals.  Crowley  took  a 
rather  dim  view  of  these.  Francis  King  assumed  wrongly  that  I also  held  much  the  same  attitude.  In 
fact,  however,  I think  that  they  have  a very  definite  place  in  the  entire 


8 


VOLUME  ONE 


process  of  initiation.  That  they  are  verbose  and  overlong  I will  admit  to.  Nonetheless  there  are 
ways  and  means  of  overcoming  this  problem.  In  my  recently  published  book  Ceremonial  Magic 
(Aquarian  Press,  England)  a ritual  opening  that  I called  Opening  by  Watchtower  (first  demonstrated 
in  the  consecration  ceremony  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts)  could  be  elaborated  meaningfully  in  a 
variety  of  different  ways  which  could  be  construed  as  effective  as  abbreviated  elemental  initiations. 

To  be  concise,  an  elemental  initiation  is  one  in  which  the  elementals  are  invoked  in  such  a way 
that  they  affect  the  sphere  of  sensation  or  the  energy  field  of  the  candidate.  A series  of  impressions  or 
symbols  are  impressed  on  this  energy  field  in  such  a way  that  they  act,  for  the  candidate,  as  a kind  of 
passport  providing  safe  entry  and  freedom  of  movement  in  that  elemental  sphere  of  operation. 

Assuming  that  this  is  the  case,  then  the  four  elemental  grade  initiations  of  the  Outer  Order,  in 
reality  do  little  more  than  the  abbreviated  Opening  by  Watchtower  ceremonies.  A number  of 
advantages  flow  from  this  assumption.  The  first  is  that  the  ritual  is  nowhere  as  turgid,  lengthy  and 
tiresome  as  is  the  grade  ritual,  all  criticisms  which  led  Crowley  and  others  to  the  faulty  conclusion  that 
they  could  be  dispensed  with  as  useless.  The  second,  and  1 think  the  most  important  one,  is  that  the 
Watchtower  rituals  described  in  the  book  named  above  could  be  employed  as  self-initiatory  rituals. 

Again,  assuming  that  this  is  factual,  then  we  have  reached  a stage  which  fulfills  the  original 
promise  of  some  of  my  early  writing  on  the  Golden  Dawn  - which  was  that  since  the  Hermetic  Order  of 
the  Golden  Dawn  was  now  defunct,  the  isolated  student  here,  there  and  everywhere,  could  now  be  his 
own  initiator.  This  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  that  new  temples  might  arise  and  have  arisen  in 
various  parts  of  the  world  independently  of  any  other  temple.  Several  new  temples  have  in  recent 
years  been  formulated  and  are  functioning  very  sucessfully,  with  new  temples  emerging  even  now. 

In  stating  that  the  isolated  student  could  now  be  his  own  initiator,  one  important  phrase  is 
rendered  imperative.  And  that  is  he  must  be  persistent  and  as  thoroughgoing  and  exacting  as  if  he 
were  an  initiator  in  a regularly  constituted  Golden  Dawn  temple  under  the  constant  scrutiny  of 
officialdom  and  higher  adept  authorities.  The  responsibility  for  progress  is  thus  placed  inexorably  on 
the  student  or  candidate  himself.  As  1 see  it  - and  I have  watched  this  on  a very  few  students  - each 
elemental  initiation  or  Watchtower  ceremony  requires  its  repetition  several  times.  One  student  whom  I 
am  thinking  of  at  this  juncture  has  performed  the  whole  Opening  by  Watchtower  ceremonies  some  50  or 
60  times.  It  is  therefore  my  opinion  that  she  has  initiated  herself  as  effectively  and  as  positively  as  any 
temple  initiatory  hierophantic  team  could  possibly  do.  All  the  important  "command"  symbols  of 
elemental  significance  are  altogether  imbedded  in  her  aura  or  energy  field  so  that  should  she  visit 
their  sphere  of  activity,  via  skrying  in  the  spirit  vision,  they  would  not  regard  her  as  an  enemy  alien 
invading  their  hallowed  circle.  Instead,  she  would  be  regarded  as  friendly  and  as  a divine  helper  because 
she  carries,  as  it  were,  the  only  correct  and  valid  passport  recognized  by  them  as  an  official  password. 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  only  and  still  major  problem  remaining  as  of  this  moment  is  how  to  convert 
the  Neophyte  and  Adeptus  Minor  rituals  into  self-initiatory  operations.  I am  willing  to 
write  off  the  Adeptus  Minor  ritual  as  impossible  to  convert  to  a self-initiatory  ceremony.  It 
still  requires  an  authentic  initiator  to  accomplish  the  purpose  of  this  ritual.  I see  no 
possibility  of  converting  this,  as  things  stand  at  this  moment. 

However,  I still  feel  that  the  Neophyte  ritual  does  contain  the  possibilities  of 
conversion.  It  has  been  done  in  other  ways.  For  example  Crowley,  while  in  Mexico,  did  one 
series  of  meditations,  almost  tantric  in  nature,  that  utilized  the  clairvoyant  visions  of  G.H. 
Frater  S.  R.M.D.  The  latter  did  describe  in  Z-l  and  Z-3  what  happened  to  the  candidate 
during  the  Neophyte  initiation  in  full  temple  ceremonies.  This  I described  in  my  biography  of 
Aleister  Crowley,  The  Eve  in  the  Triangle,  Falcon  Press,  1982.  (Although  some  students 
dislike  Crowley  the  study  of  his  life  and  the  effect  of  the  Golden  Dawn  on  him  is  essential 
to  our  understanding  of  extending  the  work  of  the  Order.)  Years  later,  when  he  came  to  full 
term  as  an  initiator  himself,  he  wrote  a book  of  instruction  entitled  Liber  HHH  (included 
in  Gems  from  the  Equinox,  Falcon  Press,  1982).  In  one  section  of  that  Liber  he  refined  his 
early  meditation  and  created  a magnificent  instruction.  This  also  I have  quoted  in  The  Eve  in 
the  Triangle.  However,  I am  not  looking  in  that  direction  at  this  particular  moment.  What  I 
wish  to  do  is  so  to  simplify  the  Neophyte  ritual  as  practiced  in  the  Order,  by  deleting  a 
number  of  segments  which  are  not  necessarily  integral  to  the  process  of  initiation.  And 
leaving  a ceremonial  skeleton  which  can  be  adapted  by  any  student  to  the  service  of  his  own 
initiation.  For  example,  the  entire  section  in  which  the  various  officers  give  speeches 
describing  what  some  of  the  symbols  amount  to  and  furthermore  name  the  various  subjects 
that  must  be  studied  by  the  candidate  before  he  can  be  advanced  further  in  the  Order.  This 
would  eliminate  a good  deal  of  unnecessary  baggage  and  shorten  the  ritual  the  student 
would  have  to  learn.  It  is  quite  likely  too  that  most  of  the  opening  of  the  temple  in  the 
Neophyte  grade  could  also  be  left  out  without  harm  to  the  entire  initiatory  process  - with 
the  exception  of  that  passage  of  the  Hierophant  which  stated  that  by  names  and  symbols  are 
all  powers  awakened  and  re-awakened.  Whether  the  circumambulations  should  be  omitted 
I have  yet  to  decide,  on  the  basis  of  some  experimentation  myself.  Much  the  same  applies  to 
the  purification  by  water  and  the  consecration  by  fire  - processes  which  are  repeated 
several  times. 

This  then  leaves  as  the  most  important  part  of  the  ritual  the  obligation  at  the  Altar, 
the  charge  of  the  Hierophant  to  quit  the  night  and  seek  the  day,  the  reception  into  the  Order 
and  the  Hegemon's  guiding  the  newly  initiated  Neophyte  between  the  two  pillars  between 
the  altar  and  the  station  of  the  East. 

It  was  only  when  discussing  this  matter  with  V.H.  Soror  Sic  Itur  Ad  Astra  in  Los 
Angeles  recently  that  some  light  was  shed  on  this  problem.  The  core  of  the  solution  revolved 
around  the  notion  that  initiation  outside  of  a regularly  constituted  Temple  was  only 
possible  with  two  students.  They  would  have  to  prove  to  themselves  - not  to  anyone  else  - 
that  they  were  wholly  devoted  to  the  Great  Work,  devoted  enought  to  spend  at  least  several 
months  jointly 


10 


VOLUME  ONE 


or  individually  practising  the  Middle  Pillar  technique  as  described  in  The  Foundations  of 
Practical  Magic,  Aquarian  Press,  1979.  If  this  practice  were  assiduous  and  intense  both  students 
would  have  awakened  in  themselves  the  psycho-spiritual  energy  that  could  not  only  hasten  their  own 
inner  development  but  that  the  latter  could  be  communicated  to  yet  another  in  a manner  not  too 
dissimilar  to  that  described  in  Z-3. 

The  fundamental  requirement  was  that  the  initiator  should  be  an  initiator  - not  a layman  out  of 
the  brute  herd.  Something  must  have  happened  to  him  to  have  redeemed  him  of  the  stigma  of  being 
"ordinary."  Of  course  it  would  have  been  better  if  he  (or  she)  had  been  the  recipient  of  a spontaneous 
mystical  experience  of  the  type  described  in  James'  Varieties  of  Religious  Experience.  Since  this  kind 
of  attainment  cannot  be  made  to  order,  as  it  were,  the  only  alternative  is  to  fall  back  on  time  honored 
methods  of  development  and  growth. 

I am  well  aware  of  the  debate  which  has  gone  on  for  years  as  to  whether  mystical  or  occult 
practices  can  induce  the  mystical  experience  - conversion  or  samadhi  or  satori,  call  it  what  you  will.  If 
not,  then  it  is  maintained  that  these  practices  prepare  the  student  for  that  possibility  if  not  inducing  it 
actually.  And  if  he  have  patience  to  "wait  upon  the  Lord,"  as  it  were,  then  the  one  is  as  good  as  the 
other,  from  my  point  of  view. 

While  pursuing  their  work  with  the  Middle  Pillar  technique  and  any  other  set  of  exercises  to 
which  they  may  be  drawn,  theycould  set  themselves  to  the  task  of  studying  the  Neophyte  Ritual  and  the 
Z documents  that  pertain  to  it.  There  is  additional  suggestive  material  on  this  topic  in  The  Eve  In  the 
Triangle.  Using  the  clairvoyant  description  given  by  Mathers  of  what  really  happened  between  the 
Two  Pillars  to  the  candidate,  Crowley  developed  a meditation  incorporating  all  those  ideas,  as  I have 
intimated  above.  Apparently  this  meditation  must  have  proven  successful,  for  many  years  later  after  he 
had  come  to  term  he  wrote  a document  for  his  own  Order,  the  A.  A.,  known  as  Liber  HHH.  The  first 
section  of  this  document  elaborates  this  meditation  and  transforms  the  clairvoyant  description  of 
Mathers  into  an  extraordinary  piece  of  magical  work  that  has  fascinated  me  for  many  years  for  as  long 
as  I have  known  of  the  Equinoxes  that  he  published  as  long  ago  as  1909-1914. 

All  of  this  could  give  them  ideas  and  hints  as  to  how  to  proceed  in  the  task  of  initiating 
themselves  or  others.  First  one  and  then  another  could  be  helped  to  come  to  the  Light  in  much  the  same 
way  as  if  they  were  operating  in  a duly  constituted  Temple.  In  fact,  to  go  one  further,  there  is  no  reason 
why  the  officers  of  a regular  Temple  should  not  follow  some  such  procedure  as  this  themselves.  It 
would  certainly  do  no  harm,  and  in  fact  would  accomplish  a great  deal.  Since  a Golden  Dawn  Temple  is 
being  instituted  here  and  there  throughout  not  only  this  country,  but  the  world  as  a whole,  this  counsel 
might  be  very  useful  to  all  concerned  to  enhance  the  whole  process  of  initiation. 

Once  this  were  accomplished,  they  could  either  go  their  own  separate  ways  or  maintain  the 
relationship  for  mutual  aid  and  comfort.  But  from  there,  with  the  aid  of  the  Opening  by  Watchtower,  as 
it  has  come  to  be  called,  the  elemental  initiations  would  be  taken  care  of,  and  from  there  they  face  the 
task  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  initation.  What  needs  to  be  done  in 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


that  regard  is  something  I would  rather  not  speculate  about.  But  as  one  initiate  has 
said,  all  that  remains  is  to  prepare  the  Temple  and  then  hope  and  pray  that  it  may  become 
indwelled. 

This  entire  discussion  however  is  intended  to  be  suggestive  only.  A great  deal  must  be 
left  to  the  ingenium  of  the  student  involved  in  this  great  adventure.  Their  intuition  must  be 
sharpened  by  their  adherance  to  the  work  itself,  and  their  progress  and  their  plans  must  be 
left  to  unfold  by  itself.  Enough  has  been  said  at  least  to  show  that  the  way  is  not  without 
light,  and  however  bleak  the  path  seemed  without  teachers  and  a temple  of  the  Order,  they 
are  not  left  to  stumble  unaided  in  the  darkness  of  the  outer  world.  For  as  the  Ritual  says 
"My  soul  wanders  in  darkness  and  I seek  the  Light  of  the  hidden  Knowledge". 

In  conclusion  it  is  strongly  suggested  that  student  closely  study  two  or  three  of  the 
discussions  in  this  present  volume.  One  of  them  is  the  Cautionary  Note  which  directly  follows 
this.  Another  is  a document  dealing  with  the  Inflation  of  the  Ego,  a result  which  is  to  be  avoided 
at  all  costs  by  self  observation  and  study.  And  finally  the  important  article  written  by  Hyatt 
and  myself  concerning  some  major  errors  and  confusions  which  students  have  made  in  the 
past.  Other  documents  scattered  throughout  the  different  segments  of  this  book  will  also  be 
found  supremely  helpful  in  achieving  the  ends  desired. 

A CAUTIONARY  NOTE 


During  the  period  of  time  when  most  of  this  work  was  in  the  manuscript  phase,  and 
various  typists  were  working  on  it,  their  occasional  comments  concerning  the  Golden  Dawn 
System  perturbed  me  somewhat.  It  was  Christopher  Hyatt  one  of  the  editors  of  Falcon  Press 
who  first  alerted  me  to  the  possibility  that  this  misunderstanding  might  occur,  suggesting 
therefore  that  I interpolate  a cautionary  word  to  prevent  other  readers  developing  the  same 
misconception. 

He  was  absolutely  right,  for  some  of  them,  as  well  as  one  or  two  subsequent  readers, 
seem  to  have  developed  the  conception  that  the  whole  Golden  Dawn  System  was  based  on 
the  initiatory  rituals,  and  nothing  more.  It  puzzled  me  because  I had  labored  under  the 
delusion  that  the  rituals  themselves  indicated  without  equivocation  that  there  was  far  more  to 
the  system  than  the  rituals  themselves,  and  also  because  the  remainder  of  the  volume  itself 
elaborated  a whole  system  of  magical  practice  which  could  exist  altogether  independently 
of  the  initiatory  rituals. 

I was  so  certain  of  this  that  to  a couple  of  them  I had  confided  that  though  for  the 
time  being  my  interest  in  writing  was  exhausted,  nonetheless  some  time  in  the  future  I felt 
compelled  to  write  yet  another  book  establishing  a relationship  between  Tibetan  magical 
practices,  as  for  example  laid  out  in  Evans  Wentz's  book  Mi/arepa  the  Tibetan  Yogi  and  the 
Golden  Dawn  System.  There  are  innumerable  parallels  which  are  worth  investigating  and 
enumerating.  And  these  are  altogether  apart  from  the  matter  of  initiatory  rituals.  I feel 
strongly  therefore  that  I must  not  proceed  too  far  with  this  book  without  stressing  the  fact 


12 


VOLUME  ONE 


that  there  is  infinitely  more  to  the  Golden  Dawn  System  of  Magic  than  the  initiatory 
and  other  types  of  rituals.  Not  that  I want  to  minimize  the  importance  of  their  role  in  the 
entire  system  but  it  comprises  so  much  more  that  it  puzzled  me  how  anyone  could  avoid  the 
realization  that  the  performance  of  the  rituals  satisfactorily  depends  on  so  much  more.  If  the 
student  has  thoroughly  studied  the  Z-l  and  Z-3  documents,  it  should  have  dawned  upon  him 
that  efficacy  of  any  ritual  depends  entirely  on  all  the  participants  having  acquired  considerable 
skills  in  the  magical  work  prescribed  by  the  Order. 


Apart  from  the  rudimentary  art  of  invocation  by  means  of  the  Pentagram  and 
Hexagram,  there  is  a vast  repertory  of  techniques  which  must  be  used  and  mastered,  not 
merely  to  gain  advancement  to  a higher  grade  in  the  Order,  which  is  not  too  terribly 
important  by  and  of  itself,  but  in  order  to  become  a proficient  student  of  Magic  these  must  be 
not  merely  known  but  wholly  mastered.  For  example,  assumption  of  God  forms  and  the 
ability  to  build  up  Telesmatic  Images,  more  or  less  along  the  same  line,  these  two  are  the 
very  foundations  of  practical  theurgy.  Then  there  is  the  Middle  Pillar  technique  whose 
importance  simply  cannot  be  overemphasized  in  any  way.  The  student  who  has  neglected  to 
achieve  considerable  proficiency  in  this  particular  practice  will  find  himself  frustrated  at 
every  turn.  And  finally  there  is  the  vibratory  formula  of  the  Middle  Pillar.  I cannot 
conceive  of  a ritual  of  any  kind  being  successfully  consummated  without  being  adept  in  the 
use  of  the  vibratory  formula.  I have  elaborated  this  in  a rather  new  way,  I fancy,  in  that 
section  dealing  with  this  matter,  and  I urge  the  prospective  student  of  magic  to  pay 
particular  attention  not  only  to  this,  but  to  all  the  techniques  I have  just  mentioned. 

Nor  is  the  main  thesis  of  the  Order  the  memorization  of  dry  Qabalistic  knowledge 
from  the  Knowledge  Lectures  or  from  any  other  text  for  that  matter.  This  material  represents 
the  dry  bones  of  Order  knowledge,  the  basic  alphabet  of  what  has  come  to  be  known  as  the 
Magical  Language.  Every  science  and  every  Art  has  its  own  language  without  which  there 
can  be  little  communication.  A great  deal  of  undergraduate  university  work  consists  mainly  of 
learning  different  kinds  of  languages  that  belong  to  the  various  sciences  one  is  learning  about. 
For  example,  physics  has  its  own  terminology  without  which  little  headway  can  be  made  in 
mastering  its  complex  mysteries.  The  same  is  true  of  geology  which  must  forever  remain  a 
mystery  to  those  who  will  not  master  its  language.  Even  in  the  behavioral  sciences  a whole 
new  jargon  or  language  must  be  assimilated.  Eventually  many  students  learn  to  use  the  jargon 
so  satisfactorily  and  skillfully  that  they  become  unintelligible  in  their  everyday 
conversations  leading  their  critics  to  condemn  the  jargon  in  which  they  have  steeped 
themselves.  Nonetheless,  it  is  a language  of  its  own.  It  must  be  learned,  mastered  and  used  in 
order  to  become  an  effective  means  of  communication.  Much  the  same  is  true  of  the 
magical  language.  It  is  a highly  complex  one,  and  most  of  this  work  lays  down  the  elemental 
principles  of  this  language.  The  student  will  do  well  to  take  his  time  mastering  it  - that  is  if  he 
has  never  been  exposed  to  it  before.  But  when  he  does  become  familiar  with  this  language, 
he  will  never  fall  into  the  booby  trap  that  The  Complete  Golden  Dawn  System  of 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Magic  comprises  this  item  or  that  item  only.  It  is  a vast  and  comprehensive  system 
that  is  worthy  of  considerable  effort  to  make  it  an  integral  part  of  one's  thinking  and 
feeling. 

Finally  of  course  there  is  the  method  of  the  tattwa  vision,  also  called  skrying  in  the 
spirit  vision.  This  is  most  important.  However  I feel  entirely  too  much  attention  in  the  past 
has  been  paid  to  this  method  at  the  expense  of  some  of  those  just  listed.  There  must  have 
been  many  members  of  the  early  Order  who  had  a great  talent  for  skrying,  since  it  led  to 
the  possible  development  of  clairvoyance,  etc.  For  this  reason,  its  use  was  overdone.  Not 
only  was  this  so,  but  some  of  the  protective  methods  were  neglected,  and  some  of  the 
people  became  gullible  and  credulous,  and  lost  their  natural  scepticism  which  is  one  of  the 
indispensable  factors  absolutely  essential  to  the  welfare  of  the  student  of  magic.  Without  it  he 
is  lost  in  a wilderness  of  deception  and  fantasy.  Nothing  solid  can  be  based  upon  this 
whatsoever.  Of  course  there  are  also  the  divinatory  methods  of  the  Order.  Geomancy  and  the 
Tarot.  But  the  student  must  not  stop  there.  These  methods  appear  to  be  devoted  to  divining 
the  future,  etc.,  but  it  would  be  a great  mistake  if  your  interpretation  were  limited  solely  to 
this.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  the  use  of  these  methods  develop  intuition  and  the  inner 
psychospiritual  senses,  there  is  a whole  inner  world  to  be  explored  and  discovered  by  using 
the  geomantic  symbols  and  the  Tarot  cards  themselves  as  gateways  to  another  dimension  of 
existence,  to  another  aspect  of  ourselves  of  which  we  ordinarily  have  little  consciousness. 
And  since  the  work  of  the  Order  is  based  upon  self  discovery  as  suggested  by  the  injunction  in 
the  Neophyte  Ritual  "Quit  the  night  and  seek  the  Day,"  and  by  the  very  name  of  the  Order 
itself  - The  Golden  Dawn,  a symbolic  representation  of  the  spiritual  experience  which  is  the 
goal  of  all  our  work,  it  is  the  attainment  of  the  awareness  of  divinity,  and  then  bringing  this 
divinity  to  operate  in  our  daily  lives  in  this  world  of  Malkuth  which  is  the  outer  garment  of 
God.  I still  like  the  old  Qabalistic  aphorism  that  Kether  is  in  Malkuth,  and  Malkuth  is  in 
Kether  but  after  another  manner.  This  is  not  unrelated  to  the  Mahayana  aphorism  that 
Nirvana  is  Samsara  and  Samsara  is  Nirvana. 

Nor  must  I forget  to  call  attention  to  something  that  is  all  too  often  neglected. 
Meditation  on  the  significance  and  meaning  of  the  magical  instruments.  They  are  often 
made  and  consecrated  by  members  of  the  Order  and  used  as  always  recommended,  but 
rarely  do  they  come  to  terms  with  what  underlies  their  common  usage.  It  should  be  obvious  to 
any  long  term  student  that  the  Lotus  Wand  for  example  is  a symbol,  amongst  others,  of  the 
spinal  column  with  the  Lotus  at  the  top  of  the  head  - a channel  for  the  movement  of  the  spinal 
spirit  fire,  the  Kundalini.  (In  this  connection  do  make  an  effort  to  obtain  and  read  a book  by 
a Hindu  named  Gopi  Krishna  entitled  Kundalini).  All  the  other  instruments  similarly  have 
profound  meanings.  In  this  connection,  as  an  aid  to  meditation,  I can  strongly  recommend 
Aleister  Crowley's  magnificent  early  book  Part  Two  of  Book  Four  dealing  with  the  theory  of 
Magick  and  its  tools.  There  are  some  beautiful  meditative  descriptions  of  the  elemental 
weapons  which  the  good  student  cannot  afford  to  overlook  or  do  without.  Such  insights  will 
grow  as  he  grows,  insight  and  intuition  piling  on  one  another  until,  of  course,  the  ultimate 
goal  of  all  the  work  is  realized  --  enlightenment. 


14 


VOLUME  ONE 


As  one  becomes  proficient  in  the  work  of  the  Order  and  one's  insight  and  understanding 
develops,  it  will  become  apparent  that  all  of  these  methods  may  be  tied  together  and  unified  to  become 
a magical  engine  by  means  of  which  the  Mountain  of  Initiation  may  be  scaled  and  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven  reached,  so  that  man  aspires  to  God  and  God  aspires  to  man. 

The  Order  is  a magical  one.  But  its  mysticism  is  by  no  means  to  be  separated  from  its  magic. 
At  first  they  may  seem  to  be  entirely  different  methods  of  attaining  to  the  highest.  And  indeed  so 
they  appear  to  be.  But  it  is  the  mark  of  real  adeptship  when  the  student  comes  to  realize  that  there  is 
no  real  separation  between  these  methods,  and  that  at  the  end  they  are  one  and  the  same. 

In  other  words,  to  come  back  to  the  initial  theme  stated  at  the  outset  of  this  chapter,  there  is  much 
more  to  the  Order  than  the  initiatory  and  other  types  of  rituals.  There  is  so  much  in  the  Neophyte  and 
Adeptus  Minor  rituals  that  are  of  value  to  the  aspirant,  that  even  if  one  were  to  assume  that  the  Order 
work  is  essentially  that  of  ritualism,  one  would  really  not  be  far  wrong.  They  contain  so  much.  For 
example  in  the  Neophyte  Ritual,  one  of  the  first  exhortations  one  hears  is  that  coming  from  the 
Hierophant  who  states  by  names  and  images  are  all  powers  awakened  and  reawakened. The  newly 
initiated  Frater  or  Soror  into  the  Order  could  spend  considerable  effort  and  time  meditating  on  just 
what  this  means.  When  he  does  this,  he  will  be  led  into  the  deepest  mysteries  of  the  teachings  of  the 
Order,  and  into  some  kind  of  understanding  of  what  all  the  variety  of  Order  techniques  amount  to.  I can 
come  to  rest  here  about  warning  the  student  to  dispense  with  any  superficial  evaluation  of  the  Order 
method  arrived  at  by  a rapid  reading  of  the  several  rituals,  or  of  the  book  itself.  The  whole  system  needs 
to  be  studied  carefully.  Don't  be  misled  by  the  apparent  simplicity  of  the  system.  It  is  enormously 
complex  and  complicated  - and  at  the  same  time  so  beautifully  simple.  It  may  take  the  student  some 
time,  perhaps  years,  to  appreciate  the  simplicity  of  the  Order  system,  but  the  expenditure  of  that  time 
will  be  found  to  be  worth  the  effort.  Though  meditation  is  not  exactly  harped  on  throughout  the  text,  it 
is  mentioned  here  and  there.  And  my  hope  is  that  the  good  student  will  do  a great  deal  of  meditation 
upon  what  he  learns  and  does  with  the  Order  work.  There  is  much  to  be  gained.  So  much  is  not  stated  in 
specific  words,  but  it  is  in  this  "non-statement"  or  understatement  that  much  of  the  essence  of  the 
system  is  contained. 

Just  recently  (Easter,  1983)  another  comment  was  made,  one  which  I have  heard  before  from 
one  of  the  Order  "failures,"  that  there  is  a dearth  of  the  devotional  element  in  the  Order  work. 
Ordinarily,  this  comment  might  be  expected  from  a former  Church  goer  steeped  in  the  Bible  - or, 
which  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  a member  of  the  Fellowship  of  the  Rosy  Cross,  the  name  of  the 
Waite  version  of  the  Golden  Dawn. 

Ordinarily,  this  criticism  is  not  worthy  of  note,  save  that  in  the  last  instance  when  I heard  it,  a 
younger  student  had  just  returned  from  one  of  the  Ashrams  in  India  where  he  had  heard  a great  deal 
about  bhakta  yoga.  I can  understand  this  criticism  because  bhakta  is  certainly  not  stressed  in  the  overt 
sense  within  the  Order  work.  But  I have  to  remind  students  that  if  they  study  the  Order  work  very 
closely  - as  closely  as  they  have  been  taught 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


to  study  the  yoga  system,  they  will  discover  a great  deal  of  emotional  content.  For  instance,  on 
the  few  occasions  when  I have  witnessed  a Neophyte  initiation,  I have  felt  very  close  to  an  emotional 
exaltation,  almost  enough  to  bring  on  tears  or  at  the  very  least  a sense  of  choking,  adequate  to  halt 
speech.  Moreover,  the  Hierophant  of  one  of  the  existent  Temples,  V.H.  Soror  S.I.A.A.,  who  has 
officiated  at  the  initiation  of  some  forty  Neophytes,  also  tells  me  that  the  ceremony  often  brings  her  to 
the  verge  of  tears. 

Apart  from  that,  however,  I strongly  urge  the  student  who  may  entertain  similar  feelings,  to  read 
once  more  a former  work  of  mine  What  You  Should  Know  About  the  Golden  Dawn,  (Falcon  Press, 
Phoenix,  AZ.  1983).  In  that  book,  many  quotations  from  the  different  rituals  are  given,  quotations  which 
are  not  only  choice  English  and  fine  writing,  but  are  good  examples  of  the  devotional  aspect  of  the 
Order's  work.  These  are  really  worth  reviewing  quite  often  so  as  to  renew  the  sense  that  the  Order  is  not 
without  its  bhakta  aspects. 

If  that  is  not  enough,  then  I must  refer  to  the  work  of  Aleister  Crowley  who,  after  all,  whatever 
is  said  and  done,  was  once  a member  of  the  Order  and  owes  a very  great  deal  to  his  Initiation  therein.  I 
especially  suggest  reading  his  instruction  which  reviews  the  whole  Eastern  attitude  about  bhakta  - 
Liber  Astarte  vel  Bervlli  to  be  found  in  one  of  the  Equinoxes,  or  in  my  book  Gems  from  the 
Equinox  (Falcon  Press,  Phoenix,  AZ.  1982).  So  far  as  I am  concerned,  this  Liber  is  a masterpiece, 
which  I can  strongly  recommend  especially  to  one  complaining  of  the  absence  of  devotional  writing  in 
the  Order. 

Furthermore,  and  this  I think  is  paramount,  there  is  Crowley's  early  masterpiece  Three  Holy  Books 
originally  published  by  Sangreal  Foundation  with  a short  introduction  by  me,  but  which  I understand  will  be 
republished  by  Samuel  Weiser  Inc.  of  New  York.  This  volume  contains  Liber  LXV  or  The  Book  of  the 
Heart  Girt  with  a Serpent,  Liber  VII  or  Liber  Lapidis  Lazuli,  and  finally  Liber  813  vel  Ararita. 
All  three  are  superbly  written  and  breathe  devotion  in  every  word.  I am  particularly  fond  of  LXV  and  VII 
which  Falcon  Press  is  issuing  as  cassettes,  containing  Liber  LXV,  or  The  Book  of  the  Heart  Girt  with  a 
Serpent,  Liber  VII  orLiber  Lapidus  Lazuli,  and  Liber  DCCCX1 1 1 or  Ararita.  Periodically  I will 
play  the  tape  on  retiring  to  bed  at  night,  and  permitting  myself  to  fall  asleep  listening  to  its  beauty  and 
devotion.  It  may  be  stretching  definitions  of  things  pretty  far  to  state  that  these  may  be  considered  part  of  the 
Order's  devotional  literature.  But  on  the  other  hand  I would  rather  consider  these  to  be  in  that  category  than 
the  religious  lucubrations  of  Mr.  A.E.  Waite  who  was  also  once  a member  of  the  Order.  He  founded  his  own 
Fellowship,  and  rewrote  the  Rituals  (three  of  which  are  included  in  a later  section  of  this  book)  to  include 
many  excerpts  from  the  Bible  and  perhaps  from  the  Roman  missal.  I am  not  to  be  construed  as  being 
antagonistic  to  the  latter  by  any  means,  but  I do  state  strongly  that  if  I must  use  one  or  the  other,  I prefer 
to  use  the  so-called  holy  books  of  Aleister  Crowley.  They  convey  more  devotion  and  love  to  me  than 
almost  anything  else.  So  that  if  there  is  actually  a dearth  of  devotional  material  in  the  Rituals  and  work 
of  the  Order,  it  is  more  than  compensated  for  by  reference  to  the  work  of  a former  member,  Aleister 
Crowley.  I trust  that  this  will  be  the  end  of  any  complaints  about  this  topic. 


16 


VOLUME  ONE 


THE  PROPER  ATTITUDE  TOWARD  MIND-BODY 
By 

ISRAEL  REGARDIE  AND  CHRISTOPHER  S.  HYATT 


Over  the  past  fifty  years  I have  insisted  that  the  serious  magical  student  seek  a course  of 
therapy  as  a safeguard  against  some  of  the  catastrophic  results  which  appear  to  overtake  too  many  of 
our  promising  students. 

The  difficulties  seem  to  arise  from  the  following: 

THE  SUPEREGO  AND  THE  H.G.A. 


A.  The  confusion  between  the  Freudian  superego  (the  unconscious  infantile  conscience) 
and  the  Order's  concept  of  the  Higher  and  Divine  Genius  (or  the  H.G.A.) 

Many  students  as  well  as  those  not  involved  with  Magic  often  substitute  a form  of  their 
infantile  conscience  for  one  form  of  "Higher  Self"  or  another.  This  can  lead  to  nothing  but  disaster. 
Instead  of  being  guided  by  a Higher  Genius  the  person  is  really  at  the  mercy  of  infantile  "voices"  and 
values,  so-called  brain  chatter.  Not  only  does  this  cause  undue  individual  suffering  and  deception,  it 
also  causes  a complete  halt  to  any  real  progress  in  the  Theurgic  arts  and  sciences.  To  a large  extent  this 
confusion  contributes  to  the  often  "bad"  reputation  students  of  the  occult  possess. 

Those  of  you  familiar  with  the  history  of  the  Order  can  find  glowing  examples  of  this  folly. 
However  there  is  no  need  to  delve  this  deeply.  Almost  any  group  or  Order  has  members  and  often 
leaders  who  have  fallen  head  long  into  this  pit  dug  for  the  unwary. 

THE  INFLATION  OF  THE  EGO 


B.  There  is  a frightening  frequency  of  the  occurrence  of  the  inflation  of  the  ego  — 
sometimes  referred  to  as  infantile  megalomania.  To  help  the  student  understand  this  difficulty  let  us 
define  the  healthy  ego  as  a computer  type  decision  maker.  The  ego's  function  is  to  help  the  person 
make  decisions  based  on  hard  data.  The  purpose  of  this  function  should  be  that  of  survival  and 
personal  fulfillment  on  various  levels  or  planes.  In  one  sense  the  healthy  ego  is  more  or  less  non- 
personal. It  realizes  cause  and  effect  in  Malkuth,  and  understands  its  limitations. 

On  the  other  hand  infantile  megalomania  is  a natural  occurrence  in  infancy,  and  with  proper 
development  has  been  outgrown  by  the  healthy  adult  ego.  However,  while  this  is  the  ideal  it  rarely 
occurs  in  practice,  and  requires  some  form  of  "therapy"  Eastern  or  Western  to  accomplish  this  goal.  In 
the  practice  of  Magic  or  anything  which  releases  unusual  amounts  of  energy  from  the  unconscious  the 
infantile  megalomaniacal  substructure  is  re-activated,  and  all  the  illusions  and  delusions  of  self 
importance  and  elevation  of  babyhood  re-emerge. 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


This  flattery  overwhelms  the  ego.  The  person  takes  the  impersonal  and  universal 
nature  of  the  powers  he  or  she  experiences  as  if  he  or  she  created  the  powers  or  experiences 
by  what  they  call  - themselves. 

If  this  experience  called  by  Jung  the  "Mana  Personality"  persists  for  too  long  a period 
the  person  becomes  ego-maniacal  and  thoroughly  self-centered.  This  can  be  observed  in 
patients  undergoing  psychotherapy  as  well  as  in  the  so-called  normal  man  on  the  street. 

This  excessive  self-admiration  or  as  Jung  puts  it  "the  naive  concretization  of  primordial 
images"  leads  to  an  overinflated  ego  which  in  the  end  leads  directly  to  disaster  and 
contradicts  in  toto  the  purpose  of  the  Great  Work. 

The  student  should  be  also  cautioned  that  the  opposite  of  infantile  megalomania  is  not 
milk-toast  humility  and  passiveness.  The  latter  is  the  sine  qua  non  of  a deeply  buried  and 
potentially  more  dangerous  form  of  infantile  megalomania. 


THE  PROPER  ATTITUDE  TOWARD  THE  INSTINCTS 


C.  There  is  a danger  of  the  blatant  acting  out  of  instincts  which  have  been  distorted 
through  repression  and  denial  on  the  one  hand  or  their  compulsive  repression  leading  to  a 
boring  and  unfulfilled  sex  life.  Almost  everyone  raised  in  the  current  Judaic-Christian 
morality  suffers  inevitably  from  a totally  distorted  attitude  towards  this  topic  as  well  as  to  all 
biologic  functions  in  general.  Therefore  a complete  sex  life  which  is  not  only  pleasurable  but 
aids  in  the  evolution  of  the  Soul  is  totally  out  of  the  question.  What  is  required  is  a a 
healthy  attitude  toward  all  bodily  functions,  remembering  always  that  Kether  is  in  Malkuth 
and  Malkuth  is  in  Kether,  but  after  another  manner. 

Those  involved  with  the  Great  Work  have  often  found  themselves  falling  into  the 
camps  of  excess  in  one  direction  or  another,  i.e.  too  much  or  too  little.  The  proper  use  and 
enjoyment  of  sex  is  a necessary  part  in  the  discovery  and  development  of  the  Higher 
Genius.  Aleister  Crowley  is  one  of  very  few  who  has  recognized  the  reality  of  this  problem, 
although  he  himself  at  times,  due  to  his  Plymouth  Brethren  upbringing,  fell  into  the  same 
booby  trap.  Most  of  us  are  plagued  by  an  average  somewhat  inhibited  sex  life,  or  worse  yet  a 
compulsive  acting  out  of  our  repressed  sexual  drives.  These  attitudes  do  not  aid  the 
development  of  self-expression,  deep  and  total  relaxation,  or  serve  as  a vehicle  for  opening 
the  deeper  channels  which  lie  within. 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  RELIGION  AND  THE  GREAT  WORK 

This  opens  the  way  to  a discussion  of  a very  serious  point  which  has  long  been  on  my 
mind.  It  emerges  into  the  open  by  the  inclusion  in  this  volume  of  some  of  the  Rituals  of  A.E. 
Waite.  Mathers  and  the  Order  he  founded  were  only  nominally  Christian.  One  has  to  search 
meticulously  through  the  Rituals  and  other  teaching  for  serious  literal  interpretations  of  the 
historical  Jesus.  In  reality  they  are  absent.  The  references  to  Osiris  as  a symbol  of  man  - 
made  - perfect  could  be  those  of  any  of  the  mythical  Mediterranean  crucified  Gods,  of  whom 
there  were  many.  The  Order  was  a Hermetic  Brotherhood  and  Christianity  played 


18 


VOLUME  ONE 


only  a minimal  role  in  its  operation.  Mathers  was  on  friendly  with  Anna  Kingsford  who  had 
founded  another  Hermetic  Society  in  which  Christianity  did  play  a prominent  part.  But  he  never 
permitted  this  friendship  to  influence  him  to  make  his  Society  similar  to  hers. 

There  is  a very  interesting  set  of  concepts  here  that  need  only  to  be  touched  on.  And  that  is  the 
constant  effort  made  by  some  occult  teachers  to  Christianize  the  ancient  wisdom  religion.  I have 
already  mentioned  Anna  Kingsford  as  one.  Another,  who  influenced  Dr.  Felkins  tremendously  was 
Rudolph  Steiner  who  seemed  determined  to  Christianize  occultism  in  grotesque  ways  that  are 
fundamentally  opposed  to  the  innate  conceptual  nature  of  Magic.  In  this  he  was  following  in  the  foot 
steps  of  Annie  Besant  and  Bishop  Leadbeater  who  had  already  succeeded  in  corrupting  Blavatskian 
Theosophy,  trans-forming  it  into  a Christian  occultism  with  Eastern  overtones.  Though  Steiner  was 
in  conflict  with  them,  nonetheless  their  doctrines  must  have  affected  him  profoundly,  despite  his  so- 
called  clairvoyance  being  in  opposition  to  the  so-called  clairvoyance  of  Leadbeater. 

While  this  was  going  on  Waite  who  had  been  raised  as  a Roman  Catholic  seemed  determined 
to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  above  named  teachers.  After  the  revolt  of  1900  in  the  Order  he  was 
one  of  the  several  committee  members  who  ran  the  Order.  Later  he  pulled  out  from  this  committee  to 
form  his  own  Lellowship  of  The  Rosy  Cross.  When  this  happened  he  totally  revised  not  merely  the 
rituals  of  the  Order  but  the  entire  philosophic  context  of  the  Order.  In  this  volume  three  of  his  Rituals 
are  included.  Lrom  them  the  discriminating  reader  will  be  able  to  determine  to  what  extent  this 
perversion  of  the  Order  methodology  had  advanced.  There  is  almost  no  relationship  between  the 
teachings  originally  laid  down  and  the  later  biblical  emphasis  introduced  by  Waite. 

This  of  course  resulted  in  the  introduction  of  Church  concepts  of  morality  and  purity  which 
are  evident  in  almost  everything  that  Waite  wrote.  His  whole  attitude  became  sex-negative  as  well  as 
occult-negative.  He  made  it  almost  a point  of  honour  to  eradicate  any  reference  to  every  item  in  the 
Magical  cut  riculum  laid  down  by  Mathers  and  Westcott.  Lortunately  when  he  died  in  the  late  1930's 
his  Order  died  with  him  and  so  did  his  sex-negative  attitudes,  as  well  as  his  wretched  pompous  English 
— characterized  by  a need  to  use  Latin  phrases  where  simple  English  would  have  been  much  better. 
Contrary  to  the  common  point  of  view  he  must  have  been  a very  ambitious  person  and  this  is  made 
evident  by  the  pompous  titles  he  gave  both  to  himself  in  the  Rituals  as  well  as  to  his  attendant 
officers. 


EGOTISM 


One  of  the  great  dangers  inherent  within  the  practice  of  Magic  and  indeed  of  all  the  occult 
arts  — is  the  development  of  an  enormous  egotism  characterized  by  messianic  feelings,  infantile 
omnipotence  and  the  utter  destruction  of  any  capacity  for  effective  self-criticism.  It  appears  that  as  the 
student  becomes  more  adept  in  the  skills  of  meditation,  skrying,  or  ceremonial  work,  he  becomes  more 
threatened  by  an  inflation  of  the  ego.  It  appears  slowly  and  insidiously,  without  apparent  warning. 
Only  those  people  who  are  closely  related  to  or  associated  with  the  student  become  aware  of  the  subtle 
metamorphosis 


19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


that  occurs.  The  student  rarely  is  conscious  of  this  unconscious  transformation. 
Attempting  to  make  him  aware  of  this  egotism  is  doomed  to  failure;  it  is  like  knocking  on  a 
stone  wall. 

It  seems  to  afflict  the  aspirant  who  functions  outside  the  borders  of  an  occult  order 
or  legitimate  magical  school.  In  this  sense,  most  students  come  within  the  jurisdiction  of  this 
definition.  Those  who  practice  their  occult  work  under  the  aegis  of  a legitimate  magical 
body  or  under  the  guidance  of  an  experienced  and  wise  guru  or  teacher  seem  to  be  more 
protected  from  this  inflation  --  unless  the  guru  has  himself  fallen  under  the  spell  of  his  own 
messianic  fantasies  and  inflation.  If  he  has,  then  he  communicates  his  fatal  sickness  to  his 
students.  Or  else  he  is  wholly  blinded  to  the  debacle  about  to  occur  to  his  student. 

One  has  only  to  look  at  the  history  of  most  modern  occultists  and  I use  them 
preferentially  because  their  history  is  more  readily  authenticated  than  those  of  earlier  times  - 
- to  perceive  how  valid  this  phenomenon  is.  So  many  of  them  developed  fantastic  notions  of 
their  own  unique  importance  and  role  in  the  world  or  even  cosmic  picture.  Only  recently  I 
heard  of  one  who  claimed  to  have  been  the  teacher  of  Jesus!  There  are  an  almost  infinite 
number  of  variations  of  this  theme. 

It  is  a definite  and  ever  present  danger,  and  all  students  of  occultism  within  or 
without  occult  orders  must  become  conscious  of  this  phenomenon.  Otherwise  they  are 
doomed.  They  experience  what  appears  to  be  at  first  an  enhancement  of  life-feelings,  a rich 
harvest  of  previously  unknown  information  and  knowledge,  and  the  awareness  that  destiny 
has  suddenly  acquired  a new  direction,  --  only  to  collapse  later  in  total  frustration,  ignominy, 
and  exile  from  all  of  society. 

From  the  theoretical  viewpoint,  the  gradual  expansion  of  the  confines  of  the  limited 
ego  by  magical  practices,  leads  to  contact  of  some  kind  with  the  'unconscious'.  A new  source 
of  energy  is  released,  an  energy  which  is  seen  as  carrying  with  it  not  only  new  feelings  but  new 
knowledge  and  a greater  capacity  for  self-confidence  with  the  ability  to  impress  and 
motivate  one's  fellow  man.  This  energy  floods  the  unprepared  ego  with  almost  infinite 
promise.  Unless  the  candidate  is  properly  prepared  for  this  phenomenon,  or  is  guided  and 
guarded  by  a competent  experienced  teacher,  he  is  likely  to  take  this  seriously.  Effective 
self-criticism  seems  to  have  vanished  in  thin  air. 

Crowley  seems  to  have  been  most  conscious  of  this  in  some  of  his  earlier  work.  He 
himself  had  a couple  of  admirable  teachers  --  Alan  Bennett,  George  Cecil  Jones  and  Oscar 
Eckenstein.  For  example  in  one  section  of  Liber  0 he  wrote:  'This  book  is  very  easy  to 
misunderstand;  readers  are  asked  to  use  the  most  minute  critical  care  in  the  study  of  it.  even 
as  we  have  done  in  its  preparation.  In  this  book  it  is  spoken  of  the  Sephiroth  and  the  Paths; 
of  Spirits  and  Conjurations;  of  Gods,  Spheres,  Planes  and  many  other  things  which  may  or 
may  not  exist.  It  is  immaterial  whether  these  exist  or  not.  By  doing  certain  things  certain 
results  will  follow;  students  are  most  earnestly  warned  against  attributing  objective  reality  or 
philosophic  validity  to  any  of  them.  There  is  little  danger  that  any  student,  however  idle  or 
stupid,  will  fail  to  get  some  result;  but  there  is  great  danger  that  he  will  be  led  astray, 


20 


VOLUME  ONE 


obsessed  and  overwhelmed  by  his  results,  even  though  it  be  by  those  which  it  is 
necessary  that  he  should  attain.  Too  often,  moreover,  he  mistaketh  the  final  resting-place  for 
the  goal,  and  taketh  off  his  armour  as  if  he  were  a victor  ere  the  fight  is  well  begun.' 

Some  few  other  occultists  familiar  with  the  practical  side  of  things  also  utter  similar 
warnings.  Blavatsky  in  her  Voice  of  the  Silence  also  warns  that  'under  every  flower  a serpent 
coiled.'  And  in  a footnote  in  this  warning,  she  adds:  The  astral  region,  the  psychic  world  of 
supersensous  perception  and  of  deceptive  sights  --  the  world  of  mediums.  It  is  the  great 
'Astral  Serpent'  of  Eliphas  Levi.  No  blossom  picked  in  those  regions  has  ever  yet  been  brought 
down  to  earth  without  its  serpent  coiled  around  the  stem.  It  is  the  world  of  the  Great 
Illusion. 

Only  a good  guru  of  almost  superhuman  powers  of  effective  self-evaluation  and 
examination  provide  the  means  of  avoiding  inflation  and  the  consequent  disaster.  A third 
means  is  almost  any  form  of  good  psychotherapy.  The  latter  appears  to  be  able  to  drain  off  the 
massive  uncontrolled  quantities  of  energy  that  are  released  and  direct  them  into  new  and 
constructive  goals.  Those  Reichians  who  have  an  understanding  of  'occult'  matters  would 
appear  to  be  more  effective  than  most  in  dealing  with  the  phenomenon. 

Jung  has  also  described  it  most  extensively  in  an  extraordinarily  good  essay  in  a book 
entitled  Two  Essays  on  Analytical  Psychology.  However,  the  methods  of  therapy  described  by 
Jung  and  practised  by  his  followers  leave  a lot  to  be  desired.  Every  occult  student  should  not 
merely  read  this  book  but  own  it,  in  order  to  provide  the  opportunity  to  read  and  re-read 
many  times  the  chapter  dealing  with  inflation  of  the  ego. 

It  is  his  contention  that  the  analysand,  the  patient  undergoing  therapy  --  analagous  to 
the  enterprising  student  beginning  his  occult  work  --  attempts  to  identify  his  ego  with  the 
collective  psyche.  He  does  this  as  a means  of  escaping  the  pain  and  anxiety  resulting  from 
the  collapse  of  his  conscious  persona  or  self,  which  is  one  of  the  primary  effects  of  the 
analysis.  To  free  himself  from  the  seductive  embrace  of  the  collective  psyche,  instead  of 
denying  it  as  some  others  have  done,  he  accepts  it  so  totally  that  he  is  devoured  or 
overwhelmed  by  it,  becomes  lost  in  it,  and  thus  is  no  longer  capable  of  perceiving  it  as  a 
separate  entity.  As  another  student  once  put  it,  instead  of  realizing  that  they  have  become 
illuminated  by  God,  they  affirm  that  they  are  God.  Thus  the  inflation  begins.  It  ends 
disastrously  when  or  if  the  'God'  discovers  he  is  not  omniscient  or  omnipotent.  But  by  then  it 
is  generally  too  late. 

It  would  not  do  the  student  harm  to  re-read  the  statement  by  Hyatt  and  myself  on  the 
problems  confronting  the  serious  occult  student  in  the  beginning  of  this  book.  Also  while  at 
times  outrageous  Hyatt's  book  Undoing  Yourself  with  Energized  Meditation  (Falcon  Press, 
1982),  makes  good  sense  in  this  context. 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  MAGICAL  ALPHABET 

The  Knowledge  Lectures  of  the  Golden  Dawn  were  fragments,  isolated  and  brief, 
of  general  occult  information  that  were  handed  to  the  student  after  each  initiation.  He  was 
instructed  to  memorize  them,  to  make  them  part  of  his  basic  mental  equipment. 

The  information  consisted  primarily  of  some  rudimentary  Qabalistic  theory,  plus 
of  course  the  Hebrew  Alphabet,  bits  of  astrological  data,  the  names  of  the  Tarot  cards  and 
their  simplest  attributions,  some  geomantic  symbols,  and  a few  samples  of  general  occult 
symbolism.  None  of  these  was  in  depth.  So  that  unless  the  student  had  done  a great  deal  of 
previous  individual  study  and  meditation  on  what  he  now  studied,  he  was  indeed  at  a loose 
end.  The  result  was  that  he  could,  and  often  did,  wind  up  hopelessly  confused,  without  the 
slightest  idea  of  what  all  this  information  really  amounted  to,  and  gave  up  the  work  of  the 
Order. 


S.  L.  Mathers'  book  The  Kabballah  Unveiledhad  only  just  been  published  prior  to  the 
formation  of  the  Heremetic  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  (in  the  Outer).  Much  of  the 
Qabalistic  information  of  several  Knowledge  Lectures  quite  evidently  had  been  extrapolated 
from  his  Introduction  to  this  book.  Lor  the  average  student  this  Introduction  is  a goldmine,  a 
most  useful  piece  of  work  --  though  I cannot  say  as  much  for  the  text  itself  which  is  the 
essence  of  needless  obscurity.  A large  part  of  the  Introduction  is  herewith  duplicated  to 
show  the  connections  between  the  book  and  Knowledge  Lectures. 

Apart  from  this  book,  there  were  not  a great  many  authorities  students  could  consult 
in  order  to  enlarge  and  round  out  their  information  of  what  the  Knowledge  Lectures  were 
merely  hinting  at.  There  was  of  course  the  library  of  the  British  Museum  where  Mathers 
himself  had  spent  a vast  amount  of  time  digging  out  archaic  magical  material.  1 doubt 
however  that  many  others  would  have  bothered  with  that  magnificent  storehouse  of  source 
material.  He  therefore  deserves  enormous  commendation  for  his  energy,  insight  and  ability  to 
probe  into  and  clarify  the  obscure  and  archaic  literature  that  he  was  determined  to  find. 

Some  critics  have  been  capriciously  hostile  assuming  that  any  Tom,  Dick  or  Harry  would 
have  had  the  perspicacity  and  intelligence  to  have  discovered  the  information  that  Mathers 
was  looking  for.  I have  spent  never  ending  hours  over  periods  of  months  and  years  in  the 
mid-thirties  attempting,  fruitlessly,  to  duplicate  what  Mathers,  in  his  genius,  knew  what  he 
was  looking  for. 

Some  astrological  works  were  also  available,  with  the  beginning  of  an  outpouring  of 
Theosophical  and  related  literature.  These  would  have  been  of  considerable  value.  At  least 
some  over-all  picture  of  the  system  would  have  been  provided,  albeit  from  an  Eastern  point  of 
view.  But  this  was  supposed  to  be  the  root  of  the  Western  Esoteric  Tradition. 

Alchemical  texts  were  not  in  general  circulation  at  that  time  either.  A.  E.  Waite  had 
not  begun  his  task  of  editing  and  publishing  Latin  and  Greek  translations  made  by  some  of 
the  older  Golden  Dawn  clerical  members.  Since  that  time  the  alchemical  field  has  evidenced 
a renaissance  with  the  appearance  of  many  fine  texts.  A recent  book  by  Lrater  Albertus  The 


22 


VOLUME  ONE 


Alchemists  Handbook  (Samuel  Weiser  Inc.,  New  York)  will  provide  a depth  of 
material  not  otherwise  available.  It  throws  much  light  on  some  of  the  dark  utterances  of  the 
Golden  Dawn  Knowledge  Lectures  which  otherwise  would  not  make  much  sense. 

So  far  as  the  Tarot  was  concerned,  much  the  same  situation  prevailed.  There  was 
little  available  in  English.  Mathers'  own  booklet  was  worthless.  1 imagine  it  was  written 
and  published  to  put  people  off  the  track  rather  than  to  help  them,  a ridiculous  attitude 
typical  of  that  period  of  time.  It  should  never  have  been  written  or  published.  Paul  F.  Case's 
book  on  the  Tarot,  had  it  then  existed,  would  have  proved  invaluable. 

Franz  Hartman,  with  Theosophical  connections  had  written  a book  on  Geomancy 
based  on  earlier  writings.  It  would  have  provided  additional  material  the  enterprising 
student  could  have  used,  though  the  esoteric  keys  unique  to  the  Golden  Dawn's  later  Inner 
Order  work  were  not  described.  He  was  also  the  author-editor  of  In  the  Pronaos  of  the  Temple,  a 
very  imformative  little  book  which  reproduced  some  of  the  forgotten  Rosicrucian  legends 
and  source  material  from  an  earlier  period  of  time.  And  we  must  not  forget  what  has  since 
become  a classic  in  the  Rosicrucian  and  Alchemical  fields  The  Secret  Symbols  of  the 
Rosicrucians. 

General  symbolism  could  have  been  picked  up  from  a variety  of  miscellaneous 
sources.  There  was  a general  stirring,  and  occult  and  spiritual  matters  were  in  the  air. 

But  for  the  general  student  of  the  Mysteries  who  was  not  a scholar,  or  had  a penchant 
for  independent  research,  the  basic  knowledge  material  was  all  disconnected  data  and 
pretty  much  of  a closed  book.  All  he  could  do  was  to  memorize  the  stuff  by  rote,  and  ask 
questions  of  the  Officers  of  the  Temple  he  belonged  to.  They  may  or  may  not  have  been  too 
helpful.  One  of  the  common  cliches  was  that  the  elucidation  of  this  or  that  set  of  notions 
was  reserved  for  a higher  grade.  Very  frustrating! 

Be  that  as  it  may,  by  the  time  the  student  had  completed  his  passage  through  the  grades 
of  the  Outer  Order  he  was  in  possession  of  a good  deal  of  basic  material.  A great  deal  more 
than  one  would  think  at  first  sight.  It  was  handed  out  piecemeal  which  was  also  a good  idea; 
otherwise  were  it  presented  en  masse  as  it  was  in  a previous  publication  of  mine  he  would 
have  been  swamped  and  overwhelmed  by  a mass  of  wholly  indigestible  material.  Whether  he 
was  able  to  tie  it  all  together  and  integrate  it,  by  the  time  he  got  to  the  Inner  Order,  into  a 
meaningful  and  workable  system  is  a moot  point.  It  would  be  far  easier  for  the  modern 
student  to  do  this  than  one  of  a century  ago. 

However,  the  fact  remains  that  what  was  given  in  the  Knowledge  Lectures  served  as 
the  barebones  of  what  could  be  called  the  Magical  Alphabet.  Without  this,  most  occult  or 
magical  literature  is  a closed  book.  With  it,  even  if  only  partly  understood,  you  have  an 
open  sesame  to  some  of  the  most  profound  ideas  and  practical  systems  of  personal 
development  ever  devised.  All  of  this  constituted  the  skeleton  of  a profound  philosophical 
system. 

The  task  today  is  so  much  easier  for  the  student  who  really  wishes  to  study  and  master 
the  basics.  Several  fine  works  have  been  written  by  former  students  of  the  Order  and  which 
have  turned  out  to  be  enormously  valuable  aids  in  the  development  of  a magical 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


philosophy.  First  and  foremost  perhaps  is  Dion  Fortune's  The  Mystical  Qabalah,  a 
beautiful  elaboration  of  the  fundamental  concepts  of  the  Order.  Criticized  by  the 
contentious  Ellic  Howe,  it  is  nonetheless  one  of  the  best  modern  introductions  to  a difficult 
subject.  Its  only  flaws  might  be  that  she  has  given  too  much  space  to  a discussion  of  the 
Unknowable  in  violation  of  Sir  Edwin  Arnold's  warning  (in  The  Light  of  Asia):  "Sink  not  the 
string  of  thoughts  into  the  Unfathomable.  Who  asks  doth  err.  Who  answers  errs.  Say 
naught."  And  then  it  is  marred  somewhat  by  the  neo-Theosophical  viewpoints  of  the 
Besant-Leadbeater  clique  relative  to  the  Master  Jesus,  which  has  no  connection  at  all  with 
the  Qabalah,  and  is  even  repudiated  by  her  more  modern  successors  such  as  Gareth  Knight. 
Nonetheless  it  is  strongly  recommended. 

In  the  same  category,  I would  place  The  Ladder  of  Lights  by  William  Gray.  It  is  a superb 
piece  of  Qabalistic  writing  that  I am  sure  will  find  its  own  place  in  posterity.  A number  of 
others  might  be  mentioned,  but  these  should  provide  a starting  point  for  the  enterprising 
student  who  wishes  to  get  a good  handle  on  an  otherwise  obscure  subject. 

In  order  to  integrate,  in  part,  some  of  the  mass  of  disconnected  materials  given  in 
the  Knowledge  Lectures,  I have  decided  to  include  long  quotations  from  MacGregor 
Mathers'  Introduction  to  The  Kaballah  Unveiled.  I will  not  say  much  about  the  latter  book  save 
that  it  is  frightfully  obscure,  but  the  Introduction  is  first  rate.  The  Kaballah  Unveiled  is  an 
English  translation  from  the  Latin  of  Knorr  von  Rosenroth,  a Renaissance  scholar  who 
translated  portions  of  the  Zohar  from  Hebrew  into  Latin.  The  Zohar  has  in  recent  years  been 
translated  wholly  into  English  by  Simon  and  Sperling  (Soncino  Press),  from  which  the 
student  may  get  some  idea  of  what  its  contents  are  like.  There  is  an  even  earlier 
translation  of  the  first  part  of  the  Zohar  by  a William  Williams  who  wrote  under  the 
pseudonym  of  Nurho  de  Manhar  (Wizard  Bookshelf,  San  Diego,  1978),  evidently  part  of 
his  magical  motto  while  in  the  Second  Order  of  the  R.R.  et  A.C.  It  is  pre-eminently 
readable,  and  was  originally  published  in  installments  in  the  early  part  of  this  century  in  a 
magazine  published  by  the  American  Section  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  Parts  of  this  will 
also  be  quoted  from  time  to  time. 


While  on  this  topic,  I feel  impelled  to  deal  with  some  criticisms  made  by  hostile 
authors.  Some  of  these  people  claim  that  Mathers'  contributions  to  the  Knowledge  Lectures 
and  the  whole  corpus  of  Golden  Dawn  teaching  was  based  entirely  on  his  research  at  the 
British  Museum.  In  other  words  there  was  nothing  new  about  the  Golden  Dawn  teaching. 

In  one  sense  this  is  true.  In  a more  profound  sense  it  is  wholly  false.  For  example, 
the  Pentagram  Ritual.  Eliphas  Levi  does  indeed  refer  to  it  as  the  conjuration  of  the  Four.  In 
an  old  Hebrew  prayer  given  in  a Sephardic  prayer  book,  there  is  a reference  to  the  four 
Archangels  and  the  quarters  in  which  they  reside.  But  nowhere  that  I am  aware  of  is  there  a 
description  of  the  Pentagram  itself,  the  elemental  attributions  to  its  several  points,  the 
divine  names  that  accompany  them,  and  any  descriptions  of  the  technique  or  method  of 
describing  this  Pentagram.  Much  the  same  is  true  of  the  Hexagram  ritual  for  the  invocation  or 
banishing  of  the  planets  and  Sephiroth  of  the  Tree  of  Life. 


24 


VOLUME  ONE 


These  are  elementary  points.  But  they  are  very  important.  References  will  be  found  to 
all  these  ideas,  but  nowhere  will  there  be  found  the  descriptions  required  above. 

We  could  go  further.  However  unimportant  these  matters  may  seem  to  the  layman  or 
the  investigator  approaching  these  topics  from  the  outside,  these  are  several  of  the  most 
useful  magical  procedures  for  which  I can  find  no  precedent.  For  example,  there  is  the 
vibratory  formula  of  the  Middle  Pillar,  the  formation  of  Telesmatic  Images,  the  specific 
method  of  Tattwa  vision  or  Skrying,  etc..  . 

It  was  apparently  the  intent  of  the  founders  not  to  provide  a finished  system  of 
philosophy  --  such  as  The  Secret  Doctrine  of  Blavatsky,  etc.  It  was  intended  to  be 
supplemented  by  further  reading,  study,  meditation,  and  of  course  by  skrying.  In  this  way, 
the  magical  language,  and  in  turn  the  philosophy,  could  be  developed  on  a individual  basis. 

For  example,  a book  I wrote  as  far  back  as  1932,  The  Tree  of  Life,  served  that  purpose  for  me. 
It  presented  a systematic  overview  of  the  magical  philosophy  with  some  of  its  practices  that, 
despite  its  verbosity  and  addiction  to  adjectivitis,  has  nonetheless  been  lauded  as  one  one  of 
the  best  current  books  of  its  kind. 

In  effect,  I wish  to  counsel  the  student  not  already  familiar  with  this  schema,  to 
approach  the  following  material  as  might  have  the  student  of  a century  ago.  Deal  with  it  in 
small  segments  so  that  you  do  not  get  overwhelmed  by  an  overview  of  a vast  mass  of 
material  which  appears  to  have  no  unifying  principle.  The  latter  is  there  alright,  but  the 
preliminary  material  needs  first  to  be  committed  to  memory  and  studied  in  small  segments 
to  avoid  psychic  indigestion.  Dealt  with  in  this  manner,  some  of  the  books  mentioned  above, 
can  be  approached  in  a meaningful  way  and  both  will  benefit  considerably  — that  is  the 
knowledge  material  and  the  recommended  books. 

THE  MAGIC  OF  THE  HEBREW  ALPHABET 

In  various  places  throughout  these  volumes  of  the  teachings  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  it 
is  stated  emphatically  that  the  Hebrew  letters  are  magical  symbols.  For  this  reason,  each 
student  should  learn  how  to  form  them  and  write  them.  Good  calligraphy  was  often  absent  in 
the  old  Order,  for  I have  seen  manuscripts  that  go  back  a long  way,  in  which  the  Hebrew 
letters  are  atrociously  formed.  If  there  is  any  magic  in  such  an  alphabet,  the  intent  is 
defeated  by  deformed  and  ill-formed  letters.  The  student  should  make  a point  of  learning  in 
some  way  to  write,  print  or  letter  these  alphabets  correctly.  A good  calligraphic  pen, 
producing  thick  and  thin  lines  is  an  absolute  essential.  A quill  must  have  originally  been 
used  centuries  ago,  but  the  lettering  pens  of  today  are  so  much  superior. 

If  you  don't  know  how  to  go  about  it,  it  might  be  the  easiest  thing  to  enquire  at  a 
local  university  where  Semitic  languages  are  taught  to  be  put  in  touch  with  a senior  student 
who  can  then  show  you  how  to  write  the  letters.  Failing  this,  contact  a local  synagogue. 
They  will  not  harm  you,  cook  you,  or  try  to  convert  you.  They  may  be  curious  as  to  why  you 
want  to  know  such  a feat,  but  you  can  make  up  a half  a dozen  explanations  to  account  for 
that  - including  the  truth,  that  you  are  studying  the  Qabalah.  They  may  know  less  about  that 
than 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


you,  but  at  least  they  may  be  able  to  teach  you  how  to  write  the  letters  correctly  and 
that  is  half  the  battle  won. 

I n the  Zohar  there  is  a pretty  legend,  rather  long-winded  but  eloquent,  about  each 
letter  of  the  alphabet,  and  how  B,  the  second  letter  of  the  alphabet,  came  to  be  used  as  the 
first  letter  of  the  first  word  of  the  Bible  - Berashith  meaning  In  the  Beginning. 

There  are  two  main  translations  of  the  Zohar  that  you  could  make  use  of,  depending 
on  which  one  you  may  have  access  to.  Some  of  the  libraries  may  have  the  translation  of 
Simon  and  Sperling;  others  may  have  the  shorter  but  earlier  version  of  Nurho  de  Manhar. 
(Wizard  Book  Shelf,  San  Diego,  CA.  1978).  Regardless  of  whose  translation  you  use,  read  or 
study  the  account  of  each  letter  appearing  before  God  imploring  Him  to  use  that  particular 
letter  for  the  first  word  of  Genesis.  It  is  interesting  reading,  full  of  symbolism  of  one  kind 
or  another,  and  may  throw  a great  deal  of  light  for  you  on  the  motives  for  Mathers'  statement 
that  Hebrew  letters  are  magical  symbols  and  as  such  must  be  treated  with  respect  and 
honor. 


THE  MYSTICISM  OF  THE  ALPHABET 

"Rabbi  Chananya  spake,  and  said:  Before  creation  began,  the  alphabetical  letters  were 
in  reversed  order;  thus  the  two  first  words  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  Berashith,  bara,  begin  with 
B;  the  next  two,  Alhim,  ath,  with  A.  Why  did  it  not  commence  with  A,  the  first  letter?  The 
reason  of  this  inversion  is  as  follows:  For  two  thousand  years  before  the  creation  of  the 
world  the  letters  were  concealed  and  hidden,  being  objects  of  divine  pleasure  and  delight. 

"When  the  Divine  Being,  however,  willed  to  create  the  world,  all  the  letters 
appeared  before  His  presence  in  their  reverse  order.  The  first  ascended  and  said:  'Lord  of 
the  Universe!  let  it  please  Thee  to  create  the  world  by  me,  as  I am  the  final  letter  of  the  word 
Emeth  - (truth),  which  is  graven  on  Thy  signet  ring.  Thou  Thyself  art  called  Emeth,  and 
therefore  it  will  become  Thee,  the  great  King,  to  begin  and  create  the  world  by  me:  Said  the 
Holy  One  (blessed  by  He):  'Thou,  oh,  Tav,  are  indeed  worthy,  but  I cannot  create  the  world 
by  thee;  for  thou  art  destined  to  be  not  only  the  characteristic  emblem  borne  by  faithful 
students  of  the  law,  from  beginning  to  end,  but  also  the  associate  of  Maveth  (death),  of 
which  thou  art  the  final  letter.  Therefore  the  creation  of  the  world  cannot,  must  not,  be 
through  thee.’ 

"After  Tav  had  disappeared,  Sh  ascended  and  said:  'I  pray  Thee,  Lord  of  the  Universe, 
as  bearing  Thy  great  name  Shaddai  (almighty),  to  create  the  world  by  me,  by  the  holy  name 
that  becometh  Thee  only.'  Said  the  Holy  One:  'Thou  art  truly,  o Shin,  worthy,  pure  and 
true;  but  letters  that  go  to  form  lying  and  falsehood  will  associate  themselves  with  thee,  viz.: 
Koph  (Q)  and  Resh  (R),  and  with  thee  will  make  up  SheQeR  (a  lie),  Falsehood,  in  order 
that  it  may  be  received  and  credited,  come  first  with  the  appearance  of  truth  (Sh),  which 
thou  representest,  and  for  this  reason  I will  not  create  the  world  by  thee.'  So  Shin  departed 
and  Q and  R,  having  heard  these  words,  dared  not  present  themselves  before  the  divine 
presence. 


26 


VOLUME  ONE 


"TZ  then  went  before  Him,  saying:  'Because  I mark  the  Zaddikim  (the  righteous),  and  Thou 
Thyself  hearest  me  in  Thy  name,  Zaddik  (righteous),  and  also  it  is  written.  The  righteous  Lord  loveth 
righteousness,  it  will  become  Thee  to  create  the  world  by  me.'  Then  said  the  Holy  One:  'Zaddi,  Zaddi, 
thou  art  truly  righteous,  but  thou  must  keep  thyself  concealed,  and  thy  occult  meaning  must  not  be 
made  known  or  b:,:;ome  revealed;  and  therefore  thou  must  not  be  used  in  the  creation  of  the  world. 
Thy  original  form  was  a rod,  symbol  of  the  male  principle,  surmounted  by  Yod,  a letter  of  the  holy 
Name,  and  also  of  the  Holy  Covenant,  and  emblem  of  the  male  principle.  (By  this,  reference  is  made 
to  the  first  man,  who  was  androgynous,  with  faces  turning  one  to  the  right,  the  other  to  the  left,  as 
symbolized  in  the  figure  of  Zaddi  in  the  Hebrew  alphabet).  But  the  time  will  come  that  thou  shall  be 
divided,  and  thy  faces  shall  then  be  turned  to  each  other.’ 

"Zaddi  then  departed,  and  P ascended  and  said:  '1  am  the  beginning  of  the  salvation 
(Peragna)  and  deliverance  (Peduth)  thou  will  execute  in  the  world.  It  will  be  fitting  to  create  it  by 
me. "Thou  art  worthy,’  replied  the  Holy  One,  'but  thou  also  givest  rise  to  Evil  (Peshang),  and  in  thy 
form  resemblest  those  animals  who  walk  with  drooping  heads,  like  wicked  men  who  go  about  with 
bowed  heads  and  extended  hands.  I will  not,  therefore,  create  the  world  by  thee.’ 

"To  the  letter  Ayin,  the  initial  of  the  word  Avon  (iniquity),  though  it  claimed  the  origination 
of  Anaya  (Modesty),  the  Holy  One  said:  'I  shall  not  create  the  world  by  thee.’  And  forthwith  Ayin 
departed. 

"S  then  went  and  pleaded:  ' 1 am  near  (Samech)  to  the  fallen  ones,  as  it  is  written:  The  Lord 
upholdeth  (soumekh)  all  them  that  fall.  Thou  must  return,  Samech,  to  thy  place,’  was  the  reply  of  the 
Holy  One,  and  must  not  leave  it;  for  if  thou  dost,  what  will  become  of  the  fallen,  who  will  need  and 
look  to  thee  for  aid  and  support?  Samech  forthwith  returned,  and  was  followed  by  N,  who  said:  'Oh 
thou  Holy  One!  that  Thou  mayest  be  venerated  in  praises  (Nura  tehillim),  and  also  because  the  praise  of 
the  righteous  will  be  a Nava  (delight),  let  it  please  Thee  to  create  the  world  by  me.’  To  whom  He 
replied:  'Nun,  return  thou  to  thy  place  with  the  fallen  (Nephelim),  for  whose  sake  Samech  hath  gone 
back  to  her  place,  and  lean  for  support  upon  her.’ 

"M  then  followed  after,  saying:  'Thou  wilt  by  me  be  called  Malech  (king). "Truly  so, ’said  He, 
'but  I will  not,  for  all  that,  create  the  world  by  thee.  Go  back  at  once  to  thy  place  with  thy  companion 
letters,  L and  CH;  for  there  must  be  a King,  and  for  the  world  to  be  without  one  would  not  be  seemly. 
At  that  moment  CH  descended  from  off  the  throne  of  light  and  splendor,  exclaiming;  'I  am  thy  glory, 
create  the  world  by  me.’  As  it  stood  trembling  with  excitement  before  the  Holy  One,  two  hundred 
thousand  worlds  together  with  the  throne  itself  were  seized  with  a sudden  tremor  and  seemed  ready 
to  fall.  'Caph,  Caph!’  cried  the  Holy  One,  'what  hast  thou  done?  I will  not  create  the  world  by  thee, 
for  thou  beginnest  Chala  (ruin,  loss).  Return  at  once  to  thy  place  on  the  throne  of  glory  and  abide 
there!’  Then  Caph  retired  and  went  back  to  its  place. 

" Y next  appeared  and  claimed  that  being  the  initial  letter  in  the  divine  name  YHVH,  it  was  the 
best  for  the  work  of  creation.  But  the  Holy  One  replied:  'Let  it  suffice  thee  to  be  what 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


thou  art,  chief  letter  in  my  name  and  foremost  in  all  my  designs,  thou  must  remain 
where  and  as  thou  art!' 

Then  came  T and  spake  before  the  Eternal  One:  'Create  the  world  by  me,  for  in  me 
alone  is  thy  goodness  (Tobh)  and  uprightness,  for  attributes  of  Thee. "I  will  not.  Oh 
Teth, 'replied  the  Holy  One,  'use  thee  in  the  creation  of  the  world,  because  the  goodness 
within  thee  is  hidden  and  concealed  from  sight  as  it  is  written,  'How  great  is  Thy  goodness 
which  Thou  hidest  from  them  that  fear  Thee.’  Seeing  thou  wilt  remain  invisible  to  the  world  1 
am  about  to  create,  and  furthermore  because  of  the  goodness  hidden  within  thee,  the  gates 
of  the  temple  will  sink  into  the  earth  as  it  is  written,  'Her  gates  are  sunk  into  the  ground,  and 
besides  all  this,  thou  with  thy  comrade  the  letter  Cheth  (CH)  composed  sin.  Therefore, 
these  letters  will  never  enter  in  the  names  of  the  twelve  holy  tribes.  On  hearing  these  words 
Ch  went  not  before  the  Holy  One,  but  returned  at  once  to  its  place. 

"Z  then  went  up  and  urged  its  claim,  saying:  'Thy  children  will  through  me  keep 
the  Sabbath,  as  it  is  written:  Remember  (Zecor)  the  Sabbath  to  keep  it  holy.  Thou,  Oh 
Zain,'  replied  the  Holy  one,  'art  of  too  warlike  a form,  resembling  as  thou  dost  a spear.  1 
cannot  use  thee  in  the  creation  of  the  world.’ 

When  Z heard  this  decision,  like  N it  retired  and  gave  place  to  V,  who  said:  '1  am  a 
letter  in  thy  Holy  name.’  The  Eternal  One  answered  and  said,  'remain  contented,  Oh  V 
that  together  with  H you  are  in  the  great  name.  I shall  not  choose  you  by  whom  to  create 
the  world.' 

"D.  accompanied  by  G,  went  before  the  Divine  Presence.  To  them  it  was  said,  'Let 
it  suffice  you,  that  so  long  as  you  are  conjoined  and  associated,  there  will  always  be  the  poor 
on  the  earth  who  will  need  succor  and  help.  Daleth  (D)  - poverty  and  Gimel  (G)  - help  or  the 
benefactor.  Therefore  both  of  you  keep  together,  the  one  helping  the  other. '(In  the  Hebrew 
alphabet  G and  D are  successive  letters). 

"Then  came  B and  said  : 'Create  the  world  by  me,  because  I am  the  initial  letter  of 
Beracha  (blessing)  and  through  me  all  will  bless  thee,  both  in  the  world  above  as  in  the 
world  below.  Truly,  Oh  B,’  said  the  Holy  One,  'I  will  surely  create  the  world  by  thee  only.1 

"Hearing  these  words,  A remained  in  its  place  and  went  not  into  the  Divine 
Presence,  who  therefore  exclaimed  'Aleph  (A)  Aleph!  why  comest  thou  not  before  me  as  all 
the  other  letters'?1  Then  replied  A:  'Lord  and  sovereign  of  the  universe,  it  is  because  I have 
observed  that  (B  excepted)  they  have  returned  as  they  went,  without  success.  Why  therefore, 
should  I come  before  thee,  since  thou  hast  already  given  B the  great  and  precious  gift  we 
all  of  us  craved  and  desired.  Moreover,  it  becometh  not  the  monarch  of  the  universe  to 
withdraw  and  take  back  his  presents  from  one  subject  and  give  them  to  another.’  To  these 
words  the  Holy  One  responded:  'Aleph,  Aleph!  Thou  shalt  be  the  first  of  all  letters  and  my 
unity  shall  be  symbolized  only  by  thee.  In  all  conceptions  and  ideas  human  or  divine,  in 
every  act  and  deed  begun,  carried  on  and  completed,  in  all  of  them  shalt  thou  be  the  first,  the 
beginning.' 

"Therefore  did  the  Holy  One  make  the  letters  of  the  celestial  alphabet,  capitals,  and 
those  of  the  earthly,  small,  each  corresponding  to  one  another.  Therefore  also  the  Book  of 
Genesis  begins  with  two  words  whose  initials  are  B,  viz/  : Berashith  Bara  (in  the  beginning 


28 


VOLUME  ONE 


created)  followed  by  two  others,  whose  initials  are  A,  viz.,Alhim  ath  (God,  the  substance  of)  to 
show  that  the  letters  of  these  alphabets  celestial  and  earthly  are  one  and  the  same  by  which  every  creature 
and  thing  in  the  universe  has  been  formed  and  produced." 

CONCERNING  HEBREW  PRONUNCIATION 


Recently,  a noted  occult  writer  wrote  me  a letter  asking  why  it  was  that  the  Hebrew 
pronunciations  given  in  an  earlier  and  now  obsolete  book  of  mine  on  the  Qabalah  differed  radically 
from  almost  every  other  contemporary  Qabalistic  writer.  When  answering  him,  it  had  been  my 
intention  to  assert  that  the  explanations  had  already  been  given.  When,  however,  I proceeded  to 
examine  the  obsolete  book  anew,  I found  that  this  had  been  carelessly  omitted.  (Falcon  Press  has  just 
issued  several  tapes  which  give  the  correct  pronunciation  of  most  of  the  Qabalistic  and  other  words 
used  in  this  text.) 

My  reply  took  a page  and  a half  to  clarify  the  issue.  In  order  to  eliminate  possible  repetitions  of 
this  expenditure  of  time  and  effort,  let  me  offer  the  following. 

I can  best  begin  by  asserting  that  no  matter  where  or  by  whom  spoken,  English  is  English.  The 
accents  used,  for  example,  in  the  North  of  England  are  entirely  different  from  those  employed  in  Kent 
or  Sussex  in  the  South  of  England.  The  English  of  Wales  sounds  strangely  melodious  compared  to  that 
of  Surrey  or  Northampton.  All  however  are  English. 

Much  the  same  is  true  in  the  United  States.  The  accent  of  an  inhabitant  of  Minnesota  is  entirely 
different  from  one  who  lives  in  Alabama  or  Georgia.  All  speak  that  variety  of  English  we  know  as 
American.  Which  one  is  correct? 

Let  me  say  that  there  is  no  standard  or  fixed  accent  which  is  accepted  universally  as 
authoritative.  I fancy  much  the  same  is  true  of  every  other  language.  Northern  and  Southern  Italian  vary 
in  many  ways.  So  also  in  Germany,  France  and  elsewhere.  Accents  and  dialects  are  integral  parts  of  the 
linguistic  process. 

This  is  true  also  in  Hebrew  which  is  part  of  the  magical  language  of  what  has  come  to  be  called 
the  Western  esoteric  tradition.  There  are  two  main  streams  of  Hebrew  pronunciation  called  the 
Ashkenazic  relating  to  North  Europe,  England  and  the  United  States,  and  the  Sephardic  spoken  in  the 
Mediterranean  and  Levantine  areas.  The  history  of  these  two  streams  is  really  irrelevant  to  this  essay. 
Anyone  interested  can  do  a little  research  in  a good  encyclopedia. 

The  Mediterranean  area,  as  we  know  historically,  achieved  a higher  level  of  cultural 
development  far  earlier  than  did  Northern  Europe.  Much  of  the  Qabalistic  literature  had  its  origins  in 
Spain  where  there  was  a fascinating  merger  of  Christian,  Arabic  and  Hebrew  mysticisms  in  pre-Zoharic 
times,  as  well  as  in  the  Levantine  area  as  a whole.  The  obvious  result  of  this  cultural  superiority  was 
that  the  spoken  Hebrew  had  a Sephardic  accent.  When  the  literature  came  to  be  translated  by  later 
scholars  and  Christian  Qabalists,  the  translations  or  better  still  transliterations  took  on  the  Sephardic 
flavor. 


Much  later  in  the  18th  century,  when  there  was  a revival  of  Jewish  mysticism  called 
Chassidism,  in  Central  Europe,  Poland  and  Russia,  the  Ashkenazic  accent  or  dialect  was 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


employed.  Regardless  of  how  popular  Chassidism  became,  English  translators 
persisted  on  the  whole  in  using  the  Sephardic  dialect,  which  is  interesting  because  Baal 
Shem,  the  founder  of  what  became  the  Chassidic  movement,  obviously  used  Ashkenazic 
Hebrew.  It  seems,  however,  that  the  Sephardic  dialect  and  the  whole  Qabalistic  literary 
corpus  were  intimately  bound  together,  so  that  very  few  could  conceive  that  there  was  any 
other  way  of  transliterating  Hebrew.  This  persisted  right  up  to  modern  times.  S.L.  Mathers 
in  his  Kaballah  Unveiled,  Arthur  E.  Waite  in  all  of  his  Qabalistic  writings,  and  Frater  Albertus 
in  one  of  the  early  Alchemical  Bulletins,  amongst  many  other  distinguished  writers,  all  used 
the  Sephardic  dialect. 

It  so  happened  that  when  I began  my  interest  in  the  Qabalah  in  my  mid-teens,  I wanted 
to  be  able  to  translate  some  of  the  important  books  and  manuscripts  that  yet  remained  to  be 
rendered  into  English.  The  head  of  the  Semitic  Division  of  the  Library  of  Congress  whom  I 
came  to  know  in  those  days  - I must  have  made  myself  a young  nuisance  to  him  requesting 
information  about  Qabalistic  texts  in  English  - recommended  that  I get  a tutor  from  whom  I 
could  learn  Hebrew.  As  a result  I had  a year's  intensive  training  in  Hebrew  from  a young  man 
attending  George  Washington  University  in  Washington,  D.C.,  where  I then  lived. 

Many  years  later,  when  I had  learned  to  manipulate  letters  and  numbers  (Gematria) 
with  some  dexterity,  I found  that  on  occasion  the  Ashkenazic  transliterations  were  far 
more  useful  and  illuminating  than  the  Sephardic,  as  I demonstrated  in  an  earlier  but  now 
obsolete  book  on  the  Qabalah.  Various  people  to  whom  I spoke  as  a very  young  man 
showed  not  the  least  interest,  so  I kept  my  counsel  to  myself. 

A large  number  of  personal  notes  and  quotations  from  various  authorities 
gradually  accumulated  over  the  course  of  years.  In  1931,  while  I was  in  a London  literary 
environment,  serving  as  a secretary  to  first  one  and  then  another  novelist  and  author,  I was 
encouraged  to  put  my  ideas  in  book  form.  I did  so.  It  became  my  first  published  book  a long 
time  ago.  I had  hoped  that  the  use  of  the  Ashkenazic  dialect  which  had  solved  a number  of 
gematria  problems  for  me,  would  attract  some  attention  from  other  students  and 
authorities  and  be  used  constructively  in  other  texts.  No  such  thing  happened.  Since  that 
book  was  written  in  the  early  1930's,  I have  seen  my  Ashkenazic  transliterations  used  only 
three  or  four  times  at  most.  I was  disappointed,  I must  confess,  so  that  in  later  writings  I 
dropped  it,  returning  to  the  more  conventional  spelling  and  transliteration  of  the  Hebrew 
alphabet  and  Qabalistic  terms. 

When  the  State  of  Israel  declared  its  independence  in  1947.  with  Hebrew  as  its 
official  language,  naturally  the  Sephardic  dialect  was  used  since  Palestine  was  part  of  the 
Levantine  area.  That  confirmed  my  decision  to  drop  the  Ashkenazic  style  of  transliteration. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  however  that  every  Jewish  community  in  Europe  or  the 
United  States  has  dropped  the  Ashkenazic  dialect  by  any  manner  or  means.  It  is  still  used. 
But  if  you  went  to  the  State  of  Israel,  your  Ashkenazic  dialect  will  hardly  be  understood, 
any  more  than  you  could  make  heads  or  tails  out  of  the  Sephardic  dialect  if  you  happened  to 
be  an  Ashkenazi. 


30 


VOLUME  ONE 


It  is  rather  as  if  someone  born  and  bred  in  Northumberland  or  Yorkshire  could 
make  much  sense  out  of  the  Cockney  accent  used  in  parts  of  London.  Some  Australians 
have  a version  of  the  Cockney  accent,  with  all  its  colloquialisms,  that  makes  them  rather 
hard  to  understand  at  first.  But,  never  let  it  be  forgotten,  they  are  all  speaking  English  - in 
much  the  same  way  that  anyone  speaking  the  Ashkenazic  dialect  or  the  Sephardic  dialect  is 
speaking  or  reading  Hebrew. 

This  is  the  core  of  the  Hebrew  language  problem  of  the  Qabalah  in  the  simplest 
possible  terms.  So  when  I have  used  "Bes"  or  "Ches"  or  "Tes"  I am  referring  to  the  same 
letters  as  "Beth,'"'Cheth,"  or  "Teth."  Keser  and  Tipharas  and  Malkus  are  no  other  than 
Kether  and  Tiphareth  and  Malkuth  - and  so  on  and  so  forth.  I still  suggest  that  the  student  of 
QBL  - as  Frater  Achad  and  Frater  Albertus  choose  to  term  the  subject  matter  - learn  both 
dialects.  He  may  find  one  more  useful  than  another  in  certain  specific  areas.  When  he 
wishes  to  discover  the  numerology  or  Gematria  of  his  name,  for  whatever  reason  he  may 
have  in  mind,  he  may  get  much  further  by  the  use  of  one  rather  than  the  other,  and 
achieve  his  objectives  more  readily. 

The  student  must  discover  which  of  these  two  suits  his  own  personal  predilection 
and  answers  to  the  necessity  imposed  by  the  results  of  study  and  experience.  The  Order 
teaching  employs  the  Sephardic  pronunciation,  and  1 have  not  ventured  to  interfere  with  that 
in  any  way  at  all.  I simply  mention  the  matter  here  to  render  impossible  the  likelihood  of 
further  confusion  arising. 


INTRODUCTION  TO 
THE  KABAFFAH  UNVEIFED 

By 

McGregor  mathers 

The  first  questions  which  the  non-qabalistical  reader  will  probably  ask  are:  What  is 
the  Qabalah?  Who  was  its  author?  What  are  its  sub-divisions?  What  are  its  general 
teachings?  And  why  is  a translation  of  it  required  at  the  present  time?..  . 

The  Qabalah  may  be  defined  as  being  the  esoteric  Jewish  doctrine.  It  is  called  in 
Hebrew  QBLH,  Qabalah,  which  is  derived  from  the  root  QBL,  Qibel,  meaning  "to  receive". 
This  appellation  refers  to  the  custom  of  handing  down  the  esoteric  tradition  by  oral 
transmission,  and  is  nearly  allied  to  "tradition". 

There  are  no  separate  numeral  characters  in  Hebrew  and  Chaldee;  therefore,  as  is 
also  the  case  in  Greek,  each  letter  has  its  own  peculiar  numerical  value,  and  from  this 
circumstance  results  the  important  fact  that  every  word  is  a number,  and  every  number  is  a 
word.  . . 1 have  selected  the  Roman  letter  Q to  represent  the  Hebrew  Qoph  or  Koph,  a 
precedent  for  the  use  of  which  without  a following  u,  may  be  found  in  Max  Muller's  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East.  The  reader  must  remember  that  the  Hebrew  is  almost  entirely  a 


31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


consonantal  alphabet,  the  vowels  being  for  the  most  part  supplied  by  small  points 
and  marks  usually  placed  below  the  letters.  Another  difficulty  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet 
consists  in  the  great  similarity  between  the  forms  of  certain  letters,  e.g.,  V,  Z,  and  final 

N. 


With  regard  to  the  author  and  origin  of  the  Qabalah,  1 cannot  do  better  than  give 
the  following  extract  from  Dr.  Christian  Ginsburg's  Essay  on  the  Kaballah,  first  premissing 
that  this  word  has  been  spelt  in  a great  variety  of  ways  - Cabala,  Kabalah,  Kabbala,  etc.  1 
have  adopted  the  form  Qabalah,  as  being  more  consonant  with  the  Hebrew  writing  of  the 
word. 


(N.B.  To  these  words  of  Mathers  1 must  add  my  own  praise.  For  ever  since  I first 
discovered  this  book  around  1925,  it  has  been  a constant  source  of  reference  for  me,  and 
most  of  one  of  my  early  books,  A Garden  of  Pomegranates  was  in  point  of  fact  predicated  on 
frequent  reading  of  this  text.  Its  historical  material,  though  brief,  I found  extremely 
accurate;  more  details  may  be  found  in  Gershom  Sholem's  book.  Major  Trends  in  Jewish 
Mysticism , which  is  another  goldmine  not  under  any  circumstances  to  be  neglected  by  the 
good  student.) 

A system  of  religious  philosophy,  or,  more  properly,  of  theosophy,  which  has  not 
only  exercised  for  hundreds  of  years  an  extraordinary  influence  on  the  mental  development 
of  so  shrewd  a people  as  the  Jews,  but  has  captivated  the  minds  of  some  of  the  greatest 
thinkers  of  Christendom  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  claims  the  greatest 
attention  of  both  the  philosopher  and  the  theologian.  When  it  is  added  that  among  its 
captives  were  Raymond  Lully,  the  celebrated  scholastic  metaphysician  and  chemist  (died 
1315);  John  Reuchlin,  the  renowned  scholar  and  reviver  of  Oriental  literature  in  Europe 
(born  1455,  died  1522);  John  Picus  de  Mirandola,  the  famous  philosopher  and  classical 
scholar  (1463-1494);  Cornelius  Henry  Agrippa,  the  distinguished  philosopher,  divine,  and 
physician  (1486-1535);  John  Baptist  von  Helmont,  a remarkable  chemist  and  physician 
(1577-1644);  as  well  as  our  own  countrymen,  Robert  Fludd,  the  famous  physician  and 
philosopher  (1574-1637);  and  Dr.  Henry  More  (1614-1687);  and  that  these  men,  after 
restlessly  searching  for  a scientific  system  which  should  disclose  to  them  "the  deepest 
depths"  of  the  divine  nature,  and  show  them  the  real  tie  which  binds  all  things  together, 
found  the  cravings  of  their  minds  satisfied  by  this  theosophy,  the  claims  of  the  Qabalah  on 
the  attention  of  students  in  literature  and  philosophy  will  readily  be  admitted.  The  claims  of 
the  Kabbalah,  however,  are  not  restricted  to  the  literary  man  and  the  philosopher;  the  poet 
too  will  find  in  it  ample  materials  for  the  exercise  of  his  lofty  genius.  How  can  it  be  otherwise 
with  a theosophy  which,  we  are  assured,  was  born  of  God  in  Paradise,  was  nursed  and 
reared  by  the  choicest  of  the  angelic  hosts  in  heaven,  and  only  held  converse  with  the  holiest 
of  man's  children  upon  earth.  Listen  to  the  story  of  its  birth,  growth,  and  maturity,  as  told 
by  its  followers. 

The  Qabalah  was  first  taught  by  God  himself  to  a select  company  of  angels,  who 
formed  a theosophic  school  in  Paradise.  After  the  Fall  the  angels  most  graciously 
communicated  this  heavenly  doctrine  to  the  disobedient  children  of  earth,  to  furnish  the 
protoplasts  with 


32 


VOLUME  ONE 


the  means  of  returning  to  their  pristine  nobility  and  felicity.  From  Adam  it  passed 
over  to  Noah,  and  then  to  Abraham,  the  friend  of  God,  who  emigrated  with  it  to  Egypt, 
where  the  patriarch  allowed  a portion  of  this  mysterious  doctrine  to  ooze  out.  It  was  in  this 
way  that  the  Egyptians  obtained  some  knowledge  of  it,  and  the  other  Eastern  nations 
could  introduce  it  into  their  philosophical  systems.  Moses,  who  was  learned  in  all  the 
wisdom  of  Egypt,  was  first  initiated  into  the  Qabalah  in  the  land  of  his  birth,  but  became 
most  proficient  in  it  during  his  wanderings  in  the  wilderness,  when  he  not  only  devoted  to  it 
the  leisure  hours  of  the  whole  forty  years,  but  received  lessons  in  it  from  one  of  the  angels. 
By  the  aid  of  this  mysterious  science  the  law-giver  was  enabled  to  solve  the  difficulties 
which  arose  during  his  management  of  the  Israelites,  in  spite  of  the  pilrimages,  wars,  and 
frequent  miseries  of  the  nation.  He  covertly  laid  down  the  principles  of  this  secret  doctrine  in 
the  first  four  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  but  withheld  them  from  Deuteronomy.  Moses  also 
initiated  the  seventy  elders  into  the  secrets  of  this  doctrine,  and  they  again  transmitted 
them  from  hand  to  hand.  Of  all  who  formed  the  unbroken  line  of  tradition,  David  and 
Solomon  were  the  most  deeply  initiated  into  the  Qabalah.  No  one,  however,  dared  to  write 
it  down,  till  Schimeon  Ben  Jochai,  who  lived  at  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the  second 
temple  ..  . After  his  death,  his  son,  Rabbi  Eleazar,  and  his  secretary,  Rabbi  Abba,  as  well 
as  his  disciples,  collated  Rabbi  Simon  Ben  Jochai's  treatises,  and  out  of  these  composed 
the  celebrated  work  called  ZHR,  Zohar,  Splendour,  which  is  the  grand  storehouse  of 
Qabalism. 

The  Qabalah  is  usually  classed  under  four  heads: 


(a) 

The  practical  Qabalah. 

(b) 

The  literal  Qabalah. 

(c) 

The  unwritten  Qabalah 

(d) 

The  dogmatic  Qabalah. 

The  practical  Qabalah  deals  with  talismanic  and  ceremonial  magic,  and  does  not 
come  within  the  scope  of  this  work.  But,  the  whole  work  of  the  Golden  Dawn  is  in  fact 
the  elucidation  of  this  topic. 

The  literal  Qabalah  is  referred  to  in  several  places,  and  therefore  a knowledge  of  its 
leading  principles  is  necessary.  It  is  divided  into  three  parts:  GMTRIA.  Gematria; 
NVTRIQVN,  Notariqon,  and  ThMVRH,  Temura. 

Gematria  is  a metathesis  of  the  Greek  work  ypauuateia.  It  is  based  on  the  relative 
numerical  values  of  words,  as  I have  before  remarked.  Words  of  similar  numerical  values 
are  considered  to  be  explanatory  of  each  other,  and  this  theory  is  also  extended  to  phrases. 
Thus  the  letter  shin,  Sh,  is  300,  and  is  equivalent  to  the  number  obtained  by  adding  up  the 
numerical  values  of  the  letters  of  the  words  RVCH  ALHIM,  Ruach  Elohim,  the  spirit  of  the 
Elohim;  and  it  is  therefore  a symbol  of  the  spirit  of  the  Elohim.  For  R-200,  V-6,  Ch-8,  A-l, 
L-30,  H-5,  I- 10,  M-40;  total-300.  Similarly  the  words  AChD,  Achad,  Unity,  one,  and 
AHBH,  Ahebcih,  love,  each-13;  for  A-l,  Ch-8,  D-4,  total-13;  and  A-l,  H-5,  B-2,  H-5, 
total- 13.  Again,  the  name  of  the  angel  MTTRVN,  Metatron  or  Methraton,  and  the  name  of 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Deity,  ShDI,  Shaddai,  each  make  314;  so  the  one  is  taken  as  symbolical  of  the  other. 
The  angel  Metraton  is  said  to  have  been  the  conductor  of  the  children  of  Israel  through 
the  wilderness,  of  whom  God  says,  "My  Name  is  in  him."  With  regard  to  Gematria  of 
phrases  (Gen.  xlix.  10),  IBA  ShlLH,  Yeba  Shiloh,  "Shiloh  shall  come"  which  equals  358, 
which  is  the  numeration  of  the  MShlCh,  Messiah.  Thus  also  the  passage,  Gen.  xviii.  2 
VHNH  ShLShH,  Vehennna  Shalisha,  "And  lo,  three  men,"  equals  in  numerical  value  ALV 
MIKAL  GBRIAL  VRPAL,  Elo  Mikhael  Gabriel  VeRaphael,  "These  are  Mikhael,  Gabriel  and 
Raphael;"  for  each  phrase  equals  701.  1 think  these  instances  will  suffice  to  make  clear  the 
nature  of  Gematria,  especially  as  many  others  will  be  found  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing 
work. 


Notariqon  is  derived  from  the  Latin  word  notarius,  a short-hand  writer.  Of 
Notariqon  there  are  two  forms.  In  the  first  every  letter  of  a word  is  taken  for  the  initial  or 
abbreviation  of  another  word,  so  that  from  the  letters  of  a word  a sentence  may  be  formed. 
Thus  every  letter  of  the  word  BRAShITh,  Berashith,  the  first  word  in  Genesis,  is  made  the 
inital  of  a word,  and  we  obtain  from  it  BRAShITh  RAH  ALHIM  AhIQBLV  IShRAL 
ThVRH,  Berashith  Rah/  Elohim  Shel'equebelo  Israel  Torah:  "In  the  beginning  the  Elohim 
saw  that  Israel  would  accept  the  law.” 

The  second  form  of  Notariqon  is  that  exact  reverse  of  the  first.  By  this  the  initials 
or  finals,  or  both  or  the  medials,  of  a sentence,  are  taken  to  form  a word  or  words.  Thus 
the  Qabalah  is  called  ChKMh  NSThRH,  Chokhmah  Nesthorah,  "the  secret  wisdom;"  and 
if  we  take  the  initials  of  these  two  words  Ch  and  N,  we  form  by  the  second  kind  of  Notariqon 
the  word  ChN,  Chen,  "grace."  Similarly,  from  the  initials  and  finals  of  the  words  MI  IOLH 
LN  V HSh  MIMH,  Mi  Iaulah  Leno  Ha-Shama  yirnah,  "Who  shall  go  up  for  us  to  heaven?" 
(Deut.  xxx.  12).  are  formed  M1LH,  Milah  circumcision,"  and  IHVH,  the  Tetragrammaton, 
implying  that  God  hath  ordained  circumcision  as  the  way  to  heaven. 


Ternura  is  permutation.  According  to  certain  rules,  one  letter  is  substituted  for 
another  letter  preceding  or  following  it  in  the  alphabet,  and  thus  from  one  word  another 
word  of  totally  different  orthography  may  be  formed.  Thus  the  alphabet  is  bent  exactly  in 
half,  in  the  middle,  and  one  half  is  put  over  the  other;  and  then  by  changing  alternately  the 
first  letter  or  the  first  two  letters  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  line,  twenty  two 
commutations  are  produced.  These  are  called  the  "Table  of  the  Combinations  of  TzIRVP," 
tziruph.  For  example's  sake,  I will  give  the  method  called  ALBTh,  Albath,  thus: 

11  10  987654321 

K 1 T Ch  Z VHDGBA 

M N S 0 P Tz  Q R Sh  Th  L 

Each  method  takes  its  name  from  the  two  pairs  composing  it,  the  system  of  pairs 
of  letters  being  the  groundwork  of  the  whole,  as  either  letter  in  a pair  is  substituted  for  the 
other  letter.  Thus,  by  Albath,  from  RVCh,  Ruach,  is  formed  DTzO,  Detzau.  The  names  of 
the  other  twenty-one  methods  are: 


34 


VOLUME  ONE 


ABGTh 

AHDTh 

ADBG 

AHBD 

AVBH 

AZBV 

AChBZ 

ATBCh 

AIBT 

AKBI 

ALBK 

AMBL 

ANBM 

ASBN 

AOBS 

APBO 

ATzBP 

AQBTz 

ARBQ 

AShBR  AThBSH 

To  these  must  be  added  the  modes  ABGD  and  ALBM.  Then  comes  the  "Rational 
Table  of  Tziruph,"  another  set  of  twenty-two  combinations.  There  are  also  three  "Tables  of 
the  Commutations,"  known  respectively  as  the  Right,  the  Averse,  and  the  Irregular.  To 
make  any  of  these,  a square,  containing  484  squares,  should  be  made,  and  the  letters 
written  in.  For  the  "Right  Table"  write  the  alphabet  across  from  right  to  left;  in  the 
second  row  of  squares  do  the  same,  but  begin  with  B and  end  with  A;  in  the  third  begin 
with  G and  end  with  B;  and  so  on.  For  the  "Averse  Table"  write  the  alphabet  from  right  to 
left  backwards,  beginning  with  Th  and  ending  with  A;  in  the  second  row  begin  with  Sh  and 
end  with  Th,  etc.  The  "Irregular  Table"  would  take  too  long  to  describe.  Besides  all  these, 
there  is  the  method  called  ThShRQ,  Thashraq,  which  is  simply  writing  a word  backwards. 
There  is  one  more  very  important  form,  called  the  "Qabalah  of  the  Nine  Chambers,"  or  AIQ 
BKR,  Aiq  Bekar.  It  is  thus  formed: 


300 

30 

3 

200  20 

2 

100 

10 

1 

Sh 

L 

G 

R K 

B 

Q 

I 

A 

600 

60 

6 

500  50 

5 

400 

40 

4 

M (f)  S 

V 

K (f)  N 

H 

Th 

M 

D 

900 

90 

9 

800  80 

8 

700 

70 

7 

Tz  (f)  Tz 

T 

P(f)P 

Ch 

N (f)  0 

Z 

I have  put  the  numeration  of  each  letter  above  to  show  the  affinity  between  the  letters 
in  each  chamber.  Sometimes  this  is  used  as  a cipher,  by  taking  the  portions  of  the  figure  to 
show  the  letters  they  contain,  putting  one  point  for  the  first  letter,  two  for  the  second,  etc. 
Thus  the  right  angle,  containing  AIQ,  will  answer  for  the  letter  Q if  it  has  three  dots  or 
points  within  it.  Again,  a square  will  answer  for  H,  N,  or  K final,  according  to  whether  it  has 
one,  two,  or  three  points  respectively  placed  within  it.  So  also  with  regard  to  the  other 
letters.  But  there  are  many  other  ways  of  employing  the  Qabalah  of  the  Nine  Chambers, 
which  I have  not  space  to  describe.  I will  merely  mention,  as  an  example,  that  by  the  mode  of 
Temura  called  AThBSh,  Athbash,  it  is  found  that  in  Jeremiah  xxv.  26,  the  word  ShShk, 
Sheshakh,  symbolizes  BBL,  Babel. 

Besides  all  these  rules,  there  are  certain  meanings  hidden  in  the  shape  of  the  letters  of 
the  Hebrew  alphabet;  in  the  form  of  a particular  letter  at  the  end  of  a word  being  different 
from  that  which  it  generally  bears  when  it  is  a final  letter,  or  in  a letter  being  written  in  the 
middle  of  a word  in  a character  generally  used  only  at  the  end;  in  any  letter  or  letters  being 
written  in  a size  smaller  or  larger  than  the  rest  of  the  manuscript,  or  in  a letter  being  written 
upside 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


down;  in  the  variations  found  in  the  spelling  of  certain  words,  which  have  a letter 
more  in  some  places  than  they  have  in  others;  in  peculiarities  observed  in  the  position  of  any 
of  the  points  or  accents,  and  in  certain  expressions  supposed  to  be  elliptic  or  redundant. 

For  example,  the  shape  of  the  Hebrew  letter  Aleph,  A,  is  said  to  symbolize  a Van, 

V,  between  a Yod,  I,  and  a Daleth,  D;  and  thus  the  letter  itself  represents  the  word  I V D,  Yod. 
Similarly  the  shape  of  the  letter  He,  H,  represents  the  word  Daleth,  D,  with  a Yod,  I, 
written  at  the  lower  left-hand  corner,  etc. 

In  Isaiah  ix.  6,  7,  the  word  LMRBH,  Lemarbah,  for  multiplying,  is  written  with  the 
character  for  M final  in  the  middle  of  the  word,  instead  of  with  the  ordinary  initial  and 
medial  M.  The  consequence  of  this  is  that  the  total  numerical  value  of  the  word,  instead  of 
being  30  + 40  + 200  + 2 + 5 equals  277,  is  30  + 600  + 200  + 2 + 5 equals  837,  by  Gematria  ThTh 
ZL,  Tat  Zal,  the  profuse  Giver.  Thus,  by  writing  the  M final  instead  of  the  ordinary 
character,  the  word  is  made  to  bear  a different  qabalistical  meaning. 

In  Deuteronomy  vi.  4,  etc.,  is  the  prayer  known  as  the  Shema  Yisrael.  It  begins,  "ShMo 
IShRAL  IHVH  ALHINV  IHVH  AChD,  Shemaa  Yisrael,  Tetragrammaton  Elohino 
Tetragrammaton  Achad:  "Hear,  0 Israel,  Tetragrammaton  our  God  is  Tetragrammaton 
Unity/' 


In  this  verse  the  terminal  letter  0 in  ShMO,  and  the  D in  AChD  are  written  much 
larger  than  the  other  letters  of  the  text.  The  qabalistical  symbology  contained  in  this 
circumstance  is  explained  as  follows.  The  letter  0,  being  of  the  value  of  70,  shows  that  the 
law  may  be  explained  in  seventy  different  ways,  and  the  D equals  4 equals  the  four  cardinal 
points  and  the  letters  of  the  Holy  Name.  The  first  word,  ShMO,  has  the  numerical  value  of 
410,  the  number  of  years  of  the  duration  of  the  first  temple,  etc.,  etc.  There  are  many  other 
points  worthy  of  consideration  in  this  prayer,  but  time  will  not  permit  me  to  dwell  on 
them..  . 


The  term  Unwritten  Qabalah  is  applied  to  certain  knowledge  which  is  never  entrusted  to 
writing,  but  communicated  orally.  I may  say  no  more  on  this  point,  not  even  whether  I 
myself  have  or  have  not  received  it.  Of  course,  till  the  time  of  Rabbi  Schimeon  Ben  Jochai 
none  of  the  Qabalah  was  ever  written. 

The  Dogmatic  Qabalah  contains  the  doctrinal  portion.  There  are  a large  number  of 
treatises  of  various  dates  and  merits  which  go  to  make  up  the  written  Qabalah,  but  they 
may  be  reduced  to  four  heads: 

(a)  The  Sepher  Yetzirah  and  its  dependencies. 

(b)  The  Zohar  with  its  developments  and  commentaries. 

(c)  The  Sepher  Sephiroth  and  its  expansions. 

(d)  The  Asch  Metzareph  and  its  symbolism. 


The  SPR  ITzIRH,  Sepher  Yetzirah,  or  Book  of  Formation,  is  ascribed  to  the  patriarch 
Abraham.  It  treats  the  cosmogony  as  symbolized  by  the  ten  numbers  and  the  twenty-two  letters  of 
the  alphabet,  which  it  calls  the  thirty-two  paths.  On  these  latter  Rabbi  Abraham 


36 


VOLUME  ONE 


Ben  Dior  has  written  a mystical  commentary.  The  term  path  is  used  throughout  the 
Qabalah  to  signify  a hieroglyphical  idea,  or  rather  the  sphere  of  ideas,  which  may  be 
attached  to  any  glyph  or  symbol. 

The  ZHR,  Zohar,  or  "Splendour,"  besides  many  other  treatises  of  less  note,  contains 
the  following  most  important  books.  . . 


The  ASh  MTzRP,  Asch  Metzareph,  or  Purifying  Fire,  is  hermetic  and  alchemical,  and 
is  known  to  few,  and  when  known  is  understood  by  still  fewer. 


The  principal  doctrines  of  the  Qabalah  are  designed  to  solve  the  following 

problems: 


(a) 

The 

(b) 

The 

(c) 

The 

(d) 

The 

(e) 

The 

(f) 

The 

(g) 

The 

(h) 

The 

(i) 

The 

0) 

The 

Supreme  Being,  His  nature  and  attributes. 
Cosmogony. 

creation  of  angels  and  man. 
destiny  of  man  and  angels, 
nature  of  the  soul. 

nature  of  angels,  demons,  and  elementals. 
import  of  the  revealed  law. 
transcendental  symbolism  of  numerals, 
peculiar  mysteries  contained  in  the  Hebrew  letters, 
equilibrium  of  contraries... 


What  is  negative  existence?  What  is  positive  existence?  The  distinction  between  these 
two  is  another  fundamental  idea.  To  define  negative  existence  clearly  is  impossible,  for  when 
it  is  distinctly  defined  it  ceases  to  be  negative  existence;  it  is  then  negative  existence  passing 
into  static  condition.  Therefore  wisely  have  the  Qabalists  shut  out  from  mortal 
comprehension  the  primal  AIN,  Ain,  the  negatively  existent  One,  and  the  AIN  SVP,  Ain 
Soph,  the  limitless  Expansion;  while  of  even  the  AIN  SVP  AVR,  Ain  Soph  Aur,  the 
illimitable  Light,  only  a dim  conception  can  be  formed.  Yet,  if  we  think  deeply,  we  shall  see 
that  such  must  be  the  primal  forms  of  the  unknowable  and  nameless  One,  whom  we,  in  the 
most  manifest  form  speak  of  as  God.  He  is  the  Absolute.  But  how  do  we  define  the 
Absolute?  Even  as  we  define  it,  it  slips  from  our  grasp,  for  it  ceases  when  defined  to  be  the 
Absolute.  Shall  we  then  say  that  the  Negative,  the  Limitless,  the  Absolute  are,  logically 
speaking,  absurd,  since  they  are  ideas  which  our  reason  cannot  define?  No;  for  could  we 
define  them,  we  should  make  them,  so  to  speak,  contained  by  our  reason,  and  therefore  not 
superior  to  it;  fora  subject  to  be  capable  of  definition  it  is  requisite  that  certain  limits  should 
be  assignable  to  it.  How  then  can  we  limit  the  Illimitable? 

The  first  principle  and  axiom  of  the  Qabalah  is  the  name  of  the  Deity,  translated  in 
our  version  of  the  Bible,  "I  am  that  I am,"  AHIH  AShR  AHIH,  Eheieh  Asher  Eheieh.  A better 
translation  is.  Existence  is  existence,  or  lam  Fie  who  is. 


Eliphas  Levi  Zahed,  that  great  philosopher  and  Qabalist  of  the  present  century,  says 
in  his  Histoire  de  la  Magie  (bk.  i.  ch.  7):  "The  Qabalists  have  a horror  of  everything  that 
resembles  idolatry;  they,  however  ascribe  the  human  form  to  God,  but  it  is  a purely 
hieroglyphical  figure.  They  consider  God  as  the  intelligent,  living,  and  loving  Infinite  One. 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


He  is  for  them  neither  the  collection  of  other  beings,  nor  the  abstraction  of  existence, 
nor  a philosophically  definable  being.  He  is  in  all,  distinct  from  all,  and  greater  than  all.  His 
very  name  is  ineffable;  and  yet  this  name  only  expresses  the  human  ideal  of  His  Divinity. 
What  God  is  in  Himself  it  is  not  given  to  man  to  know.  God  is  the  absolute  of  faith;  existence  is 
the  absolute  of  reason,  existence  exists  by  itself,  and  because  it  exists.  The  reason  of  the 
existence  of  existence  is  existence  itself.  We  may  ask,  "Why  does  any  particular  thing 
exist?"  that  is,  "Why  does  such  or  such  a thing  exist?"  But  we  cannot  ask,  without  its  being 
absurd  to  do  so,  "Why  does  existence  exist?"  For  this  would  be  to  suppose  existence  prior  to 
existence.”  Again,  the  same  author  says  (ibid.  bk.  iii.  ch.  2):  "To  say,  I will  believe  when  the 
truth  of  the  dogma  shall  be  scientifically  proved  to  me,"  is  the  same  as  to  say,  1 will 
believe  when  I have  nothing  more  to  believe,  and  when  the  dogma  shall  be  destroyed  as 
dogma  by  becoming  a scientific  theorem.  That  is  to  say,  in  other  words:  "I  will  only  admit 
the  Infinite  when  it  shall  have  been  explained,  determined,  circumscribed,  and  defined  for 
my  benefit;  in  one  word,  when  it  has  become  finite.  I will  then  believe  in  the  Infinite  when  I 
am  sure  that  the  Infinite  does  not  exist.  I will  believe  in  the  vastness  of  the  ocean  when  I 
shall  have  seen  it  put  into  bottles.”  But  when  a thing  has  been  clearly  proved  and  made 
comprehensible  to  you,  you  will  no  longer  believe  it  you  will  know  it. 

In  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  ch.  ix.,  it  is  said,  "I  am  Immortality  and  also  death;  and  I,  0 
Arjuna!  am  that  which  is  and  that  which  is  not. "[Or,  "which  exists  negatively."]  And  again 
(ch.  ix.):  "And,  0 descendant  of  Bharata!  see  wonders  in  numbers,  unseen  before.  Within  my 
body,  0 Gudakesa!  see  today  the  whole  universe,  including  everything  moveable  and 
immovable,  all  in  one."  And  again  (ibid.)  Arjuna  said:  "0  Infinite  Lord  of  the  Gods!  0 
Thou  who  pervadest  the  universe!  Thou  art  the  Indestructible,  that  which  is,  that  which  is 
not,  and  what  is  beyond  them.  Thou  art  the  Primal  God,  the  Ancient  One;  Thou  art  the 
highest  support  of  this  universe.  By  Thee  is  this  universe  pervaded,  0 Thou  of  the  infinite 
forms.  . .Thou  art  of  infinite  power,  of  unmeasured  glory;  Thou  pervadest  all,  and 
therefore,  Thou  art  all! 


The  idea  of  negative  existence  can  then  exist  as  an  idea,  but  it  will  not  bear 
definition,  since  the  idea  of  definition  is  utterly  incompatible  with  its  nature.  But,  some  of 
my  readers  will  perhaps  say,  your  term  negative  existence  is  surely  a misnomer;  the  state  you 
describe  would  be  better  expressed  by  the  title  of  negative  subsistence.  Not  so,  I answer;  for 
negative  subsistence  can  never  be  anything  but  negative  subsistence;  it  cannot  vary,  it 
cannot  develop;  for  negative  subsistence  cannot  be  at  all;  it  never  has  existed,  it  never  does 
exist,  it  never  will  exist.  But  negative  existence  bears  hidden  in  itself,  positive  life;  for  in  the 
limitless  depths  of  the  abyss  of  its  negativity  lies  hidden  the  power  of  standing  forth  from 
itself,  the  power  of  projecting  the  scintilla  of  the  thought  unto  the  outer,  the  power  or  re- 
involving the  syntagma  into  the  inner.  Thus  shrouded  and  veiled  is  the  absorbed  intensity  in 
the  centerless  whirl  of  the  vastness  of  expansion.  Therefore  have  I employed  the  term  Ex-sto, 
rather  than  Sub-sto. 


38 


VOLUME  ONE 


But  between  two  ideas  so  different  as  those  of  negative  and  positive  existence  a 
certain  nexus,  or  connecting-link,  is  required,  and  hence  we  arrive  at  the  form  which  is 
called  potential  existence,  which  while  more  nearly  approaching  positive  existence,  will 
still  scarcely  admit  of  clear  definition.  It  is  existence,  in  its  possible  form.  For  example,  in 
a seed,  the  tree  which  may  spring  from  it  is  hidden;  it  is  in  a condition  of  potential  existence;  is 
there;  but  it  will  not  admit  of  definition.  How  much  less,  then,  will  those  seeds  which  that 
tree  in  its  turn  may  yield?  But  these  latter  are  in  a condition  which,  while  it  is  somewhat 
analogous  to  potential  existence,  is  in  hardly  so  advanced  a stage;  that  is,  they  are 
negatively  existent. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  positive  existence  is  always  capable  of  definition;  it  is  dynamic; 
it  has  certain  evident  powers,  and  it  is  therefore  the  antithesis  of  negative  existence,  and  still 
more  so  of  negative  subsistence.  It  is  the  tree,  no  longer  hidden  in  the  seed,  but  developed 
into  the  outer.  But  positive  existence  has  a beginning  and  an  end,  and  it  therefore  requires 
another  form  from  which  to  depend,  for  without  this  other  concealed  negative  ideal  behind 
it,  it  is  unstable  and  unsatisfactory. 

Thus,  then,  have  I faintly  and  with  all  reverence  endeavoured  to  shadow  forth  to 
the  minds  of  my  readers  the  idea  of  the  Illimitable  One.  And  before  that  idea,  and  of  the 
idea,  I can  only  say,  in  the  words  of  an  ancient  oracle;  "In  Him  is  an  illimitable  abyss  of 
glory,  and  from  it  there  goeth  forth  one  little  spark  which  maketh  all  the  glory  of  the  sun, 
and  of  the  moon,  and  of  the  stars.  Mortal!  behold  how  little  I know  of  God;  seek  not  to 
know  more  of  Him,  for  this  is  far  beyond  thy  comprehension,  however  wise  thou  art;  as  for 
us,  who  are  His  ministers,  how  small  a part  are  we  of  Him!" 

There  are  three  qabalistical  veils  of  the  negative  existence,  and  in  themselves  they 
formulate  the  hidden  ideas  of  the  Sephiroth  not  yet  called  into  being,  and  they  are 
concentrated  in  Kether,  which  in  this  sense  is  the  Malkuth  of  the  hidden  ideas  of  the 
Sephiroth.  I will  explain  this.  The  first  veil  of  the  negative  existence  is  the  AIN,  Ain  equals 
Negativity.  This  word  consists  of  three  letters,  which  thus  shadow  forth  the  first  three 
Sephiroth  or  numbers.  The  second  veil  is  the  AIN  SVP,  Ain  Soph , equals  Without  Limit. 
And  the  third  veil  is  AIN  SVP  AVR,  Ain  Soph  Aur  equals  the  Limitless  Light.  This  again 
consists  of  nine  letters,  and  symbolizes  the  first  nine  Sephiroth,  but  of  course  in  their  hidden 
idea  only.  But  when  we  reach  the  number  nine  we  cannot  progress  farther  without 
returning  to  the  unity,  or  the  number  one,  for  the  number  ten  is  but  a repetition  of  unity 
freshly  derived  from  the  negative,  as  is  evident  from  a glance  at  its  ordinary  representation  in 
Arabic  numerals,  where  the  circle  0 represents  the  Negative,  and  the  1 the  Unity.  Thus, 
then,  the  limitless  ocean  of  negative  light  does  not  proceed  from  a center,  for  it  is  centerless,  but  it 
concentrates  a center,  which  is  the  number  one  of  the  manifested  Sephiroth,  Kether,  the 
Crown,  the  First  Sephira;  which  therefore  may  be  said  to  be  the  Malkuth  or  number  ten  of 
the  hidden  Sephiroth.  Thus,  "Kether  is  in  Malkuth,  and  Malkuth  is  in  Kether. "Or,  as  an 
alchemical  author  of  great  repute  (Thomas  Vaughan,  better  known  as  Eugenius 
Philalethes)  says,  [Euphrates,  or,  The  Waters  of  the  East]  apparently  quoting  from 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Proclus:  "That  the  heaven  is  in  the  earth,  but  after  an  earthly  manner; 
and  that  the  earth  is  in  the  heaven,  but  after  a heavenly  manner."  But 
inasmuch  as  negative  existence  is  a subject  incapable  of  definition,  as  I have 
before  shown,  it  is  rather  considered  by  the  Qabalists  as  depending  back 
from  the  number  of  unity  than  as  a separate  consideration  therefrom; 
wherefore  they  frequently  apply  the  same  terms  and  epithets 
indiscriminately  to  either.  Such  epithets  are:  Tlie  Concealed  of  the  Concealed, 
The  Ancient  of  the  Ancient  Ones,  the  Most  Holy  Ancient  One,  etc. 

I must  now  explain  the  real  meaning  of  the  terms  Sephira  and  Sephiroth.  The  first 
is  singular,  the  second  is  plural.  The  best  rendering  of  the  word  is  numerical  emanation.  There  are 
ten  Sephiroth,  which  are  the  most  abstract  forms  of  the  ten  numbers  of  the  decimal  scale, 
i.e.,  the  abstract  forms  of  the  ten  numbers  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10.  Therefore,  as  in  the  higher 
mathematics  we  reason  of  numbers  in  their  abstract  senses,  so  in  the  Qabalah  we  reason  of 
the  Deity  by  the  abstract  forms  of  the  numbers;  in  other  words,  by  the  SPIRVTh,  Sephiroth.  It 
was  from  this  ancient  Oriental  theory  that  Pythagoras  derived  his  numerical  symbolic 
ideas. 


Among  these  Sephiroth,  jointly  and  severally,  we  find  the  development  of  the 
persons  and  attributes  of  God.  Of  these  some  are  male  and  some  are  female.  Now,  for  some  reason 
or  other  best  known  to  themselves,  the  translators  of  the  Bible  have  carefully  crowded  out  of 
existence  and  smothered  up  every  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  Deity  is  both  masculine  and 
feminine.  They  have  translated  a,  feminine  plural  by  a masculine  singular  in  the  case  of  the  word 
Elohim.  They  have,  however,  left  an  inadvertent  admission  of  their  knowledge  that  it  was 
plural  in  Gen.  iv.  26;  "And  Elohim  said:  Let  Us  make  man."  Again  (v.  27),  how  could  Adam 
be  made  in  the  image  of  the  Elohim,  male  and  female,  unless  the  Elohim  were  male  and 
female  also?  The  word  Elohim  is  a plural  formed  from  the  feminine  singular  ALH,  E/oh,  by 
adding  IM  to  the  word.  But  inasmuch  as  IM  is  usually  the  termination  of  the  masculine 
plural,  and  is  here  added  to  a feminine  noun,  it  gives  the  word  Elohim  the  sense  of  a 
female  potency  united  to  a masculine  idea,  and  thereby  capable  of  producing  an  offspring. 
Now,  we  hear  much  of  the  Father  and  Son,  but  we  hear  nothing  of  the  Mother  in  the  ordinary 
religions  of  the  day.  But  in  the  Qabalah  we  find  that  the  Ancient  of  Days  conforms 
Himself  simultaneously  into  the  Father  and  the  Mother,  and  thus  begets  the  Son.  Now,  this 
Mother  is  Elohim.  Again,  we  are  usually  told  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  masculine.  But  the  word 
RVCh,  Ruach,  Spirit,  is  feminine,  as  appears  from  the  following  passage  of  the  Sepher 
Yetzirah:  "AChTh  RVCh  ALHIM  ChllM,  Achath  (feminine,  not  Achad,  masculine)  Ruach  Elohim 
Chiim:  One  is  She  the  Spirit  of  the  Elohim  of  Life." 

Now,  we  find  that  before  the  Deity  conformed  Himself  thus,  i.e.,  as  male  and  female 
that  the  worlds  of  the  universe  could  not  subsist,  or,  in  the  words  of  Genesis,  "The  earth 
was  formless  and  void."  These  prior  worlds  are  considered  to  be  symbolized  by  the  "kings 
who  reigned  in  Edom  before  there  reigned  a king  in  Israel,"  and  they  are  therefore  spoken  of 
in  the  Qabalah  as  the  "Edomite  kings.”  This  will  be  found  fully  explained  in  various  parts 
of  this  work. 


40 


VOLUME  ONE 


We  now  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  first  Sephira,  or  the  Number  One,  the 
Monad  of  Pythagoras.  In  this  number  are  the  other  nine  hidden.  It  is  indivisible,  it  is  also 
incapable  of  multiplication;  divide  1 by  itself  and  it  still  remains  1 multiply  1 by  itself  and  it 
is  still  1 and  unchanged.  Thus  it  is  a fitting  representative  of  the  great  unchangeable  Father 
of  all.  Now  this  number  of  unity  has  a twofold  nature,  and  thus  forms,  as  it  were,  the  link 
between  the  negative  and  the  positive.  In  its  unchangeable  one-ness  it  is  scarcely  a number; 
but  in  its  property  of  capability  of  addition  it  may  be  called  the  first  number  of  a numerical 
series.  Now,  the  zero,  0,  is  incapable  even  of  addition,  just  as  also  is  negative  existence.  How, 
then,  if  1 can  neither  be  multiplied  nor  divided,  is  another  1 to  be  obtained  to  add  to  it;  in 
other  words,  how  is  the  number  2 to  be  found?  By  reflection  of  itself.  For  though  0 be  incapable 
of  definition,  1 is  definable.  And  the  effect  of  a definition  is  to  form  an  Eidolon,  duplicate, 
or  image,  of  the  thing  defined.  Thus,  then,  we  obtain  a duad  composed  of  1 and  its 
reflection.  Now  also  we  have  the  commencement  of  a vibration  established,  for  the  number  1 
vibrates  alternately  from  changelessness  to  definition,  and  back  to  changelessness  again. 
Thus,  then  is  it  the  father  of  all  numbers,  and  a fitting  type  of  the  Father  of  all  things. 

The  name  of  the  first  Sephira  is  KThR,  Kether,  the  Crown. 

The  Divine  Name  attributed  to  it  is  the  Name  of  the  Father  given  in  Exod.  iii.  4: 
AHIH,  Eheieh,  I am.  It  signifies  Existence. 

Among  the  Epithets  applied  to  it,  as  containing  in  itself  the  idea  of  negative 
existence  depending  back  from  it  are: 

TMIRA  DTMIRIN,  Temira  De-Temirin,  the  Concealed  of  the  Concealed.  OThlQA 
DOThlQIN,  Authiqa  De-Authiqun,  the  Ancient  of  the  Ancient  Ones.  OThlQA  QDIShA, 

Authiqa  Qadisha,  the  Most  Holy  Ancient  One.  OThlQA,  Authiqa,  the  Ancient  One. 

OThlQ  IVMIN,  Authiq  lomin,  the  Ancient  of  Days. 

It  is  also  called:  NQDH  RAShVNH,  Nequdah  Rashunah,  the  Primordial  Point.  NQDH 
PShVTh,  Nequdah  Peshutah,  the  Smooth  Point. 

RIShA  HVVRH,  Risha  Havurah,  the  White  Head. 

RVM  MOLH,  Rom  Meolah,  the  Inscrutable  Height. 

Besides  all  these  there  is  another  very  important  name  applied  to  this  Sephira  as 
representing  the  great  Father  of  all  things.  It  is  ARIK  ANPIN,  Arikh  Anpin,  the  Vast 
Countenance,  or  Macroprosopus.  Of  Him  it  is  said  that  He  is  partly  concealed  (in  the  sense  of 
His  connection  with  the  negative  existence)  and  partly  manifest  (as  a positive  Sephira). 
Hence  the  symbolism  of  the  Vast  Countenance  is  that  of  a profile  wherein  one  side  only  of 
the  Countenance  is  seen;  or,  as  it  is  said  in  the  Qabalah,  "in  Him  all  is  right  side."  I shall 
refer  to  this  title  again. 

The  whole  ten  Sephiroth  represent  the  Heavenly  Man,  or  Primordial  Being,  ADM 
OILAH,  Adam  Auilh. 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Under  this  Sephira  are  classed  the  angelic  order  of  ChIVTh  HQDSh,  Chioth  Ha- 
Qadesh,  holy  living-creatures,  the  kerubim  or  sphinxes  of  Ezekiel's  vision  and  of  the 
Apocalypse  of  John.  These  are  represented  in  the  Zodiac  by  the  four  signs,  Taurus,  Leo, 
Scorpio,  and  Aquarius  --  the  Bull,  Lion,  Eagle,  and  Man.  Scorpio, .as  a good  emblem,  being 
symbolized  by  the  eagle,  as  an  evil  emblem  by  the  scorpion,  and  as  a mixed  nature  by  the 
snake. 


This  first  Sephira  contained  the  other  nine,  and  produced  them  in  succession,  thus: 

The  number  2,  or  the  Duad.  The  name  of  the  second  Sephira  is  ChKMH,  Chokmah, 
Wisdom,  a masculine  active  potency  reflected  from  Kether,  as  I have  before  explained.  This 
Sephira  is  the  active  and  evident  Lather,  to  whom  the  Mother  is  united,  to  whom  are 

attributed  the  Divine  Names,  IH,  Yoh , and  IHVH,  Tetragrammaton;  and  among  the 

angelic  hosts  by  AVPNIM,  Auphanim,  the  Wheels  (Ezek  i.).  The  second  Sephira  is  also 
called  AB,  Ab,  the  Lather. 

The  third  Sephira,  or  Triad,  is  a feminine  passive  potency,  called  BINH,  Binah, 
the  Understanding,  who  is  co-equal  with  Chokmah.  Lor  Chokmah,  the  number  2 is  like  two 
straight  lines  which  can  never  enclose  a space,  and  therefore  it  is  powerless  till  the  number  3 
forms  the  triangle.  Thus  this  Sephira  completes  and  makes  evident  the  supernal  Trinity.  It  is 
also  called  AMA,  Ama,  Mother,  and  AIMA,  Alma,  the  great  productive  Mother,  who  is 
eternally  conjoined  with  AB,  the  Lather,  for  the  maintenance  of  the  universe  in  order. 
Therefore  is  she  the  most  evident  form  in  whom  we  can  know  the  Lather,  and  therefore  is 
she  worthy  of  all  honour.  She  is  the  supernal  Mother,  co-equal  with  Chokmah,  and  the 
great  feminine  form  of  God,  the  Elohim,  in  whose  image  man  and  woman  are  created, 
according  to  the  teaching  of  the  Qabalah,  equal  before  God.  Woman  is  equal  with  man,  and 
certain/r  not  inferior  to  him,  as  it  has  been  the  persistent  endeavour  of  so-called  Christians  to 
make  her.  Aima  is  the  woman  described  in  the  Apocalypse  (ch.  xii.).  This  third  Sephira  is  also 
sometimes  called  the  Great  Sea.  To  her  are  attributed  the  Divine  names,  ARAL1M,  Aralirn, 
the  Thrones.  She  is  the  supernal  Mother,  as  distinguished  from  Malkuth,  the  inferior 
Mother,  Bride,  and  Queen. 

The  number  4.  This  union  of  the  second  and  third  Sephiroth  produced  ChSD, 

Chesed,  Mercy  or  Love  also  called  GDVLH,  Gedulah,  Greatness  or  Magnificence;  a 
masculine  potency  represented  by  the  Divine  Name  AL,  El,  the  Mighty  One,  and  the 
angelic  name,  ChShMLIM,  Chashmalim,  Scintillating  Llames  (Ezek.  iv.  4). 

The  number  5.  Lrom  this  emanated  the  feminine  passive  potency  GBVRH, 

Geburah,  strength  or  fortitude;  or  DIN,  Deen,  Justice;  represented  by  the  Divine  Names 
ALHIM  GBVR,  and  ALH,  Eloh,  and  the  angelic  name  ShRPIM,  Seraphim  (Isa.  vi.  6).  This 
Sephira  is  also  called  PChD,  Pachad,  Pear. 

The  number  6.  And  from  these  two  issued  the  uniting  Sephira,  ThPARTh,  Tiphareth, 
Beauty  or  Mildness,  represented  by  the  Divine  Name  ALVH  VDOTh,  Eloah  Va-Daath,  and 
the  angelic  names,  ShNANIM  Shinanim,  (Ps.  Ixviii.  18),  or  MLKIM,  Melakim,  kings.  Thus 
by  the  union  of  justice  and  mercy  we  obtain  beauty  or  clemency,  and  the  second 


42 


VOLUME  ONE 


trinity  of  the  Sephiroth  is  complete.  This  Sephira,  or  "Path,"  or  Numeration  --  for  by 
these  latter  appellations  the  emanations  are  sometimes  called  --  together  with  the  fourth, 
fifth,  seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  Sephiroth,  is  spoken  of  as  ZOIR  ANPIN,  Zauir  Anpin,  the 
Lesser  Countenance,  or  Microprosopus.  The  sixth  Sephiroth  of  which  Zauir  Anpin  is 
composed,  are  then  called  His  six  members.  He  is  also  called  MLK,  Melekh,  the  King. 

The  number  7.  The  seventh  Sephira  is  NTzCh,  Netzach,  or  Firmness  and  Victory, 
corresponding  to  the  Divine  Name  IHVH  TzBAVTh,  Jehovah  Tzabaoth,  the  Lord  of 
Armies,  and  the  angelic  names  ALHIM,  Elohim,  gods,  and  ThRShlShlM,  Tharshishim,  the 
brilliant  ones  (Dan.  x.  6). 

The  number  8.  Thence  proceeded  the  feminine  passive  potency  HVD,  Hod,  Splendour, 
answering  to  the  Divine  Name  ALHIM  TzBAVTh,  Elohim  Tzabaoth,  the  Gods  of  Armies, 
and  among  the  angels  to  BNI  ALHIM,  Beni  Elohim,  the  Sons  of  the  Gods  (Gen.  vi.  4). 

The  number  9.  These  two  produced  ISVD,  Yesod,  the  Foundation  or  Basis, 
represented  by  AL  Chi,  El  Chai,  the  Mighty  Living  One,  and  ShDE,  Shaddai,  and  among  the 
angels  by  AShIM,  Aishim,  the  Flames  (Ps.  civ. 4),  yielding  the  third  Trinity  of  the 
Sephiroth. 

The  number  10.  From  this  ninth  Sephira  came  the  tenth  and  last,  thus  completing  the 
decad  of  the  numbers.  It  is  called  MLKVTh,  Malkuth,  the  Kingdom,  and  also  the  Queen, 
Matrona,  the  inferior  Mother,  the  Bride  of  Microprosopus;  and  ShKINH,  Shekinah, 
represented  by  the  Divine  Name  ADNI,  Adonai,  and  among  the  angelic  hosts  by  the 
KRVBIM  Kerubim. 

Now,  each  of  these  Sephiroth  will  be  to  a certain  degree  androgynous,  for  it  will  be 
feminine  or  receptive  with  regard  to  the  Sephira  which  immediately  precedes  it  in  the 
Sephirotic  scale,  and  masculine  or  transmissive  with  regard  to  the  Sephira  which 
immediately  follows  it.  But  there  is  no  Sephira  anterior  to  Kether,  nor  is  there  a Sephira 
which  succeeds  Malkuth.  By  these  remarks  it  will  be  understood  how  Chokmah  is  a 
feminine  noun,  though  marking  a masculine  Sephira.  The  connecting-link  of  the  Sephiroth  is 
the  Ruach,  spirit,  from  Mezla,  the  hidden  influence..." 

Let  me  leave  Mathers'  Introduction  for  a brief  moment  in  order  to  dilate  on  one  of  the 
important  topics  he  dealt  with. 


CONCERNING  THE  HIERARCHIES 

A set  of  names  and  ideas  which  frequently  seem  to  get  mixed  up  and  confused,  relates 
to  the  hierarchies  of  intelligent  beings  of  the  Sephiroth,  Signs,  Planets  and  Elements.  It  will 
become  evident,  very  early  in  one's  study  of  the  Qabalah  and  the  Tree  of  Life  as  given  in  this 
hook,  there  is  a magical  technique  for  invoking  each  constituent  of  these  hierarchies.  This  being 
the  case,  it  is  imperative  that  one's  mind  be  absolutely  clear  as  to  the  nature  of  the  hierarchy  being 
dealt  with,  and  where  it  belongs.  For  example,  the  first  Scphirah  is  named  Kether,  the  Crown 
Its  divine  name  is  Eheieh,  meaning  I will  be.  This  is  the  future  tense  in  Hebrew  grammar;  its 
Archangel  is  Metatron,  and  its  Choir  of  Angels  is  the  Chayoth  ha-Qadosh,  and  its  Palace  in 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Assiah  is  Rashith  ha-Gilgaleem.  Each  one  of  these  hierarchical  names  refers  also  to 
one  of  the  four  Qabalistic  worlds.  The  first  to  ATZILUTH  --  the  Archetypal  World.  The 
second  to  BRIAH  --  the  Creative  World.  The  third  to  YETZIRAH  --  the  Formative  World  -- 
and  ASSIAH  is  the  World  of  Action  or  Manifestation. 


These  names  should  certainly  be  committed  to  memory.  One  means  of  ensuring  this 
is  to  draw  a good  copy  of  the  Tree  of  Life  on  a full  sheet  of  typing  paper,  and  run  off  a couple 
of  dozen  or  more  xerox  copies.  Then  each  set  of  correspondences  can  simply  be  copied  on 
one  of  the  duplicated  Trees,  enabling  one  to  see  at  a glance  the  associations,  inferences, 
etc. 


Now  one  of  the  attributions  to  Kether  is  Air,  primal  Air.  The  element  Air  has  its 
own  hierarchy  as  follows:  The  divine  Name  is  given  as  Shaddai  El  Chai,  its  Archangel  is 
Raphael,  its  Angel  is  Chassan,  the  Ruler  is  Ariel,  and  the  King  is  Paralda.  Actually  this  set  of 
attributions  should  belong  lower  down  on  the  Tree  than  Kether,  undoubtedly  in  Yesod.  But  1 
will  deal  with  that  later. 

For  the  time  being,  however,  consider  the  fact  that  this  hierarchical  relation  to  Air  is 
also  attributed  to  Kether,  the  Crown.  It  would  be  a gross  misunderstanding  of  Qabalistic 
principles  to  confuse  the  individual  members  of  each  hierarchy  with  the  other,  as  is 
commonly  done.  Metatron,  the  Archangel  of  Kether,  has  nothing  whatsoever  to  do  with  the 
element  Air.  Nor  has  the  Archangel  Raphael,  who  rules  over  the  element  Air,  anything 
whatsoever  to  do  with  K ether.  Much  the  same  is  true  of  the  remaining  members  of  the 
hierarchy.  Each  one  must  be  considered  separately  and  individually.  There  must  be  no 
confusion.  (This  is  clarified  on  one  of  our  G.D.  tapes). 

Take  Geburah,  another  example.  It  is  the  5th  Sephirah  on  the  Tree,  and  to  it  is 
referred  the  planet  Mars  and  the  element  of  Fire  (reflected  downwards  from  Chokmah.  See 
the  chart  which  depicts  the  reflection  of  the  three  elements  downwards  and  crosswise  on 
the  Tree.)  That  means,  apart  from  other  more  complicated  features  (if  one  considers  them 
as  complications),  there  are  three  entirely  separate  hierarchies.  One  for  Geburah.  Another  for 
Mars,  and  yet  a third  for  Fire.  Each  must  be  kept  separate  from  the  other. 

The  divine  name  for  Geburah  is  Elohim  Gibor.  The  Archangel  is  Kamael,  and  the 
Choir  of  Angels  is  Seraphim,  and  its  Assiatic  Palace  is  Mars,  Maadim. 

Now  the  hierarchy  for  Mars  is  of  course  Elohim  Gibor,  but  the  Angel  is  Zamael,  the 
Intelligence  is  Graphiel,  and  its  Spirit  is  Bartzabel.  These  two  sets  of  hierarchical  names 
bear  absolutely  no  relationship  with  one  another.  They  must  be  kept  in  separate  watertight 
compartments  in  one's  brain,  so  that  any  one  name  of  any  one  hierarchy  does  not  leak  over 
and  create  confusion  in  the  other  hierarchy.  I repeat  and  am  most  emphatic  on  this  score,  for 
even  some  of  the  better  authorities  fall  into  this  booby-trap,  which  is  dug  for  the  unwary. 
This  warning  could  be  reiterated  frequently  and  should  be  printed  on  every  few  pages  in  the 
student's  own  notebooks,  so  that  it  serves  as  an  ever  present  reminder  --  keep  the  hierarchies 
separate!  One  may  not  say  that  Mars  is  Geburah.  Mars  has  its  own 


44 


VOLUME  ONE 


hierarchy  which  is  separate  from  that  of  Geburah.  We  may  say  that  among  the  many 
attributions  given  to  Geburah,  and  they  are  manifold,  one  of  them  and  only  one  is  Mars.  So  since  the 
part  is  not  greater  than  the  whole,  Mars  with  its  own  particular  kinds  of  attributions  occupies  a lesser 
space  than  the  category  of  Geburah  in  which  it  is  included. 

The  problem  for  the  novice  and  the  so-called  advanced  student  is  that  there  is  another  set  of 
attributions  to  Geburah  with  another  hierarchy  altogether.  For  example  in  common  parlance  the 
student  may  say  Geburah  is  Fire.  This  is  not  true!  Fire  is  but  another  one  of  the  attributions  to  Geburah  in 
the  same  category  as  is  Mars.  And  just  as  Mars  has  its  own  hierarchy  so  also  does  the  element  of  Fire. 
The  hierarchy  of  Fire  again  must  not  be  confused  with  the  hierarchy  of  Mars  or  that  of  Geburah. 

The  element  of  Fire  diagonally  reflected  down  the  Tree  from  the  Sephirah  Chokmah,  has  its 
own  hierarchy  which  is  totally  distinct  and  separate  from  the  preceding  two.  For  instance  its  divine 
name  is  Yhvh  Tzabaoth  (which  more  or  less  links  it  to  Netzach),  while  the  Archangel  is  Michael,  the 
King  is  Aral.  (He  must  not  be  confused  with  the  Ruler  of  Air  Ariel,  nor  with  Auriel  who  is  the 
Archangel  of  Earth).  The  King  of  Fire  is  Seraph  (not  to  be  confused  with  the  Seraphim  who  are  the 
Choir  of  Angels  of  Geburah),  and  its  Ruler  is  Djin. 

I know  of  countless  numbers  of  students  throughout  the  years  who  have  never  mastered  this 
particular  set  of  attributions  and  hopelessly  confuse  one  with  the  other.  The  result  is  a hodge-podge  of 
attributions,  none  of  which  make  sense  and  then  to  excuse  their  confusion  and  lack  of  true 
understanding  of  semantic  principles  they  begin  to  talk  of  "blinds"  in  the  teaching. 

There  is  another  point  here  that  must  be  referred  to.  For  example:  Raphael  is  the  Archangel 
of  Air.  The  Archangel  of  Tiphareth  is  also  Raphael.  The  Angel  of  Mercury  is  also  Raphael. 

Now  is  this  the  same  "person  or  are  they  different  beings? 

From  the  practical  magical  point  of  view,  when  invoking  any  one  of  these  beings,  the  divine 
Name  used  will  be  quite  different  and  of  course  the  Pentagram  or  the  Hexagram  will  be  different  too. 
The  intention  is  altogether  different;  this  is  a significant  factor  that  will  differentiate  results.  The 
Archangel  of  Air  is  invoked  by  the  Air  Pentagram.  The  Archangel  of  Tiphareth  will  be  invoked  by  a 
Hexagram  of  the  Sun,  as  will  the  Angel  of  Mercury  by  the  Hexagram  of  Hod.  That  disposes  of  the 
practical  aspect. 

But  there  is  a more  metaphysical  topic  involved,  which  1 think  is  quite  interesting  and 
intriguing.  V.H.  Frater  S.R.M.D.  attempted  in  one  of  the  Enochian  papers  to  deal  distantly  with  this 
problem,  but  I do  not  think  the  discussion  came  to  a satisfactory  conclusion,  nor  do  1 think  the 
problem  was  solved. 

The  way  in  which  one  may  look  at  it  is  to  consider  a country  where  many  people  have  similar 
names.  Smith  for  example,  is  one  of  these  found  in  England,  Schmidt  in  Germany,  or  Collins  or 
Williams,  etc.,  in  Wales,  etc.  Let  us  deal  with  Wales.  In  a fairly  large  town  in  Wales  there  is  going  to 
be  a Mr.  Williams  who  is  the  dairyman.  Then  there  will  be  Mr. 


45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Williams  who  has  the  dry-goods  store.  I knew  a Mr.  Williams  who  was  a gardener 
when  once,  years  ago,  1 lived  in  St.  Briavels  on  the  Welsh  border.  And  there  ought  to  be  a 
Mr.  Williams,  the  groceryman.  All  are  Williams.  Are  they  the  same  person  because  they 
have  the  same  name?  Obviously  not,  though  having  the  same  surname,  their  first  or  Christian 
names  would  be  different  and  so  would  their  vocations. 

In  much  the  same  way  we  can  distinguish  the  Archangels  and  Angels  we  are  talking 
about.  One  of  them  is  in  the  hierarchy  of  Air  - a different  kind  of  profession  as  it  were. 
Another  is  in  Tiphareth,  and  the  third  relates  to  the  planet  Mercury.  There  is  no  earthly 
connection  between  any  of  these,  despite  the  fact  they  have  the  same  name.  Correspondingly,  the 
divine  Names  of  these  three  areas  is  also  different.  So  to  call  them,  or  to  call  upon  them,  we 
must  know  what  sphere  of  action  they  operate  in  and  act  accordingly.  They  are  in  effect 
different  "people,"  different  names  and  use  different  "tools"  as  it  were. 

We  will  also  have  to  learn  to  differentiate  between  the  element  of  Air  attributed  to 
Kether,  that  attributed  to  Tiphareth,  and  that  attributed  to  Yesod.  The  first  we  can  call, 
merely  to  provide  understandable  labels,  Celestial  Air.  To  invoke,  one  should  use  the  divine 
Name  of  Kether  first  before  using  the  hierarchical  names  belonging  to  the  element  of  Air.  In  the 
case  of  Tiphareth,  we  could  use  the  term  Divine  Air  (or  even  Harmonious  Air),  using  the 
divine  name  of  Tiphareth  first  before  those  of  the  element  of  Air.  The  Air  attributed  to 
Yesod  could  be  entitled  just  Elemental  Air,  and  used  with  the  hierarchical  names  as  given. 

The  same  rationale  must  be  used  with  the  elements  of  Fire  attributed  to  Chokmah, 
Geburah  and  Netzach  - Celestial  Fire,  Divine  Fire,  and  Elemental  Fire. 

Water  - we  use  rather  the  same  procedure.  It  is  attributed  to  Binah,  Chesed,  and  Hod  - 
Celestial  Water,  Divine  Water,  and  Elemental  Water,  with  the  same  changes  in  the  use  of 
divine  names  as  given  above.  This  procedure  will  eliminate  a great  deal  of  confusion  and 
muddle. 


THE  SEPHIROTIC  HIERARCHIES 
KETHER 


Divine  Name 
( Atziluth) 

Eheieh  Metatron 

CHOKMAH 


Archangelic 
Angelic  Choir 
(Briah)  (Yetzirah) 
Chayoth  ha-Qadesh 


Divine  Name 
(Atziluth) 

Yah  Raziel 


Archangelic 
Angelic  Choir 
(Briah)  (Yetzirah) 
Auphanim 


46 


VOLUME  ONE 


Divine  Name 
(Atziluth) 

YHVH  Elohim 

Divine  Name 
(Atziluth) 

El 

Divine  Name 
(Atziluth) 

Elohim  Gibor 

Divine  Name 
(Atziluth) 

YHVH  Eloah  ve  Daath 

Divine  Name 
(Atziluth) 

YHVH  Tzabaoth 

Divine  Name 
(Atziluth) 

Elohim  Tzabaoth 


BINAH 

Archangelic 

(Briah) 

Tzaphqiel 

CHESED 

Archangelic 

(Briah) 

Tzadgiel 

GEBURAH 

Archangelic 

(Briah) 

Kamael 

TIPHARETH 

Archangelic 

(Briah) 

Raphael 

NETZACH 

Archangelic 

(Briah) 

Haniel 

HOD 

Archangelic 

(Briah) 

Michael 


Angelic  Choir 

(Yetzirah) 

Aralim 

Angelic  Choir 

(Yetzirah) 

Chashmalim 

Angelic  Choir 

(Yetzirah) 

Seraphim 

Angelic  Choir 

(Yetzirah) 

Melekim 

Angelic  Choir 

(Yetzirah) 

Elohim 

Angelic  Choir 
(Yetzirah) 
Beni  Elohim 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


YESOD 

Divine  Name  Archangelic  Angelic  Choir 


(Atziluth) 

(Briah) 

(Yetzirah) 

Shaddai  El  Chai 

Gabriel 

Kerubim 

MALKUTH 

Divine  Name 

Archangelic 

Angelic  Choir 

(Atziluth) 

(Briah) 

(Yetzirah) 

Adonai  ha  Aretz 

Sandalphon 

Ashim 

PLANETARY  HIERARCHIES 


One  of  the  characteristics  of  the  Qabalah  is  that  each  Sephirah,  Planet  and  Element 
has  its  own  hierarchy.  Each  hierarchy  must  be  kept  distinct  and  seperate.  The  following  gives 
the  hierarchies  relative  to  the  Planets. 

SATURN 


Planet 

Shabbathai 


Angel 

Cassiel 


Intelligence  Spirit 

Agiel  Zazel 


48 


VOLUME  ONE 


JUPITER 

Planet 

Angel 

Intelligence 

Spirit 

Tzedek 

Sachiel 

Iophiel 

Hismael 

MARS 

Planet 

Angel 

Intelligence 

Spirit 

Madim 

Zamael 

Graphiel 

Bartzabel 

SUN 

Planet 

Angel 

Intelligence 

Spirit 

Shemesh 

Michael 

Nakhiel 

Sorath 

VENUS 

Planet 

Angel 

Intelligence 

Spirit 

Nogah 

Hanael 

Hagiel 

Kedemel 

MERCURY 

Planet 

Angel 

Intelligence 

Spirit 

Kokab 

Raphael 

Tiriel 

Taphthartharath 

MOON 

Planet 

Angel 

Intelligence 

Spirit 

Levanah 

Gabriel 

Malkah  be 

Schad  Barschemoth 

Tarshisim  ve-ad 

ha-Shartathan  Ruachoth 

Schechalim 

49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ELEMENTAL  HIERARCHIES 


EARTH  - NORTH 


Hebrew 

Aretz  or  Ophir 

Divine  name 

Adonai  ha-Aretz 

s*t« 

Cardinal  point 

Tzaphon 

lies 

Archangel 

A uriel 

Angel 

Phorlakh 

Ruler 

Kerub 

King 

Ghob 

Elemental 

Gnomes 

AIR  - EAST 


Hebrew 

Ruach 

nn 

Divine  name 

Shaddai  El  Chai 

Cardinal  point 

Mizrach 

mra 

Archangel 

Raphael 

Angel 

Chassan 

Ruler 

Ariel 

King 

Paralda 

Elementals 

Sylphs 

50 


VOLUME  ONE 


WATER  - WEST 


Hebrew 

Mayim 

t)S& 

Divine  name 

Elohim  Tzabaoth 

Cardinal  point 

Maarab 

Archangel 

Gabriel 

Angel 

Taliahad 

Ruler 

Tharsis 

Queen 

Nichsa 

Elemental 

Undines 

FIRE  - SOUTH 

Hebrew 

Asch 

12W 

Divine  name 

YHVH  Tzabaoth 

jmiosf  mrr 

Cardinal  point 

Darom 

Dm 

Archangel 

Michael 

Angel 

Aral 

Ruler 

Seraph 

tnt* 

King 

Djin 

Elemental 

Salamanders 

51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


I now  continue  with  the  quotations  from  Mathers  Introduction  to  The  Kaballah 
Unveiled: 

"I  will  now  add  a few  more  remarks  on  the  qabalistical  meaning  of  the  term 
MThQLA,  Methegela,  balance.  In  each  of  the  three  trinities  or  triads  of  the  Sephiroth  is  a 
duad  of  opposite  sexes,  and  uniting  intelligence  which  is  the  result.  In  this,  the  masculine 
and  feminine  potencies  are  regarded  as  the  two  scales  of  the  balance,  and  the  uniting  Sephira 
as  the  beam  which  joins  them.  Thus,  then,  the  term  balance  may  be  said  to  symbolize  the 
Triune,  Trinity  in  Unity,  and  the  Unity  represented  by  the  central  point  of  the  beam.  But 
again,  in  the  Sephiroth  there  is  a triple  Trinity,  the  upper,  lower,  and  middle.  Now,  these 
three  are  represented  thus:  the  Supernal,  or  highest,  by  the  Crown,  Kether;  the  middle  by  athe 
King,  and  the  inferior  by  the  Queen;  which  will  be  the  greatest  trinity.  And  the  earthly 
correlatives  of  these  will  be  the  Primum  Mobile,  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  Here  we  at  once 
find  alchemical  symbolism. 

Now  in  the  world  the  Sephiroth  are  represented  by: 


(1) RAShlTh  HGLGLIM,  Rashith  Ha-Galgalim,  the  commencement  of  the  whirling  motions,  the 
Primum  Mobile 

(2) MSLVTh,  Masloth,  the  sphere  of  the  Zodiac. 

(3) ShBThAI,  Shabbathai,  rest,  Saturn. 

(4) TzDQ,  Tzadeq,,  righteousness,  Jupiter 

(5) MADIM,  Madim,,  vehement  strength.  Mars. 

(6) ShMSh,  Shemesh,  the  solar  light,  the  Sun. 

(7) NVGH,  Nogah,  glittering  splendour,  Venus. 

(8) KVKB,  Kokab,  the  stellar  light,  Mercury. 

(9) LBNH,  Levanah,  the  lunar  flame,  the  Moon. 

(10) ChLM  ISVDVTh,  Cholorn  Yesodoth,  the  breaker  of  the  foundations,  the  elements. 

The  Sephiroth  are  further  divided  into  three  pillars  the  right-hand  Pillar  of  Mercy, 

consisting  of  the  second,  fourth,  and  seventh  emanations;  the  left-hand  Pillar  or  Judgment, 
consisting  of  the  third,  fifth,  and  eighth;  and  the  middle  Pillar  of  Mildness,  consisting  of  the 
first,  sixth,  ninth,  and  tenth  emanations. 

In  their  totality  and  unity  the  ten  Sephiroth  represent  the  archetypal  man,  ADM 
QDMVN,  Adam  Kadmon,  the  Protogonos.  In  looking  to  the  Sephiroth  constituting  the  first 
triad,  it  is  evident  that  they  represent  the  intellect;  and  hence  this  triad  is  called  the 
intellectual  world,  OV  LM  M VShK  L,  Olahm  Mevshekal.  The  second  triad  corresponds  to  the 
moral  world,  OVLM  MVRGSh,  Olahm  Morgash.  The  third  represents  power  and  stability, 
and  is  therefore  called  the  material  world,  OVLM  HMVTBO,  Olahm  Ha-Mevethau.  These 
three  aspects  are  called  the  faces,  AN  PIN,  Anpin.  Thus  is  the  tree  of  life,  OTz  ChllM,  Or: 
Chaiim,  formed;  the  first  triad  being  placed  above,  the  second  and  third  below,  in  such  a 
manner  that  the  three  masculine  Sephiroth  are  on  the  right,  three  feminine 


52 


VOLUME  ONE 


on  the  left,  whilst  the  four  uniting  Sephiroth  occupy  the  center.  This  is  the  qabalistical 
Tree  of  Life,  on  which  all  things  depend.  There  is  considerable  analogy  between  this  and  the 
tree  Yggdrasil  of  the  Scandinavians. 

I have  already  remarked  that  there  is  one  trinity  which  comprises  all  the  Sephiroth, 
and  that  it  consists  of  the  Crown,  the  King,  and  the  Queen.  (In  some  senses  this  is  similar  to 
the  Christian  Trinity  of  Father,  Son,  and  Floly  Spirit,  which  in  their  highest  divine  nature 
are  symbolized  by  the  first  three  Sephiroth,  Kether,  Chokmah,  and  Binah.)  It  is  the  Trinity 
which  created  the  world,  or,  in  qabalistic  language,  the  universe  was  born  from  the  union  of 
the  crowned  King  and  Queen.  But  according  to  the  Qabalah,  before  the  complete  form  of 
the  heavenly  man  (the  ten  Sephiroth)  was  produced,  there  were  certain  primordial  worlds 
created,  but  these  could  not  subsist,  as  the  equilibrium  of  balance  was  not  yet  perfect,  and 
they  were  convulsed  by  the  unbalanced  forces  and  destroyed.  These  primordial  worlds  are 
called  the  kings  of  ancient  time,  and  the  kings  of  Edom  who  reigned  before  the  monarchs  of  Israel. 

In  this  sense,  Edom  is  the  world  of  unbalanced  force,  and  Israel  is  the  balanced  Sephiroth 
(Gen.  xxxvi.  31).  This  important  fact,  that  worlds  were  created  and  destroyed  prior  to  the 
present  creation,  is  again  and  again  reiterated  in  the  Zohar. 

Now  the  Sephiroth  are  also  called  the  World  of  Emanations,  or  the  Atziluthic  World, 
or  archetypal  world,  OVLM  ATzILVTh,  Olahm  Atziloth;  and  this  world  gave  birth  to  three 
other  worlds,  each  containing  a repetition  of  the  Sephiroth,  but  in  a descending  scale  of 
brightness. 

The  second  world  is  the  Briatic  world,  OVLM  HBR1AH,  Olahm  Ha-Briah,  the  world 
of  creation,  also  called  KVRS1A,  Khorsia,  the  throne.  It  is  an  immediate  emanation  from  the 
world  of  Atziluth,  whose  ten  Sephiroth  are  reflected  herein,  and  are  consequently  more 
limited,  though  they  are  still  of  the  purest  nature,  and  without  any  admixture  of  matter. 

The  third  is  the  Yetziratic  world,  OVLM  HITzIRH,  Olahm  Ha-  Yetzirah,  or  world  of 
Formation  and  of  angels,  which  proceeds  from  Briah,  and  though  less  refined  in  substance,  is 
still  without  matter.  It  is  in  this  angelic  world  where  those  intelligent  and  incorporeal 
beings  reside  who  are  wrapped  in  a luminous  garment,  and  who  assume  a form  when  they 
appear  unto  man. 

The  fourth  is  the  Assiatic  world,  OVLM  HOShIH,  Olahm  Ha-Assiah,  the  World  of 
Action,  called  also  the  world  of  shells,  OVLM  HQLIPVTh,  Olahm  Ha-Qliphoth,  which  is 
this  world  of  matter,  made  up  of  the  grosser  elements  of  the  other  three.  In  it  is  also  the 
abode  of  the  evil  spirits  which  are  called  "the  shells"  by  the  Qabalah,  Qliphoth,  material 
shells.  The  devils  are  also  divided  into  ten  classes,  and  have  suitable  habitations.  . . 

The  Demons  are  the  grossest  and  most  deficient  of  all  forms.  Their  ten  degrees  answer 
to  the  decad  of  the  Sephiroth,  but  in  inverse  ratio,  as  darkness  and  impurity  increase  with  the 
descent  of  each  degree.  The  two  first  are  nothing  but  absence  of  visible  form  and 
organization.  The  third  is  the  abode  of  darkness.  Next  follow  seven  Hells  occupied  by  those 
demons  which  represent  incarnate  human  vices,  and  torture  those  who  have  given 


53 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


themselves  up  to  such  vices  in  earth-life.  Their  prince  is  SMAL,  Samael,  the  angel  of 
poison  and  of  death.  His  wife  is  the  harlot,  or  woman  of  whoredom  AShTh  ZNVNIM, 
Isheth  Zenunim;  and  united  they  are  called  the  Beast,  CHIVA,  Chioa.  Thus  the  infernal 
trinity  is  completed,  which  is,  so  to  speak,  the  averse  and  caricature  of  the  supernal 
Creative  One.  Samael  is  considered  to  be  identical  with  Satan. 

The  name  of  the  Deity,  which  we  call  Jehovah,  is  in  Hebrew  a name  of  four  letters, 
I H V H;  and  the  true  pronunciation  of  it  is  known  to  very  few..." 

TETRAGRAMMATON 

This  is  a Latin  word  meaning  "the  four  lettered  name."  This  name  is  a Hebrew  name 
for  the  traditional  God  of  the  Old  Testament,  Jehovah.  In  Hebrew,  the  consonants  of  the 
latter  name  are  YHVH  - thus  Tetragrammaton. 

Qabalistically,  each  letter  of  Tetragrammaton  was  attributed  to  one  of  the  four  major 
primitive  elements  of  the  ancients.  Y equals  Fire.  H equals  Water.  Vau  equals  Air,  and  the 
last  H or  final  Heh  equals  Earth.  So  that  the  Tetragrammaton,  or  the  name  of  Jehovah 
represents  the  four  basic  elements  of  life.  The  Biblical  Jehovah  was  the  God  who  flamed  in 
the  fire  of  the  holy  ground  Moses  stood  on,  thundered  in  the  storms  around  Mount  Horeb 
and  Sinai,  drowned  the  Egyptians  and  their  chariots,  and  opened  up  the  land  with 
earthquakes  to  destroy  the  enemies  of  Israel.  Thus  he  is  depicted  as  an  angry  and  violent 
God  - which  is  what  the  four  elements  of  life  are.  They  can  be  gentle  and  easy  going,  but 
never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  they  are  also  violent,  dangerous  and  overwhelming.  This  is 
Tetragrammaton. 

The  Letters  of  the  Name  are  attributed  in  various  ways  to  the  Tree  of  Life,  always 
carrying  with  them  the  attributions  of  the  basic  elements.  Even  when  Y,  often  called  the 
Father,  is  sometimes  attributed  to  Kether,  the  fire  of  creation  is  referred  to.  When  H,  the  M 
other,  is  attributed  to  Chokmah  and  Binah,  we  are  considering  the  fine  ethereal  waters  of  the 
creative  levels,  the  substance  in  which  and  from  which  all  the  worlds  were  created.  V is 
sometimes  referred  to  Tiphareth,  the  Son  of  Yod  and  Heh  of  Tetragrammaton,  and  is  the 
all-encompassing  Air  - not  the  Air  that  we  ordinarily  breathe  oxygen,  nitrogen,  carbon 
dioxide,  etc.  . .but  the  vital  airs;  the  pranas  without  which  there  is  no  life. 

The  final  H or  Heh  is  the  unredeemed  Daughter,  the  Earth,  which  is  acted  upon 
and  formed  and  influenced  by  the  other  three  elements  of  letters  of  Tetragrammaton.  She  is 
the  unredeemed  Daughter  until  she  becomes  receptive  to  the  higher  influences  - 
consciously  and  deliberately  - and  then  she  becomes  transformed  into  the  Bride  of 
Microprosopus  or  Vau  of  Tiphareth  who  brings  harmony  and  beauty  to  the  heavy  enduring 
burdensome  qualities  of  Earth. 

All  of  these  together  with  a host  of  similar  manifold  associations  and  symbols  are 
subsumed  under  the  heading  of  Tetragrammaton. 

Even  Tetragrammaton,  the  testy  senior  of  the  Bible,  the  ever-angry  and  punitive 
Jehovah,  needs  to  be  transformed  and  redeemed  by  the  descent  of  the  holy  spirit 


54 


VOLUME  ONE 


represented  by  the  letter  Shin.  (Shin  equals  300.  Ruach  Elohim  translates  as  the 
Spirit  of  the  Gods  equals  300.)  When  this  Shin  descends,  splitting  asunder  the  old  rigid, 
hide-bound  Tetragrammaton,  he  becomes  transformed  into  the  Pentagrammaton  YHShVH, 
the  saved,  redeemed  and  illumined  Adept  who  combines  heaven  and  earth,  the  Cosmos  and 
the  Microcosm  all  at  once.  We  are  now  returning  once  more  to  Mathers  and  his  lengthy 
introduction  to  the  Kahallah  Unveiled. 

He  states:  "I  myself  know  some  score  of  different  mystical  pronunciations  of  it.  The 
true  pronunciation  is  a most  secret  arcanum,  and  is  a secret  of  secrets.  He  who  can  rightly 
pronounce  it,  causeth  heaven  and  earth  to  tremble,  for  it  is  the  name  which  rusheth  through 
the  universe.  Therefore  when  a devout  Jew  comes  upon  it  in  reading  the  Scripture,  he  either 
does  not  attempt  to  pronounce  it,  but  instead  makes  a short  pause,  or  else  he  substitutes  for  it 
the  name  Adonai,  ADNI,  Lord.  The  radical  meaning  of  the  word  is  "to  be,”  and  it  is  thus,  like 
AHIH,  Eheieh,  a glyph  of  existence.  It  is  capable  of  twelve  transpositions,  which  all 
convey  the  meaning  of  "to  be";  it  is  the  only  word  that  will  bear  so  many  transpositions 
without  its  meaning  being  altered.  They  are  called  the  twelve  banners  of  the  mighty  name,  and 
are  said  by  some  to  rule  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac.  These  are  the  twelve  banners: 

IHVH,  IHHV,  IVHH,  HVHI,  HVIH,  HHIV,  VHHI,  VIHH,  VHIH,  HIHV,  HIVH,  H HVI. 
There  are  three  other  Tetragrammatic  names,  which  are  AHIH,  Eheieh,  existence;  ADNI, 
Adonai,  Lord;  and  AGLA  Agla.  This  last  is  not,  properly  speaking,  a word,  but  is  a notariqon 
of  the  sentence,  AThH  GBVR  LOVLM  ADNI,  Ateh  Gebor  Le-Olahm  Adonai:  Thou  art 
mighty  for  ever,  0 Lord!  An  arbitrary  interpretation  of  Agla  is  this:  A,  the  one  first;  A,  the 
one  last;  G,  the  Trinity  in  Unity;  L,  the  completion  of  the  Great  Work. 

The  first  thing  we  notice  is  that  both  AHIH  and  IHVH  convey  the  idea  of  existence; 
this  is  their  first  analogy.  The  second  is,  that  in  each  the  letter  H comes  second  and  fourth; 
and  the  third  is  that  by  Gematria  AHIH  equals  IHV  without  the  H (which,  as  we  shall  see 
presently,  is  the  symbol  of  Malkuth,  the  tenth  Sephira).  But  now,  if  they  be  written  one 
above  the  others,  thus,  within  the  arms  of  a cross,  they  read  downwards  as  well  as  across, 


AH 

IH 

IH 

VH 

AHIH,  IHVH.  Now,  if  we  examine  the  matter  qabalistically  we  shall  find  the 
reason  of  these  analogies.  For  Eheieh,  AHIH,  is  the  Vast  Countenance,  the  Ancient  One, 
Macroprosopus,  Kether,  the  first  Sephira,  the  Crown  of  the  Qabalistical  Sephirotic 
greatest  Trinity  (which  consists  of  the  Crown,  King,  and  Queen;  or  Macroprosopus, 
Microprosopus  and  the  Bride),  and  the  Father  in  the  Christian  acceptation  of  the  Trinity. 

But  IHVH,  the  Tetragrammaton,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  contains  all  the 
Sephiroth  with  the  exception  of  Kether,  and  specially  signifies  the  Lesser  Countenance, 
Microprosopus, 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  King  of  the  qabalistical  Sephirotic  greater  Trinity,  and  the  Son  in  His  human 
incarnation,  in  the  Christian  interpretation  of  the  Trinity. 

Therefore,  as  the  Son  reveals  the  Father,  so  does  IHVFI,  Jehovah,  reveal  AFIIH, 

Eheieh.  And  ADNI  is  the  Queen  "by  whom  alone  Tetragrammaton  can  be  grasped,"  whose 
exaltation  into  Binah  is  found  in  the  Christian  assumption  of  the  Virgin. 

The  Tetragrammaton  IHVH  is  referred  to  the  Sephiroth,  thus:  the  uppermost  point 
of  the  letter  Yod,  I,  is  said  to  refer  to  Kether;  the  letter  I itself  to  Chokmah,  the  father  of 
Microprosopus;  the  letter  H,  or  "the  supernal  He,"  to  Binah  and  supernal  Mother;  the 
letter  V to  the  next  six  Sephiroth,  which  are  called  the  six  members  of  Microprosopus  (and  six 
is  the  numerical  value  of  V,  the  Hebrew  Vau);  lastly,  the  letter  H,  the  "inferior  He,"  to 
Malkuth,  the  tenth  Sephira,  the  bride  of  Microprosopus. 

Now,  there  are  four  secret  names  referred  to  the  four  worlds  of  Atziloth,  Briah, 
Yetzirah,  and  Assiah;  and  again,  the  Tetragrammaton  is  said  to  go  forth  written  in  a certain 
manner  in  each  of  these  four  worlds.  The  secret  name  of  Atziloth  is  OB  Aub;  that  of  Briah  is  SG 
Seg;  that  of  Yetzirah  is  MH  Mali;  and  that  of  Assiah  is  BN  Ben.  (BN,  Ben  means  "son")..  . 

These  names  operate  together  with  the  Sephiroth  through  the  "231  gates,"  as 
combinations  of  the  alphabet  are  called;  but  it  would  take  too  much  space  to  go  fully  into 
the  subject  here. 

Closely  associated  with  the  subject  of  the  letters  of  the  Tetragrammaton  is  that  of 
the  four  Kerubim,  to  which  I have  already  referred  in  describing  the  first  Sephira.  Now  it 
must  not  be  forgotten  that  these  forms  in  Ezekiel's  vision  support  the  throne  of  the  Deity, 
whereon  the  Heavenly  Man  is  seated  - the  Adam  Qadmon,  the  Sephirotic  image;  and  that 
between  the  throne  and  the  living  creatures  is  the  firmament.  Here  then  we  have  the  four 
worlds  - Atziloth,  the  deific  form;  Briah,  the  throne;  Yetzirah,  the  firmament;  Assiah,  the 
Kerubim.  Therefore  the  Kerubim  represent  the  powers  of  the  letters  of  the  Tetragrammaton  on 
the  material  plane;  and  the  four  represent  the  operation  of  the  four  letters  in  each  of  the  four 
worlds.  Thus,  then,  the  Kerubim  are  the  living  forms  of  the  letters,  symbolized  in  the  Zodiac 
by  Taurus,  Leo,  Aquarius,  and  Scorpio,  as  I have  before  remarked. 

And  the  mystery  of  the  earthly  and  mortal  man  is  after  the  mystery  of  the  supernal 
and  immortal  One;  and  thus  was  he  created  in  the  image  of  God  upon  earth.  In  the  form  of 
the  body  is  Tetragrammaton  found.  The  head  is  I,  the  arms  and  shoulders  are  like  H,  the  body 
is  V,  and  the  legs  are  represented  by  the  H final.  Therefore,  as  the  outward  form  of  man 
corresponds  to  the  Tetragrammaton,  so  does  the  animating  soul  correspond  to  the  ten 
Sephiroth;  and  as  these  find  their  ultimate  expression  in  the  trinity  of  the  Crown,  the  King, 
and  the  Queen,  so  is  there  a principal  triple  division  of  the  soul.  Thus,  then,  the  first  is 
Neschamah  NShMH,  which  is  the  highest  degree  of  being,  corresponding  to  the  crown 
(Kether),  and  representing  the  highest  triad  of  the  Sephiroth,  called  the  intellectual  world. 
The  second  is  Ruach,  RVCh,  the  seat  of  good  and  evil,  corresponding  to  Tiphareth,  the 
moral  world.  And  the  third  is  Nephesch,  NPSh,  the  animal  life  and  desires,  corresponding  to 
Yesod,  and  the  material  and  sensuous  world.  All  souls  are  pre-existent  in  the  world  of 


56 


VOLUME  ONE 


emanations,  and  are  in  their  original  state  androgynous,  but  when  they  descend  upon 
earth  they  become  separated  into  male  and  female,  and  inhabit  different  bodies;  if  therefore 
in  this  mortal  life  the  male  half  encounters  the  female  half,  a strong  attachment  springs  up 
between  them,  and  hence  it  is  said  that  in  marriage  the  separated  halves  are  again 
conjoined;  and  the  hidden  forms  of  the  soul  are  akin  to  the  Kerubim. 

But  this  foregoing  triple  division  of  the  soul  is  only  applicable  to  the  triple  form  of 
the  intellectual,  moral  and  material.  Let  us  not  lose  sight  of  the  great  qabalistical  idea,  that 
the  trinity  is  always  completed  by  and  finds  its  realization  in  the  quaternary;  that  is,  IHV  completed  and 
realized  in  IHVH  - the  trinity  of..  . 


Crown  King  Queen 

Father  Son  Spirit 

Absolute  Formation  Realization 

This  is  completed  by  the  quaternary  of: 

Absolute  One 
Father  - Mother 
Son 
Bride 

Macroprosopus  - Vast  Countenance 
Father  - Mother 

Microprosopus  - Lesser  Countenance 
Malkuth  Queen  - Bride 

Atziluth  - Archetypal 
Briah  - Creative 
Yetzirah  - Formative 
Assiah  - Material 

And  to  these  four  the  soul  answers  in  the  following  four  forms:  Chiah  to  Atziluth; 
Neschamah  to  Briah;  Ruach  to  Yetzirah;  and  Nephesch  to  Assiah. 

But  Chiah  is  in  the  soul  the  archetypal  form  analogous  to  Macroprosopus. 
Wherefore  Neschamah,  Ruach,  and  Nephesch  represent  as  it  were  by  themselves  the 
Tetragrammaton,  without  Chiah,  which  is  nevertheless  symbolized  in  the  uppermost  point  of  the 
I,  Yod,  of  the  soul;  As  Macroprosopus  is  said  to  be  symbolized  by  the  uppermost  point  of  the 
I,  yod,  of  IHVF1.  For  Yod  of  the  Ancient  One  is  hidden  and  concealed.. . 

I will  now  revert  to  the  subject  of  Arikh  Anpin  and  Zauir  Anpin,  the  Macroprosopus 
and  the  Microprosopus,  or  the  Vast  and  the  Lesser  Countenances.  Macroprosopus  is,  it  will 
be 


57 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


remembered,  the  first  Sephira,  or  Crown  Kether;  Microprosopus  is  composed  of  six 
of  the  Sephiroth.  In  Macroprosopus  all  is  light  and  brilliancy;  but  Microprosopus  only 
shineth  by  the  reflected  splendour  of  Macroprosopus.  The  six  days  of  creation  correspond 
to  the  six  forms  of  Microprosopus.  Therefore  the  symbol  of  the  interlaced  triangles, 
forming  the  six-pointed  star,  is  called  the  Sign  of  the  Macrocosm,  or  of  the  creation  of 
the  greater  world,  and  is  consequently  analogous  to  the  two  Countenances  of  the  Zohar. 
The  Book  of  Concealed  Mystery  fully  discusses  the  symbolism  of  Macroprosopus  and 
Microprosopus;  therefore  it  is  well,  before  reading  it,  to  be  cognizant  of  their  similarities 
and  differences.  The  one  is  A H II-I,  Eheieh;  the  other  is  the  V,  Vau,  of  the 
Tetragrammaton.  The  first  two  letters,  I and  H,  Yod  and  He,  are  the  Father  and  Mother  of 
Microprosopus,  and  the  H final  is  his  Bride.  But  in  these  forms  is  expressed  the  equilibrium  of 
Severity  and  Mercy;  Severity  being  symbolized  by  the  two  Hehs,  the  Mother  and  the  Bride, 
but  especially  by  the  latter.  But  while  the  excess  of  Mercy  is  not  an  evil  tendency,  but 
rather  conveys  a certain  idea  of  weakness  and  want  of  force,  too  great  an  excess  of  Severity 
calls  forth  the  executioner  of  judgment,  the  evil  and  oppresive  force  which  is  symbolized 
by  Leviathan.  Wherefore  it  is  said,  behind  the  shoulders  of  the  Bride  the  serpent  rears  his 
head:  of  the  Bride,  but  not  of  the  Mother,  for  she  is  the  Supernal  H,  and  bruises  his  head. 
But  his  head  is  broken  by  the  waters  of  the  great  sea.  The  sea  is  Binah,  the  Supernal  H,  the 
Mother.  The  serpent  is  the  centripetal  force,  ever  seeking  to  penetrate  into  Paradise  (the 
Sephiroth),  and  to  tempt  the  Supernal  Eve  (the  bride),  so  that  in  her  turn  she  may  tempt 
the  Supernal  Adam  (Microprosopus). 

It  is  utterly  beyond  the  scope  of  this  Introduction  to  examine  this  symbolism 
thoroughly,  especially  as  it  forms  the  subject  of  this  work;  so  I will  simply  refer  my  reader  to 
the  actual  text  for  further  elucidation,  hoping  that  by  the  perusal  of  this  introductory  notice 
he  will  be  enlightened." 

To  recapitulate  some  of  Mathers  writings  above  let  me  affirm  that  once  you  have 
studied  the  Knowledge  Lectures  and  have  become  familiar  with  the  Hebrew  names  and  terms 
used,  refer  to  the  excerpts  from  Mathers'  Introduction  given  here.  With  only  a little  effort, 
the  Knowledge  Lecture  names  will  be  seen  to  have  been  drawn  from  the  Introduction. 

And  furthermore  the  study  of  the  Introduction  will  tend  to  clarify  much  of  the  material  in 
the  Knowledge  Lectures. 

Further  amplication  can  be  obtained  by  reference  to  the  Qabalistic  books  already 
mentioned,  so  that  in  a very  short  time  - relative  to  that  consumed  by  the  student  of  a 
century  ago  - he  should  have  an  intelligent  understanding  of  the  Tree  of  Life  which  is  the 
backbone  of  all  Qabalistic  study. 


58 


VOLUME  ONE 


ON  THE  LEAST  AMOUNT  OF  WORK  ACTUALLY  NECESSARY  FOR  THE 
STUDIES  OF  THE  FIRST  ORDER  GRADES 

By 


G.H.  FRATER  S.  R.  M.  D. 

What  is  really  necessary  to  this  end  is  to  acquire  sufficient  knowledge  clearly  to  follow 
the  explanations  and  instructions  given  in  the  successive  Grades  so  that  the  Candidate  does 
not  become  unduly  bewildered  in  his  endeavors  to  grasp  the  meaning  through  ignorance  of 
the  technical  expressions  employed  for  that  purpose. 

It  is  to  aid  in  this  comprehension  that  the  so-called  "Knowledge  Lectures"  exist  as 
apart  from  those  termed  "Side-Lectures";  these  latter,  though  not  necessarily  required  to  be 
committed  to  memory,  contain  important  and  interesting  matter  peculiar  to  each  grade.  The 
"Knowledge  Lectures"  contained  just  the  amount  of  carefully  sifted  out  knowledge 
necessary  not  only  to  pass  the  examination  for  such  and  such  Grade,  but  also  fairly  well  to 
comprehend  and  follow  the  Ceremonial  Ritual  of  the  Grade  itself.  Such  knowledge  then 
may  seem  and  perhaps  is  slightly  more  amplified  than  a bare  pass  in  the  examination  might 
demand.  But  it  is  to  the  student's  own  interest  to  learn  as  thoroughly  as  he  can  what  is  given. 

Our  subject  of  study  is  inexhaustible  for  it  is  the  Universe  itself  whose  Mysteries  we 
seek  to  fathom  by  the  aid  of  that  Secret  System  of  Correspondences  and  Formulas,  the 
especial  knowledge  of  our  Order  the  Keys  of  the  Wisdom  of  all  Time.  Our  Grades  therefore 
form  the  ladder  which  aids  us  to  mount  towards  this  end,  a ladder  in  which  not  one  rung  is 
wanting  neither  is  there  a Lacune.  We  appeal  to  the  soul  by  the  secret  formulas  hidden  in 
our  Ceremonies;  to  the  mind  by  the  special  studies  of  the  Order,  to  the  body  by  the  Stations 
and  movements  in  the  Temple  and  to  the  whole  being  by  the  combinations  of  these. 

Now  it  must  be  taken  into  consideration  that  many  of  our  members,  and  those  very 
good  ones,  have  but  limited  time  to  devote  to  the  work  and  studies  of  the  Order  owing  to 
the  exigencies  and  occupations  of  their  daily  life;  and  this,  though  at  first  sight  a drawback,  is 
in  reality  not  so  much  so  as  it  appears,  for  on  the  one  side  our  studies  are  so  different  from  the 
ordinary  business  conditions  and  avocations  of  existence  that  it  is  a fresh  interest  and 
repose  of  the  mind  to  come  to  them  and  on  the  other  hand  it  avoids  the  excessive  nerve 
strain  and  consequent  want  of  mental  balance,  frequently  induced  by  too  continuous  an 
application  to  psychic  and  occult  experiments  and  practices,  whether  theoretical  or 
practical.  It  is  surprising  how  much  can  be  accomplished  by  a little  time  regularly  given  to 
the  study  of  any  subject  whatever  and  in  this  way  the  mind  does  not  get  so  fatigued  and  tired 
through  close  application  for  too  long  a period. 

Touching  as  they  do  a variety  of  subjects  though  not  so  distinct  from  each  other  as  at 
first  sight  they  would  appear  to  be;  the  effect  of  the  Knowledge  Lectures  is  to  seem  more 
formidable  to  tackle  than  they  really  are,  and  to  resolutely  start  on  them  is  more  than  half 


59 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  battle  gained  already.  They  are  far  less  difficult  than  they  look.  Thr  first 
impression  usually  produced  on  the  Neophyte  may  be  thus  expressed  Oh!  I've  got  to  learn 
Hebrew,  and  become  a grammatical  Hebrew  scholar.  He  is  only  asked  to  learn  the  Hebrew 
alphabet,  that  is  to  say  the  proper  shapes  and  meanings  of  its  letters  together  with  their 
numerical  values,  and  in  the  case  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  (or  Ten  Divine  Emanations 
corresponding  to  the  ten  numbers  of  the  decimal  scale)  and  of  some  names  chiefly  Divine 
and  Angelic;  their  exact  orthography  as  well:  the  which  is  a very  different  thing  to 
becoming  a critical  student  of  Hebrew.  Of  course  should  any  Frater  or  Soror  have  the  time 
and  inclination  to  make  a thorough  study  of  the  Hebrew  language  there  is  nothing  to  prevent 
them  so  doing,  but  this  is  in  no  sense  necessary  either  to  pass  the  Examinations  for  the 
Grades  or  follow  the  technicalities  of  the  Rituals.  For  our  object  is  not  to  make  the 
Aspirant  a critical  grammatical  Hebrew  scholar  but  gradually  a profound  Mystic  and 
Magician.  The  same  reasoning  applies  to  Alchemy,  Astrology,  Egyptology,  etc.,  all  of 
which  subjects  are  touched  upon  in  the  various  knowledge  lectures.  It  rests  with  the  Aspirant 
to  choose  if  and  how  he  will  apply  later  the  basal  knowledge  so  gained.  For  it  is  the  science 
of  correspondences  he  is  studying  the  whole  time,  whether  between  the  Divine  Powers  and 
the  Universe,  between  these  and  man,  or  between  these  again  and  the  different  planes  and 
developments  in  the  life  of  Nature. 

The  best  way  to  learn  the  forms  of  the  Hebrew  Letters,  as  well  as  those  of  the 
Astrological  characters,  etc.,  is  to  take  from  four  to  seven  at  a time  and  copy  them 
repeatedly  and  as  exactly  as  you  can,  until  you  know  them:  in  the  case  of  the  Hebrew 
always  putting  the  number  beside  the  letter,  so  as  to  associate  the  two  together  in  your  mind. 
Remember  that  the  Hebrew  letters  should  be  always  written  broad  and  strong,  the  horizontals 
being  thick,  and  the  perpendiculars  thin,  as  in  music  copying  just  the  contrary  of  the  ordinary 
Roman  letter,  and  as  square  as  possible. 

It  may  be  wondered  why  the  Hebrew  Alphabet  seems  to  have  been  so  specially 
selected,  rather  than  any  other.  For  these  reasons:  Not  necessarily  because  it  is  Hebrew; 
though  the  circumstance  of  the  Qabalah  (which  contains  so  large  a part  of  the  ancient 
Egyptian  wisdom)  being  written  in  that  language,  confers  a certain  special  value  upon  it. 
And  the  mysteries  of  the  Qabalah  form  a most  important  part  of  our  studies.  But  the  Hebrew 
unites  in  itself  certain  notable  peculiarities  and  qualities  expressed  in  its  Alphabet,  to  a 
much  greater  extent  than  is  usually  found  in  other  and  more  familiar  alphabets  of  the 
European  group.  For  (a)  contrary  to  our  practise,  it  has  not  a set  of  numerals  which  singly 
or  combined  express  numbers,  but  each  letter  itself  has  a numerical  value.  When  thus 
employed  as  numbers  or  as  an  initial  letter  put  for  the  whole  word  itself,  two  little  dashes  are 
placed  above  it  to  shew  that  it  is  used  in  that  sense:  thus  the  initial  for  the  name  of  the 
Sephira  Netzach,  for  the  number  50  etc.,  (b)  It  is  an  entirely  consonantal  Alphabet.  It  then 
results  from  the  combination  of  (a)  and  (b)  that  every  word  is  a number,  and  conversely 
again  that  most  numbers  are  words:  which  affords  a method  of  comparison  between  words 
having  the  same  number  and  is  used  in  the  Qabalah.  (In  the  Hebrew  Q does  not  require  a 


60 


VOLUME  ONE 


"u"  to  follow  it,  and  it  is  pronounced  like  an  accented  or  "coughed"  (very  slightly  of 
course)  K.  (c)  Every  letter,  besides  its  power  has  an  especial  name  with  a meaning  attached  to  it, 
thus  allying  it  with  a Hieroglyphic  Idea,  e.g.,  power  M,  name  Mem,  meaning  Water,  (d)  With  us 
each  letter  has  further  its  Sphere  of  Mystical  Significations  so  that  any  important  Hebrew  word 
becomes  as  it  were  a phrase  rather  than  a word.  Besides  other  developments  which  unfold 
themselves  later. 

The  Neophyte  should  remember  that  Hebrew  is  always  written  from  right  to  left,  while  in 
English,  French,  German,  etc.,  it  is  just  the  opposite. 

A point  that  very  generally  puzzles  the  Neophyte  is  the  apparent  extreme  arbitrariness  of 
the  Hebrew  Orthography,  so  that  to  him  it  appears  (though  it  is  not  really  so)  as  if  in  some  cases 
a letter  were  needlessly  put  in,  and  in  others  erroneously  omitted.  The  following  explanation  is 
given  to  thoroughly  clear  up  this  point  by  giving  the  reason  for  this  apparent  uncertainty  but 
none  of  these  or  the  foregoing  observations  are  intended  to  be  learned  by  heart,  they  are  merely 
given  to  make  difficult  points  more  clear. 

Hebrew  is  a Semitic  and  not  an  European  language.  Now  the  great  distinguishing 
characteristic  of  the  Semitic  group  such  as  Hebrew,  Chaldaic,  Arabic,  Ethiopic,  etc.,  is  that  the 
Alphabet  consists  entirely  of  consonants;  even  those  letters  which  appear  to  have  a vowel  power, 
as  in  the  Hebrew  not  being  absolutely  what  we  in  European  languages  know  as  vowels.  Thus  is 
rather  a drawing  in  of  the  breath  like  the  syllable  Ah,  than  the  vowel  A is  H or  EH,  or  He 
according  to  position.  Certainly  not  the  vowel  E.  V is  much  more  than  U;  Y nearer  I,  NG,  or  AA 
or  HAA,  something  like  the  neigh  of  a horse  or  the  bleat  of  a goat,  rather  than  O. 

In  What  You  Should  Know  About  the  Golden  Dawn,  I once  expressed  some  criticisms  of 
the  general  attitudes  prevailing  in  the  Order.  Of  doing  just  enough  work  to  pass  the  appropriate 
examination  to  be  promoted  to  a higher  grade.  This  really  was  the  curse  of  the  early  Order.  From 
the  paper,  it  would  appear  that  Mathers  was  as  responsible  for  this  viewpoint  as  anyone.  On  the 
whole,  I have  great  respect  for  Mathers  for  as  this  book  indicates,  he  was  the  author  with 
Westcott  of  most  of  the  Initiatory  Rituals,  and  most  of  the  magical  instructions.  But  in  this 
particular  respect  he  was  the  inadvertent  promoter  of  this  attitude  which,  in  my  estimation,  brought 
incalculable  harm  to  the  Order,  permitted  essentially  unworthy  candidates  to  be  wrongly  advanced 
to  higher  grades  for  which  they  were  basically  unready. 

ELITISM 

The  U.  S.  E.  S.  S.  and  Falcon  Press  intend  to  inaugurate  a Golden  Dawn  Foundation  for  the 
preservation  not  merely  of  memorabilia  of  the  Order,  but  to  set  up  a centre  where  the  highest 
standards  of  initiation  and  training  may  be  perpetuated.  Throughout  its  history  in  modern  times,  the 
Order  has  been  prone  to  many  fluctuations  in  its  forward  progress.  The  Foundation's  intent  is  to 
form  a stable  background  of  function  and  teaching  so  as  to  minimize  and  overcome  the 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


degenerative  effect  of  excessive  fluctuation  in  a world  where  change  and  disintegration 
seem  to  have  become  the  order  of  the  day.  The  U.S.E.S.S.  and  Falcon  Press  stand  ready  to 
provide  any  enquirer  with  information  as  to  the  goals  and  purposes  of  this  Foundation.  You  may 
write  to  Mr.  Christopher  S.  Hyatt  of  Falcon  Press,  3660  North  3rd  Street,  Phoenix,  Arizona 
85012  for  further  information.  It  should  be  stated  emphatically  that  the  Center  is  intended  to  be 
Elitist  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  term,  appealing  primarily  to  those  with  the  highest 
qualifications  and  capabilities  in  all  aspects  and  developments  of  modern  life.  The  lame,  the  halt, 
the  effete  and  inept  will  not  find  a favorable  environment  for  their  foibles  there.  For  just  as  there 
are  athletes  of  the  sports  and  the  arts,  so  are  there  athletes  of  the  spirit.  The  first  search  for  excellence 
and  perfection  in  their  chosen  field  of  endeavour  and  are  so  recognized,  while  in  the  latter  there 
is  similarly  a search  for  excellence  of  technique  and  perfection  of  all  the  vehicles  of  the  Self. 


62 


VOLUME  ONE 


63 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  DIVINATION 


64 


VOLUME  ONE 


65 


VOLUME  TWO 


VOLUME  TWO 

THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  DIVINATION 

DIVINATION 

By 

V.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 

The  study  of  the  different  types  of  divination  may  seem  difficult  to 
understand  in  an  Order  which  purported  to  teach  methods  of  spiritual  development. 
Many  will  no  doubt  be  rather  perplexed  by  this.  Divination  usually  is  said  to  refer 
exclusively  to  the  low  occult  arts.  Actually,  however,  so  far  as  the  Order  is 
concerned,  the  principal  object  for  these  practical  methods  is  that  they  stimlulate,  as 
few  exercises  can,  the  faculties  of  imagination,  intuition  and  clairvoyance. 

Though  certain  readings  or  interpretations  to  the  Geomantic  and  Tarot 
symbols  may  be  found  in  the  appropriate  parts  of  this  text,  these  rule  of  thumb 
methods  do  not  conduce  to  the  production  of  an  accurate  delineation  of  the  spiritual 
causes  behind  material  events.  These  interpretations  are  usual  to  the  beginner  in  the 
art,  for  he  requires  a foundation  of  the  principal  definitions  employed  upon  which  his 
own  meditations  can  build.  These  textual  delineations  serve  in  actual  practice  only 
as  a base  for  the  working  of  the  inner  faculties,  provides  for  them  a thrust  block,  as 
it  were  from  which  they  may  "kick-off."  In  short,  the  effort  to  divine  by  these 
methods  calls  into  operation  the  intuitive  and  imaginative  faculties  to  a very  large 
extent.  Everyone  without  exception  has  this  faculty  of  divining  in  some  degree, 
varying  only  in  his  ability  to  make  it  manifest.  I n most  people  it  is  wholly  dormant. 

Again,  while  divination  as  an  artificial  process  may  be  wholly  unnecessary 
and  a hindrance  to  the  refined  perceptions  of  a fully  developed  Adept  who  requires 
no  such  convention  to  ascertain  whence  a thing  comes  and  whither  it  is  going,  yet 
these  aids  and  stimuli  have  their  proper  place  for  the  Neophyte.  For  those  in  training 
they  are  not  only  legitimate  but  useful  and  necessary. 


1 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


It  may  be  interesting  for  the  reader  to  attempt  to  acquire  intuitive  knowledge 
on  any  matter  without  the  divinatory  aids  first,  and  it  will  be  seen  how  extremely 
difficult  it  is  to  get  started,  to  pick  upon  any  one  fact  or  incident  which  shall  act  as  a 
prompt  or  a start  of  the  interior  mechanism.  Having  failed  in  this  way,  let  him  see  how 
much  further  he  really  may  go  by  the  judicious  and  sensible  use  of  one  of  the  Order 
methods.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  opening  of  the  mind  to  an  intuitive  perception  is 
considerably  aided  by  these  methods.  And  this  is  particularly  true  with  regard  to  the 
rather  lengthy  Tarot  method  which  was  given  to  the  initiate  while  engaged  in  the 
fulfilment  of  his  Adeptus  Minor  curriculum.  Like  all  magical  techniques,  divination 
is  open  to  abuse.  This  fact,  however,  that  abuse  is  possible  does  not,  as  again  and 
again  must  be  reiterated,  condemn  the  abused  technique.  The  application  of  common 
sense  to  the  magical  art  is  as  necessary  as  it  is  to  all  else. 

Originally,  Astrology  was  taught  as  part  of  the  regular  routine.  All  instruction 
on  this  subject  seems  now  to  have  been  thoroughly  extirpated  from  the  Order  papers. 
In  this  particular  instance,  the  omission  is  just  as  well.  Recent  years  have  seen  a 
great  deal  of  meticulous  attention  paid  to  this  study  by  sincere  and  honest  researchers, 
and  many  first  rate  books  have  been  published  explaining  its  intricacies.  All  that  the 
Order  demands  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  is  that  he  should  understand  the  underlying 
principles  of  this  science  and  be  able  to  draw  up  a map  showing  the  position  of 
Planets  and  Signs  preparatory  to  certain  operations  requiring  the  invocation  of 
planetary  and  zodiacal  forces. 

So  far  as  the  general  topic  of  divination  is  concerned,  the  Outer  Order  had  very 
little  to  say.  The  formal  teaching  of  Astrology  was  abandoned  because,  as  stated 
above,  the  market  was  now  replete  with  many  fine  works  on  the  subject,  and  thus 
there  was  really  no  need  to  teach  what  was  readily  available. 

1 he  Tarot  technique  that  it  recommended  was  the  Celtic  method,  a ten  card 
layout  popularized  by  A.  E.  Waite  in  his  Pictorial  Ke_i'  to  the  Tarot  from  which 
later  writers  have  drawn  extensively.  The  method  is  very  simple  and  direct;  thus  its 
advantage  to  the  student  in  the  Outer  Order.  It  had  however  one  major  disadvantage. 
There  was  no  way  to  determine  whether  any  one  particular  card  in  the  layout  was  well 
aspected  or  otherwise.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  novice  diviner  would  be  most 
likely  to  pick  out  the  most  favorable  interpretation  to  suit  his  fancy.  The  Golden 
Dawn  method,  as  taught  in  the  Inner  Order,  was  a horse  of  another  color,  having  a 
superb  method  of  aspecting  each  card  to  be  read. 

The  Celtic  or  Gypsy  method,  as  it  is  called  in  the  Leigh  Gardner  papers,  has 
been  made  useful  by  resort  to  a simple  device.  As  one  shuffles  the  pack  in  order  to 
infiltrate  it  with  one's  own  magnetism  or  aura,  it  is  a good  idea  to  drop  a card 
periodically.  When  inserting  it  back  into  the  deck,  make  sure  it  is  replaced  upside 
down.  Or,  half  the  number  of  cards  in  a deck  may  be  deliberately  pulled  out  at 
random,  turned  upside  down  and  then  inserted  back  into  the  pack.  Then  shuffle  very 
thoroughly  to  make  sure  they  are  randomly  well  distributed. 

The  notion  involved  here  is  that  the  upside  down  position  provides  the  basis 
for  the  negative  reading  of  some  of  the  cards  as  they  turn  up  in  the  divination.  In  this 
manner  it  is  likely  to  answer  more  accurately  to  the  facts  in  the  case,  yielding  of  course 
a more  pragmatic  reading. 


2 


VOLUME  TWO 


The  more  complete  Order  method  of  Divination  will  be  given  later  in  this 
series.  The  Gypsy  method  is  described  solely  for  the  purpose  of  letting  the  student 
experiment  with  a simple  method  to  develop  some  expertise  before  he  begins  to 
handle  the  more  complex  Order  method  of  Tarot  reading. 

The  other  method  was  Geomancy,  divination  by  earth.  A complete  treatise  was 
given  to  the  Practicus  - that  is  in  the  Outer  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn.  Years  after  the 
Revolt  which  all  but  annihilated  the  Order,  McGregor  Mathers  and  Brodie  Innes 
reconstituted  one  o:  the  Temples  in  the  North  of  England  (from  which  it  spread  even 
to  the  United  States)  and  named  it  the  A.O.  an  abbreviation  for  the  Alpha  and 
Omega.  It  was  the  direct  continuation  of  the  Golden  Dawn  under  the  new  name.  It 
continued  to  use  the  instruction  papers  originally  written  for  the  Golden  Dawn,  but 
some  new  ones  were  added.  One  of  these  was  a paper  on  Geomancy.  From  it  I have 
extrapolated  some  notes  of  significant  material,  and  added  it  to  the  basic  text. 
Together  they  form  a splendid  piece  of  instructional  material  on  the  subject. 

FUNDAMENTALS  OF  TAROT,  GEOMANCY  AND  ASTROLOGY 

Fuller  discussions  of  the  Tarot  system,  Geomancy  and  Astrology  to  some  extent 
will  be  found  in  later  sections  of  this  work.  For  the  time  being  however  and  for  the 
benefit  of  the  new  student  to  this  subject  matter  it  has  been  decided  to  give  a 
relatively  brief  survey  of  these  fields,  so  that  when  he  comes  to  the  more  complex 
material  later  he  will  be  to  some  extent  prepared. 

THE  TAROT 
By 

STUART  R.  KAPLAN 

"There  exist  today  several  fifteenth-century  Visconti-Sforza  tarocchi  decks 
which  comprise  the  earliest  known  tarot  cards.  The  reproduction  in  1975  of  the  most 
complete  of  these  packs  - the  Pierpont  Morgan-Bergamo  tarocchi  deck  whose  original 
cards  are  divided  between  the  Pierpont  Morgan  Library,  New  York,  and  the 
Accademia  Carrara  and  Colleoni  family,  Bergamo,  Italy  - is  an  important  event  for 
tarot  collectors  and  researchers  of  art  history. 

Italy  holds  the  honor  of  having  produced  several  of  the  earliest  known 
tarocchi  packs  that  contain  the  mystical  and  allegorical  trump  cards.  Throughout  five 
centuries  the  provocative  symbolism  of  the  twenty-two  Major  Arcana  cards  has 
continued  to  intrigue  art  historians,  artists  and  occultists.  For  over  five  hundred  years 
card  designers  and  artists  have  faithfullly  preserved  the  same  dominant  symbolism  of 
the  Major  Arcana  cards  while  often  adding  their  personal  interpretations  in  the  form  of 
slight  modifications  to  the  designs 


3 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


based  upon  the  fashions,  events  and  important  topics  of  the  day.  There  exist 
in  leading  museums,  libraries  and  private  collections  many  hundreds  of  such 
modified  tarot  designs,  the  work  of  such  artists  as  the  fifteenth-century  genius 
Bonifacio  Bernbo,  modern  painters  such  as  Salvador  Dali  and  Larry  Rivers,  and  many 
lesser  known  but  talented  artists  such  as  Pamela  Coleman  Smith  (Rider-Waite  pack), 
Lady  Frieda  Harris  (Crowley  Thoth  cards),  Fergus  Hall  (James  Bond  007  tarot 
cards),  David  Palladini  (Aquarian  tarot)  and  Domenico  Balbi  (Balbi  pack). 

1 he  development  of  tarot  symbolism  during  the  last  five  centuries,  beginning 
with  the  earliest  known  Italian  tarocchi  cards,  is  an  intriguing  story. 

TERMINOLOGY 

The  term  trionfi  was  used  in  Italy  in  the  fifteenth  century  to  describe  the 
twenty-two  Major  Arcana  cards.  The  term  tarocchi  subsequently  came  into  usage  in 
Italy  in  the  early  sixteenth  century,  first  referring  to  the  twenty-two  Major  Arcana 
cards,  and  thereafter  to  the  complete  seventy-eight-card  deck,  consisting  of  the 
twenty-two  Major  Arcana  and  fifty-six  Minor  Arcana  or  suit  cards.  The  words 
tarocchi  and  tarocco  are  often  used  interchangeably,  although  tarocchi  is  actually  the 
plural  of  tarocco.  Tarot,  the  French  derivative  of  tarocchi,  has  come  into  widespread 
usage  in  the  English  language.  In  pronouncing  the  word  tarot,  the  final  t is  silent. 

MacGregor  Mathers,  writing  in  1888,  describes  several  anagrams  derived  from 
the  word  taro: 

Tora  - law  (Hebrew) 

Troa  - gate  (Hebrew) 

Rota  - wheel  (Latin) 

Orat  - it  speaks,  argues  or  entreats  (Latin)  Taor  or  Taur  - Egyptian  goddess 
of  darkness  Ator  or  Athor  - Egyptian  Hathor  goddess  of  joy. 

The  term  trumps  is  derived  from  the  Latin  triumphi.  The  twenty-two  trump 
cards,  also  known  as  the  Major  Arcana  or  Greater  Arcana  cards,  each  contain  a 
symbolic  or  allegorical  picture.  Arcana  is  a Latin  word  meaning  mysterious  or 
secret;  the  Italian  word  arcana,  derived  from  the  Latin,  has  the  same  meaning.  The 
trumps  are  also  known  as  at  outs  in  French  and  atutti  in  Italian.  Atouts  denote  cards  of 
higher  value  than  the  rest,  that  is,  a tous  or  a tutti,  superior  to  all  others. 

Some  researchers  believe  the  word  tarot  derives  from  the  term  tarotee,  the 
name  applied  to  the  design  on  the  back  of  early  cards  - a multiple  series  of 
crisscrossing  solid  or  dotted  lines  in  varying  widths.  However,  it  is  likely  that  the 
word  tarotee  itself  was  derived  from  tarocchi  since  the  use  of  the  word  tarocchi 
predates  that  of  the  word  tarotee.  In  the  statutes  of  the  guild  of  card  makers  of  Paris 
in  the  year  1594  the  cartiers  called  themselves  tarotiers,  another  form  of  the  word 
tarot. 


4 


VOLUME  TWO 


The  origins  of  playing  cards  - both  the  twenty-two  Major  Arcana  and  the  fifty- 
six  suited  cards  - remain  obscure.  An  early  pack  of  suited  cards  - perhaps  the  earliest 
extant  deck  - is  the  hand-painted  German  "Hunting"  pack  of  Stuttgart,  which  dates 
from  about  1420-1430  and  contains  no  trumps.  These  cards  depict  a hunting  series 
with  dogs,  stags,  ducks  and  falcons  for  suit  signs.  The  earliest  Visconti-Sforza  tarocchi 
cards  also  date  from  this  period.  The  following  are  some  of  the  popular  theories 
advanced  during  the  past  several  centuries  regarding  the  possible  origin  of  tarocchi 
cards. 


PREHISTORIC  MAN  AND  ORAL  CULTURES 

Prior  to  recorded  history,  prehistoric  man  developed  various  systems  of  oral 
culture  and  tradition  based  upon  a subtle  knowledge  of  astronomy  and  calendric 
counters.  It  is  generally  believed  that  early  man  carefully  observed  the  sidereal 
phases  of  the  day,  month  and  year,  and  the  changing  positions  of  the  planets.  These 
were  astronomical  events  he  could  easily  study  and  he  recorded  these  events  by 
calendric  counters  such  as  markings  on  a stretched  piece  of  animal  hide,  engravings 
or  scratchings  on  a bone,  and  notches  on  a tree  branch.  Important  cultural  events 
were  eventually  expressed  in  metaphorical  and  allegorical  forms  as  myths,  legends 
and  fables,  which  were  verbally  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation  over 
periods  of  time  extending  many  thousands  and  even  tens  of  thousands  of  years. 

Some  fragments  of  these  early  oral  traditions  survived  into  recorded  time  in 
the  form  of  popular  myths  and  beliefs.  Lor  example,  the  devil  is  an  antlered  figure 
associated  with  sorcery  and  evil,  and  the  hermit  is  a hooded  figure  holding  a candle 
and  representing  the  winter  solstice.  Both  these  figures  are  found  in  the  Major  Arcana 
of  the  tarot  pack.  Many  of  the  pictorial  images  on  the  Major  Arcana  cards  have  been 
distorted  by  time  and  the  ignorance  of  their  interpreters.  Thus,  most  tarot  pictures  as 
popularized  during  the  past  five  hundred  years  are  unrecognizable  in  terms  of  early 
myths  and  oral  culture.  Literal  interpretations  of  many  early  myths  are  the  basis  of 
numerous  superstitions  and  ceremonies  practiced  today  by  religious  groups, 
fraternal  orders,  secret  societies  and  followers  of  the  occult. 

Some  scholars  including  Arthur  Corwin,  who  has  been  researching  the  subject 
since  the  1960's,  view  the  allegorical  symbolism  of  tarot  cards  as  pictorial  metaphors 
that  express  the  preoccupation  of  early  man  with  the  task  of  timekeeping.  The 
calendar  was  an  important  point  of  reference  to  early  man.  He  kept  accurate  records 
of  the  celestial  changes  that  occurred  on  a daily,  monthly  and  annual  basis.  He 
observed  the  precession  of  the  equinox,  the  astronomical  motions  of  the  stars  and 
planets,  and  other  repetitive  events.  The  calendar  was  used  as  a means  of  survival, 
including  planning  for  winter  food  storage,  preparing  necessary  shelter, 
communicating  on  a daily  basis  with  other  human  beings  and  recording  the  length  of 
time  required  for  birth..." 


5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


A GYPSY  METHOD  OF  TAROT  DIVINATION 

This  mode  of  Tarot  Divination  is  the  most  suitable  for  obtaining  rapidily  an 
answer  to  a definite  question. 

The  Diviner  selects  a card  to  represent  the  person  or  matter  about  which  he 
enquires.  This  card  is  called  the  Significator,  and  should  he  wish  to  ascertain 
something  in  connection  with  himself,  he  takes  the  one  which  corresponds  to  his 
personal  description. 

A King  represents  a man  of  40  years  and  upwards.  A Knight  represents  any 
male  under  that  age.  A Queen  a woman  of  40  years  and  upwards.  A Knave  a young 
man  or  woman. 

The  Four  Court  Cards: 

Wands  represent  very  fair  people  with  yellow  or  auburn  hair,  fair  complexion, 
blue  eyes. 

Cups  have  light  brown  or  dull  hair  with  grey  or  blue  eyes. 

Swords  have  hazel  or  grey  eyes,  and  dark  brown  hair  and  dull  complexions. 

Pentacles  have  very  dark  brown  or  black  hair,  dark  eyes  and  sallow  or  swarthy 
complexions. 

You  can  be  guided  on  occasion  by  the  known  temperament  of  a person.  One 
who  is  exceedingly  dark  may  be  energetic  and  would  be  better  represented  by  a Sword 
card  than  a Pentacle.  On  the  other  hand  a very  fair  subject  who  is  indolent  and 
lethargic  should  be  referred  to  Cups  in  place  of  Wands.  If  it  is  a matter  about  which 
an  enquiry  is  to  be  made,  the  Significator  should  be  a Trump  or  small  card  which 
bears  some  relationship  to  the  matter. 

Suppose  that  the  question  is  "Will  a lawsuit  be  necessary?"  In  this  case,  take 
the  Trump  card  "Justice"  as  the  significator  since  it  has  reference  to  legal  matters.  But 
if  the  question  is  "Shall  I be  successful  in  my  lawsuit?  one  of  the  Court  Cards 
representing  yourself  should  be  selected.  Subsequently  consecutive  divinations  can  be 
performed  to  ascertain  the  course  of  the  process  itself,  and  its  result  to  each  of  the 
parties  concerned. 

Having  selected  the  Significator,  place  it  on  the  table  face  upwards,  then  shuffle 
well  and  thoroughly  the  rest  of  the  cards,  cutting  three  times  after  each  shuffle.  Lastly, 
keeping  the  face  of  the  cards  downwards,  turn  up  the  top  or  front  card  of  the  pack 
and  cross  the  significator  with  it,  and  say: 

1.  This  card  covers  him. 

This  card  gives  the  influence  which  is  affecting  the  person  or  matter  of  the 
enquiry  generally,  the  atmosphere  in  which  the  ether  current  moves.  Turn  up  the 
second  card  and  say: 


6 


VOLUME  TWO 


2.  This  crosses  him. 

It  shows  the  nature  of  the  obstacles  in  the  matter.  If  this  is  a favorable  card,  the 
opposing  forces  will  not  be  serious,  or  it  may  indicate  that  something  good  in  itself  will 
be  productive  of  good  in  this  particular  connection.  Turn  up  the  third  card  and  say: 

3.  This  crowns  him. 

It  represents  first,  the  Querent's  aims  or  ideals  in  the  matter.  And  second,  the 
best  that  can  be  achieved  under  the  circumstances  but  that  which  has  not  yet  been 
made  actuality.  Turn  up  the  fourth  card,  place  it  below  the  Significator,  and  say: 

4.  This  is  beneath  him.  It  shows  the  foundation  or  basis  of  the  matter, 

that  which  has  already  passed  into  actuality  and  which  the  Significator  has 
made  his  own.  Turn  up  the  fifth  card  and  say: 

5.  This  is  behind  him. 

It  gives  the  influence  that  has  just  past  or  is  passing  away.  If  the  Significator  is 
a Trump  card  or  a card  that  cannot  be  said  to  face  either  way,  the  diviner  must 
decide  beforehand  which  side  of  the  Significator  he  will  take  as  facing.  Usually  this 
fifth  card  is  placed  on  the  right  hand  side  of  the  Significator,  as  it  will  be  found  that 
most  of  the  court  cards  are  looking  towards  the  left  hand.  Anyhow,  if  you  decide  to 
always  adopt  the  plan  it  will  be  found  satisfactory  - only  make  a rule  always  to  do  so. 
Turn  up  the  sixth  card,  place  it  on  the  side  that  the  Significator  is  facing  and  say: 

6.  This  is  before  him. 

It  shows  the  influence  that  is  coming  into  action  and  will  operate  in  the  near 
future.  The  next  four  cards  are  turned  up  in  succession  and  placed  in  a line  by  the  side 
of  the  others  which  are  in  the  form  of  a cross. 

7.  This  is  himself.  This  signifies  the  person  himself  or  else  the  thing 
enquired  about,  and  shows  its  position  or  attitude  in  the  matter. 

8.  The  eighth  card  represent  his  House.  This  is  his  environment,  and  the 
tendencies  at  work  there  which  have  an  effect  on  the  matter  - for  instance,  his 
position  in  life,  the  influence  of  immediate  friends  and  so  forth. 

9.  The  ninth  card  gives  his  hopes  and  fears  in  matter. 

10.  The  tenth  card  the  final  result. 

It  is  the  culmination  which  is  brought  about  by  the  influence  shown  by  the 
other  cards  that  have  been  turned  up  in  the  divination. 

The  operation  is  now  complete.  If  in  any  divination  the  tenth  card  should  be  a 
court  card  it  shows  that  the  subject  of  the  divination  falls  ultimately  into  the  hands 
of  a person 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


represented  by  the  court  card  and  its  end  depends  mainly  on  him.  In  this  case,  it 
is  possible  to  have  a fresh  divination  taking  the  court  card  as  the  Significator  to 
discover  what  is  the  nature  of  his  influence  in  the  matter,  and  to  what  issue  he  will 
bring  it. 

Great  facility  may  be  obtained  by  this  method  in  a short  time,  allowance  being 
made  for  the  gifts  of  the  operator,  that  is  to  say  his  faculty  of  insight,  latent  or 
developed,  and  besides  which  it  is  free  from  all  complications. 

Upon  looking  up  Waite's  Pictorial  Key  to  the  Tarot,  I find  that  a good  deal  of 
the  above  is  extrapolated  almost  verbatim  from  that  book.  However  a great  deal  of 
important  information  about  this  method  is  presented  in  Eden  Gray's  book  A 
Complete  Guide  to  the  Tarot. 

NOTES  ON  THE  TAROT  By 
G.H.  FRATER  S.R.M.D. 

(N.B.  This  paper  was  lent  me  some  years  ago  by  Mr.  Stuart  Kaplan  of  U.S.  Games 
Systems,  Inc.  This  is  to  acknowledge  my  gratitude.  I.R.) 

In  the  Tree  of  Life  in  the  Tarot,  each  path  forms  the  connecting  link  between 
two  of  the  Sephiroth.  The  King  and  the  Queen  are  the  correlations  of  the  ABBA  and 
the  AIMA  in  that  suit;  the  Knight  or  Prince  answers  to  Microprosopus,  and  the  Page 
or  Princess  which  was  anciently  a female  figure,  is  referred  to  the  Bride,  Kallah  or 
Malkah. 

Combining,  then,  the  material  attributions  of  the  Sephiroth  and  the  Path,  it 
results  that: 

0.  Fool  - The  Crown  of  Wisdom,  the  Primum  Mobile  acting  through  the  Air 
on  the  Zodiac. 

1.  The  Juggler  - The  Crown  of  Understanding,  the  beginning  of 
material  production,  the  Primum  Mobile  acting  through  the  Philosophic 
Mercury  on  Saturn. 

2.  High  Priestess  - The  Crown  of  Beauty,  the  beginning  of 
Sovereignty  and  Beauty,  the  Primum  Mobile  acting  through  the  Moon  on  the 
Sun. 

3.  Empress  - The  Wisdom  of  Understanding,  the  Union  of  the 
powers  of  Origination  and 

Production;  the  Sphere  of  the  Zodiac  acting  through  Venus  upon  Saturn. 

4.  Emperor  - The  Wisdom  of  Sovereignty  and  Beauty,  and  the 
originator  of  them;  the 

Sphere  of  the  Zodiac  acting  through  Aries  upon  the  Sun,  and  initiating 
Spring. 

5.  Hierophant  - The  Wisdom  and  fountain  of  Mercy,  the  Sphere  of 
the  Zodiac  acting 

through  Taurus  upon  Jupiter. 

6.  The  Lovers  - The  Understanding  of  Beauty  and  Production  of 
Beauty  and  Sovereignty.  Saturn  acting  through  Gemini  upon  Sol. 

7.  Chariot  - Understanding  acting  upon  Severity.  Saturn  acting 
through  Cancer  upon  Mars. 


8 


VOLUME  TWO 


8.  Strength  - Fortitude.  Mercy  tempering  Severity.  The  Glory  of  Strength. 
Jupiter  acting  through  Leo  upon  Mars. 

9.  Hermit  - The  Mercy  of  Beauty,  the  Magnificence  of  Sovereignty, 
Jupiter  acting  through  Virgo  upon  So!. 

10.  Wheel  of  Fortune  - The  Mercy  and  Magnificence  of  Victory.  Jupiter 
acting  through  Jupiter  direct  upon  Venus. 

11.  Justice  - The  Severity  of  Beauty  and  Sovereignty.  Mars  acting  through 
Libra  upon  So!. 

12.  The  Hanged  Man  - The  Severity  of  Splendour.  Execution  of  Judgment. 
Mars  acting  through  Water  upon  Mercury. 

13.  Death  - The  Sovereignty  and  result  of  Victory.  Sol  acting  through 
Scorpio  upon  Venus,  or  Osiris  under  the  destroying  power  of  Typhon  afflicting 
Isis. 

14.  Temperance  - The  Beauty  of  a firm  Basis.  The  Sovereignty  of 
Fundamental  Power.  Sol  acting  through  Sagittarius  upon  Luna. 

15.  The  Devil  - The  Sovereignty  and  Beauty  of  Material  (and  therefore 
false)  splendor.  Sol  acting  through  Capricorn  on  Mercury. 

16.  The  Tower  - The  Victory  over  Splendour.  Venus  acting  through  Mars 
upon  Mercury.  Avenging  force. 

17.  The  Star  - The  Victory  of  Fundamental  Strength.  Venus  acting  through 
Aquarius  upon  Luna.  Hope. 

18.  Moon  - The  Victory  of  the  Material.  Venus  acting  through  Pisces  upon 
the  Cosmic  Elements,  deceptive  effect  of  the  apparent  power  of  Material  Forces. 

19.  Sun  - The  Splendour  of  the  Material  World.  Mercury  acting  through 
the  Sun  upon  the  Moon. 

20.  Judgement  - The  Splendour  of  the  Spiritual  World.  Mercury  acting 
through  Fire  upon  the  Cosmic  Elements. 

21.  Universe  - The  Foundation  of  the  Cosmic  Elements  and  of  the  Material 
World.  Luna  acting  through  Saturn  upon  the  Elements. 


9 


VOLUME  TWO 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


TAROT  TRUMPS 

The  following  description  of  the  Arcana  Major  are  taken  primarily  from  the 
grade  rituals  of  the  Order  and  so  are  written  by  Mcgregor  Mathers.  The  descriptions 
of  the  keys  to  Lamed  and  Mem  are  taken  from  the  Adeptus  Major  Ritual  - to  be  found 
in  that  section  of  this  book  dealing  with  the  initiatory  rituals,  which  bears  all  the  marks 
of  having  been  written  at  a later  date,  by  Waite. 

The  remainder  are  brief  improvisations  adapted  from  several  sources  mostly  to 
fill  in  the  gaps  in  the  knowledge  lectures  and  rituals.  Very  little  about  the  Tarot  was 
communicated  in  the  outer  Order,  the  really  significant  material  being  given  after  the 
Adeptus  Minor  grade  was  reached.  Even  so,  there  are  many  lacunae  there,  which 
should  be  filled  in  and  supplemented  by  additional  reading  and  meditation. 

From  my  present  point  of  view,  there  are  only  three  or  four  major  works 
which  the  student  should  consult  in  this  area  - apart  from  the  basic  book  by  Waite, 
The  Pictorial  Key  to  the  Tarot,  which  gives  his  verbose  description  of  the  cards  and 
black  and  white  reproductions  of  his  own  deck.  There  is  Aleister  Crowley's  Book  of 
Thoth  (Weiser,  N.Y.)  which  is  probably  the  most  profound  of  them  all  and  should  be 
number  one  on  the  reading  list.  Paul  Case's  The  Tarot,  the  Key  to  the  Mysteries  of  the 
Ages,  is  the  next  one,  giving  a good  description  of  the  cards  which  probably 
approaches  nearest  of  all  to  the  Order  point  of  view.  Which  is  as  it  should  be,  because 
once  he  was  a member  of  the  American  branch  of  the  Order.  Finally,  there  is  the 
Encyclopedia  of  the  Tarot  by  Stuart  R.  Kaplan  (Copyright  by  U.S.  Games  Systems, 
1978).  This  is  probably  the  most  complete  description  of  extant 


12 


VOLUME  TWO 


packs  with  history  and  reproductions  of  some  cards  of  some  packs.  These  four 
books  with  the  Order  material  should  be  all  that  the  average  good  student  should 
need.  The  Trumps  have  already,  on  a previous  page,  been  numbered  and  briefly 
described. 

21st  KEY-UNIVERSE 

Within  the  oval  formed  of  the  72  circles,  is  a female  form,  nude  save  for  a scarf 
that  floats  around  her.  She  is  crowned  with  the  Lunar  Crescent  of  Isis  and  holds  in 
her  hands,  two  wands.  Her  legs  form  a cross.  She  is  the  Bride  of  the  Apocalypse,  the 
Kabbalistic  Queen  of  the  Canticles,  the  Egyptian  Isis  or  Great  Feminine  Kerubic 
Angel  Sandalphon  on  the  left  hand  of  the  Mercy  Seat  of  the  Ark. 

The  wands  are  the  directing  forces  of  the  positive  and  negative  currents.  The 
Seven  Pointed  Heptagram  or  Star  alludes  to  the  Seven  Palaces  of  Assiah;  the  crossed 
legs  to  the  symbol  of  the  Four  Letters  of  the  Name. 

The  surmounting  crescent  receives  alike  the  influences  of  Geburah  and 
Gedulah.  She  is  the  synthesis  of  the  32nd  Path,  uniting  Malkuth  to  Yesod. 

The  oval  of  the  72  smaller  circles  refers  to  the  Schem  ha-mephorasch,  or  Seventy- 
two  fold  Name  of  the  Deity.  The  twelve  large  circles  form  the  Zodiac.  At  the  angles 
are  the  Four  Kerubim  which  are  the  vivified  powers  of  the  Name  Yod  He  Vau  He 
operating  in  the  Elements,  through  which  you  have  just  symbolically  passed  in  the 
preceding  Ceremony. 

The  Fan,  Lamp,  Cup  and  Salt  represent  the  four  Elements  themselves  whose 
inhabitants  are  the  Sylphs,  Salamanders,  Undines  and  Gnomes. 

The  magical  title  of  this  trump  is  The  Great  One  of  the  Night  of  Time. 

20th  KEY-JUDGMENT 

Before  you  upon  the  altar  is  the  Twentieth  Key  of  the  Tarot,  which 
symbolically  represents  these  ideas.  To  the  uninitiated  eye  it  apparently  represents 
The  Last  Judgment  with  an  angel  blowing  a trumpet  and  the  dead  rising  from  their 
tombs  - but  its  meaning  is  far  more  occult  and  recondite  than  this,  for  it  is  a glyph 
of  the  powers  of  Fire. 

The  Angel  encircled  by  the  rainbow,  whence  leap  corruscations  of  Fire,  and 
crowned  with  the  Sun,  represents  Michael,  the  Great  Archangel,  the  Ruler  of  Solar 
Fire. 

The  Serpents  which  leap  in  the  rainbow  are  symbols  of  the  Fiery  Seraphim.  The 
Trumpet  represents  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  descending  from  Binah,  while  the 
Banner  with  the  Cross  refers  to  the  Four  Rivers  of  Paradise  and  the  Letters  of  the 
Holy  Name. 

He  is  also  Axieros,  the  first  of  the  Samothracian  Kabiri,  as  well  as  Zeus  and 

Osiris. 

The  left  hand  figure  below,  rising  from  the  Earth  is  Samael,  the  Ruler  of 
Volcanic  Fire.  He  is  also  Axiokersos,  the  Second  Kabir,  Pluto  and  Typhon. 

The  right  hand  figure  below  is  Anael,  the  Ruler  of  Astral  Light.  She  is  also 
Axiokersa,  the  Third  Kabir,  Ceres,  and  Persephone,  Isis,  and  Nephthys.  She  is, 
therefore,  represented  in  duplicate  form,  and  rising  from  the  waters.  Around  both  of 
these  figures  dart  flashes  of  Lightening. 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  three  principle  figures  form  the  Fire  Triangle,  and  further  represent  Fire  operating 
in  the  other  Three  Elements  of  Earth,  Air,  and  Water. 

The  central  lower  figure  with  his  back  turned,  and  his  arms  in  the  sign  of  the  Two 
equals  Nine,  is  Arel,  the  Ruler  of  latent  heat.  He  is  rising  from  the  Earth  as  if  to  receive  the 
properties  of  the  other  three.  He  is  also  Kasimillos,  the  Candidate  in  the  Samothracian 
Mysteries,  and  the  Horus  of  Egypt.  He  rises  from  the  rock-hewn  cubical  Tomb  and  he  also 
alludes  to  the  Candidate  who  traverses  the  Path  of  Fire.  The  three  lower  figures  represent  the 
letter  Shin,  to  which  Fire  is  especially  referred.  The  seven  Hebrew  Yods  allude  to  the 
Sephiroth  operating  in  each  of  the  Planets  and  to  the  Schem-hamphoresch. 

The  magical  title  is  The  Spirit  of  the  Primal  Fire. 

19th  KEY-THE  SUN 

Before  you  upon  the  Altar  is  the  Nineteenth  Key  of  Tarot  which  symbolically  resumes 
these  ideas.  The  Sun  has  twelve  principal  rays  which  represent  the  Twelve  Signs  of  the 
Zodiac.  They  are  alternately  waved  and  salient  as  symbolising  the  alternation  of  the 
masculine  and  feminine  natures.  These  again  are  subdivided  into  36  Decanates  or  sets  of  ten 
degrees  in  the  Zodiac,  and  these  again  into  72,  typifying  the  72  quinances  or  sets  of  five,  and  the 
72-fold  name  of  Schem  ha-mephorasch.  Thus  the  Sun  embraces  the  whole  creation  in  its  rays. 

The  seven  Hebrew  Yods  on  each  side,  falling  through  the  air,  refer  to  the  Solar 
influence  descending.  The  Wall  is  the  Circle  of  the  Zodiac,  and  the  stones  are  its  various 
degrees  and  divisions. 

The  two  children  standing  respectively  on  the  Water  and  Earth  represent  the  generating 
influence  of  both,  brought  into  action  by  the  rays  of  the  Sun.  They  are  the  two  inferior  and 
passive  Elements,  as  the  Sun  and  Air  above  them  are  the  superior  and  active  Elements  of  Fire 
and  Air.  Furthermore,  these  two  children  resemble  the  sign  Gemini  which  unites  the  Earthy 
Sign  of  Taurus  with  the  Watery  Sign  Cancer,  and  this  sign  was,  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans, 
referred  to  Apollo  and  the  Sun. 

The  magical  title  is  Lord  of  the  Fire  of  the  World. 

18th  KEY-THE  MOON 

Before  you  upon  the  Altar  is  the  18th  Key  of  Tarot  which  symbolically  resumes  ideas. 
It  represents  the  Moon  with  four  Hebrew  Yods  like  drops  of  dew  falling,  two  Dogs,  two 
Towers,  a winding  Path  leading  to  the  Horizon,  and  in  the  foreground,  Water  with  a Crayfish 
crawling  through  it  to  the  land.  The  Moon  is  in  its  increase  on  the  side  of  Mercy,  Gedulah,  and 
from  it  proceed  sixteen  principle  and  sixteen  secondary  rays,  which  make  32,  the  number  of  the 
Paths  of  Yetzirah.  She  is  the  Moon  at  the  feet  of  the  Woman  of  Revelations,  ruling  equally 
over  the  cold  and  moist  natures  and  the  passive  elements  of  Earth  and  Water.  It  is  to  be  noted 
that  the  symbol  of  the  Sign  is  formed  of  two  lunar  crescents  bound  together.  It  thus  shows 
the  lunar  nature  of  the  Sign.  The  Dogs  are  the 


14 


VOLUME  TWO 


Jackals  of  the  Egyptian  Anubis,  guarding  the  Gates  of  the  East  and  of  the 
West,  shown  by  the  two  Towers  between  which  lies  the  Path  of  all  the  heavenly  bodies 
ever  rising  in  the  East  and  setting  in  the  West.  The  Crayfish  is  the  Sign  Cancer  and  was 
anciently  the  Scarabeus  or  Khephera,  the  emblem  of  the  Sun  below  the  Horizon  as 
he  ever  is  when  the  Moon  is  increasing  above.  Also,  when  the  Sun  is  in  the  Sign 
Pisces  the  Moon  will  be  well  in  her  increase  in  Cancer  as  shown  by  the  Cray-fish 
emblem. 

The  Moon  has  the  magical  title  of  Ruler  of  Flux  and  Reflux,  Child  of  the  Sons 
of  the  Mighty. 

17th  KEY-THE  STAR 

Before  you  on  the  Altar  is  the  17th  Key  of  the  Tarot  which  symbolically 
resumes  these  ideas. 

The  large  Star  in  the  center  of  the  Heavens  has  seven  principal  and  fourteen 
secondary  rays  and  this  represents  the  Heptad  multiplied  by  the  Triad.  This  yields  21  - 
the  Number  of  the  Divine  Name  Eheieh  which,  as  you  already  know,  is  attached  to 
Kether. 

In  the  Egyptian  sense,  it  is  Sirius,  the  Dog-Star,  the  Star  of  Isis-Sothis.  Around 
it  are  the  Stars  of  the  Seven  Planets  each  with  its  seven-fold  counter-changed 
operation. 

The  nude  female  figure  with  the  Star  of  the  Heptagram  on  her  brow  is  the 
synthesis  of  Isis,  of  Nephthys,  and  of  Hathor.  She  also  represents  the  planet  Venus 
through  whose  sphere  the  influence  of  Chesed  descends.  She  is  Aima,  Binah,  Tebunah, 
the  Great  Supernal  Mother-Aima  Elohim,  pouring  upon  the  Earth  the  Waters  of 
Creation  which  unite  and  form  a River  at  her  feet,  the  River  going  forth  from  the 
Supernal  Eden  which  floweth  and  faileth  not. 

Note  well,  that  in  this  Key  she  is  completely  unveiled  while  in  the  21st  Key 
she  is  only  partially  so. 

The  two  Urns  contain  the  influences  from  Chokmah  and  Binah.  On  the  right 
springs  the  Tree  of  Life,  and  on  the  left  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of  Good  and  of  Evil 
whereon  the  Bird  of  Hermes  alights,  and  therefore  does  this  Key  represent  the 
restored  World,  after  the  formless  and  the  Void  and  the  Darkness,  the  New  Adam  the 
countenance  of  the  Man  which  falls  in  the  sign  Aquarius.  And  therefore  doth  the 
astronomical  ripple  of  this  sign  represent,  as  it  were,  Waves  of  Water  - the  ripples  of 
that  River  going  forth  out  of  Eden  - but,  therefore  also,  is  it  justly  attributed  to  Air  and 
not  unto  Water  because  it  is  the  Firmament  dividing  and  containing  the  Waters. 

The  magical  motto  of  this  Key  is  Daughter  of  the  Firmament,  Dweller 
between  the  Waters. 

16th  KEY-BLASTED  TOWER 

Before  you  on  the  Altar  is  the  16th  Key  of  Tarot,  which  symbolically  resumes 
these  ideas.  It  represents  a Tower  struck  by  a Lightening  Flash  proceeding  from  a 
rayed  circle  and  terminating  in  a triangle.  It  is  the  Tower  of  Babel  struck  by  the  Fire 
from  Heaven.  It  is  to  be 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


noted  that  the  triangle  at  the  end  of  the  flash,  issuing  from  the  circle,  forms 
exactly  the  astronomical  symbol  of  Mars. 

It  is  the  Power  of  the  Triad  rushing  down  and  destroying  the  Columns  of 
Darkness.  Three  holes  are  rent  in  the  walls,  symbolising  the  establishment  of  the  Triad 
therein  and  the  Crown  at  the  summit  of  the  Tower  is  falling,  as  the  Crowns  of  the  Kings  of 
Edom  fell,  who  are  also  symbolised  by  the  men  falling  headlong.  On  the  right  hand  side 
of  the  Tower  is  Light  and  the  representation  of  the  Tree  of  Life  by  ten  circles  thus 
disposed. 

On  the  left  hand  side  is  Darkness  and  eleven  circles  symbolising  the  Qlippoth. 
Lord  of  the  Hosts  of  the  Mighty  is  its  magical  name. 

15th  KEY-DEVIL 

The  15th  Key  of  the  Tarot  represents  a goat-headed  satyr-like  Demon  whose  legs 
are  hairy  - his  feet  and  claws  standing  upon  a Cubical  Altar.  He  has  heavy  bat-like  wings. 
In  his  left  hand,  which  points  downwards,  he  holds  a lighted  torch,  and  in  his  right, 
which  is  elevated,  a horn  of  water.  The  left  hand  points  downwards  to  show  that  it  is  the 
infernal  and  burning,  not  the  celestial  and  life-giving  flame  which  is  kindled  in  his  torch  - 
just  as  when  the  Sun  is  in  Capricornus,  to  which  cold  and  earthy  Sign  this  Key 
corresponds,  solar  Light  is  at  its  weakest  and  the  natures  of  cold  and  moisture  triumph 
over  heat  and  dryness.  The  cubical  Altar  presents  the  Universe  - right  and  left  of  it,  bound 
thereto  by  a cord  attached  to  a circle  which  typifies  the  center  of  the  Earth,  are  two 
smaller  demons,  one  male  and  one  female.  They  hold  a cord  in  their  hands.  The  whole 
figure  shows  the  gross  generative  powers  of  nature  on  the  material  plane,  and  is 
analogous  to  the  Pan  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Egyptian  God  of  Mendes  (the  symbol  of 
Khem).  In  certain  aspects,  the  Key  represents  the  brutal  forces  of  nature,  which  to  the 
unbelieving  man  only  obscures  and  does  not  reflect  the  luminous  Countenance  of  God.  It 
also  alludes  to  the  sexual  powers  of  natural  generation.  Thus  therefore  the  Key  fitly 
balances  the  symbol  of  Death  on  the  other  side  of  the  Tree  of  Life.  On  the  smaller 
demons,  one  points  downwards  and  one  upwards,  answering  to  the  positions  of  the 
hands  of  the  central  figures. 

Beneath  his  feet  are  Pentagrams  on  which  he  tramples  (whence  comes  their  title 
of  Wizard's  foot)  and  his  head  is  covered  with  the  evil  and  reversed  Pentagram,  and  his 
hands  bear  the  torch  and  horn  - the  symbols  of  Lire  and  Water,  so  does  his  form  unite  the 
Earth  in  his  hairy  and  bestial  aspect,  and  the  Air  in  his  bat-like  wings.  Thus  he  represents 
the  gross  and  materialized  Elemental  Forces  of  Nature;  and  the  whole  would  be  an  evil 
symbol,  were  it  not  for  the  Pentagram  of  Light  above  his  head  which  regulates  and  guides 
his  movements.  He  is  the  eternal  renewer  of  all  the  changing  forms  of  Creation  in 
conformity  with  the  Law  of  The  All-Powerful  One  (Blessed  be  He)  which  controlling 
Law  is  typified  by  the  controlling  Pentagram  of  Light  surmounting  the  whole.  This 
Key  is  an  emblem  of  tremendous  force;  many  and  universal  are  its  mysteries. 

The  magical  title  of  this  Key  is  Lord  of  the  Gates  of  Matter,  Child  of  the  Forces  of 

Time. 


16 


VOLUME  TWO 


14th  KEY-TEMPERANCE 

This  drawing  represents  the  more  ancient  form  of  the  14th  Key  of  Tarot,  for  which  the 
later  and  more  usual  form  of  Temperance  was  soon  substituted,  as  better  representing  the 
natural  symbolism  of  the  Path  Sagittarius.  The  earlier  figure  was  considered  not  so  much  a 
representation  of  this  Path  alone,  as  the  synthesis  of  that  and  the  others  conjoined.  The  later 
figure,  therefore,  is  better  adapted  to  the  more  restricted  meaning.  The  more  ancient  forms 
shows  a female  figure  crowned  with  the  crown  of  five  rays,  symbolising  the  Five  Principles 
of  Nature,  the  concealed  Spirit  and  the  Four  Elements  of  Earth,  Air,  Water  and  Fire.  About  her 
head  is  a halo  of  light.  On  her  breast  is  the  Sun  of  Tiphareth.  The  Five-rayed  Crown  further 
alludes  to  the  Five  Sephiroth  Kether,  Chokmah,  Binah,  Chesed  and  Geburah.  Chained  to  her 
waist  are  a Lion  and  an  Eagle,  between  which  is  a large  cauldron  whence  arise  steam  and 
smoke.  The  Lion  represents  the  Fire  in  Netzach  - the  Blood  of  the  Lion,  and  the  Eagle 
represents  the  Water  in  Hod,  the  Gluten  of  the  Eagle  whose  reconcilement  is  made  by  the  Air 
in  Yesod,  uniting  with  the  volatilised  Water  arising  from  the  cauldron  through  the  influence  of 
the  Fire  beneath  it.  The  chains  which  link  the  Lion  and  the  Eagle  to  her  waist,  are  symbolic  of 
the  Paths  of  Scorpio  and  Capricornus  as  shown  by  the  Scorpion  and  the  Goat  in  the 
background.  In  her  right  hand,  she  bears  the  Torch  of  Solar  Fire  elevating  and  volatilising  the 
Water  in  Hod  by  the  fiery  influence  of  Geburah,  while  with  her  left  hand,  she  pours  from  a 
vase  the  Waters  of  Chesed  to  temper  and  calm  the  Fires  of  Netzach.  This  latter  form  is  the 
usual  figure  of  Temperance,  symbolising  in  a more  restricted  form  than  the  preceding,  the 
peculiar  properties  of  this  Path.  It  represents  an  Angel  with  the  Solar  emblem  of  Tiphareth  on 
her  brow,  and  wings  of  the  aerial  and  volatilising  nature,  pouring  together  the  fluidic  fire  and 
the  fiery  water  thus  combining,  harmonising  and  tempering  those  opposing  elements. 

One  foot  rests  on  dry  and  volcanic  land,  in  the  background  of  which  is  a volcano  whence 
issues  an  eruption.  The  other  foot  is  in  the  water  by  whose  border  springs  fresh  vegetation, 
contrasting  strongly  with  the  arid  and  dry  nature  of  the  distant  land.  On  her  breast  is  a square, 
the  emblem  of  rectitude.  The  whole  figure  is  a representation  of  that  straight  and  narrow  way 
of  which  it  is  said,  "few  there  be  that  find  it"  which  alone  leads  to  the  higher  and  glorified  life. 
For  to  pursue  that  steady  and  tranquil  mean  between  two  opposing  forces,  is  indeed  difficult, 
and  many  are  the  temptations  to  turn  aside  either  to  the  right  or  to  the  left  - wherein,  remember, 
are  but  to  be  found  the  menacing  symbols  of  Death  and  the  Devil. 

The  magical  title  is  Daughter  of  the  Reconcilers,  the  Bringer  Forth  of  Life. 

13th  KEY-DEATH 

The  13th  Key  of  Tarot  represents  a figure  of  a Skeleton,  upon  which  some  portions  of 
flesh  still  remain.  In  a field  he  is  reaping  off  with  Scythe  of  Death  the  fresh  vegetation  which 
springs  from  the  corrupting  bodies  buried  therein  - fragments  of  which,  such  as  hands,  heads 
and  feet  appear  above  the  soil.  One  of  the  heads  wears  a kingly  crown;  another  is  apparently 
that  of  a person  of  little  note,  showing  that  Death  is  the  equaliser  of  all 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


conditions.  The  five  extremities,  the  head,  hands  and  feet,  allude  to  the 
powers  of  the  number  five,  the  Letter  He,  the  Pentagram  - the  concealed  Spirit  of 
Life  and  the  Four  Elements  - the  originator  of  all  living  form.  The  Sign  of  Scorpio 
especially  alludes  to  stagnant  and  foetid  water  - that  property  of  the  moist  nature 
which  initiates  putrefaction  and  decay.  The  eternal  change  from  life  into  death  through 
death  into  life,  is  symbolised  by  the  grass  which  springs  from  and  is  nourished  by 
putrifying  and  corrupting  carcasses;  the  herbiage,  in  its  turn  affords  food  to  animals 
and  man,  which  again  when  dead,  nourisheth  vegetable  life  and  bring  to  growth  and 
perfection  the  living  herbiage.  This  is  further  shown  by  the  figure  itself  putrifying  and 
decaying  as  it  reaps  the  grass  of  the  field.  "As  for  man,  his  days  are  as  grass,  as  a flower 
of  the  field,  so  he  fourisheth.'The  top  of  the  scythe  forms  the  Tau  Cross  of  Life, 
showing  that  what  destroys  also  renews. 

The  whole  is  a representation  of  the  eternal  transmutation  of  the  life  of  nature, 
which  reforms  all  things  into  fresh  images  and  similitudes.  This  symbol  represents  the 
corrosive  and  destructive  action  of  the  infernal  Fire  as  opposed  to  the  Celestial  - the 
Dragon  of  the  Waters,  the  Typhon  of  the  Egyptians,  the  Slayer  of  Osiris  - which  later 
yet  rises  again  in  Horus.  The  Scorpion,  Serpent  of  Evil,  delineated  before  the  figure 
of  Death  in  the  more  ancient  form  of  the  Key  refers  to  the  mixed  and  transforming, 
therefore  deceptive,  nature  of  this  emblem.  Behind  him,  is  the  symbol  of  the  Nameless 
One,  representing  the  Seed  and  its  germ,  not  yet  differentiated  into  Life,  therefore 
incapable  of  definition.  The  Scorpion  is  the  emblem  of  ruthless  destruction;  the  Snake 
is  the  mixed  and  deceptive  nature,  serving  alike  for  good  and  evil;  the  Eagle  is  the 
higher  and  Divine  Nature,  yet  to  be  found  herein,  the  Alchemical  Eagle  of  distillation, 
the  Renewer  of  Life.  As  it  is  said,  "Thy  youth  shall  be  renewed  like  the  Eagles."  Great 
indeed,  and  many  are  the  mysteries  of  this  terrible  Kev. 

The  magical  title  is  The  Child  of  the  Great  Transformers,  Lord  of  the  Gates  of 

Death. 

12th  KEY-HANGED  MAN 
The  Spirit  of  the  Mighty  Waters 

The  gallows  from  which  this  figure  is  suspended  forms  a Tau  cross.  The  figure 
itself,  from  the  position  of  the  legs,  forms  a fylfot  cross.  It  also  represents  the 
alchemical  symbol  of  Sulphur  in  reverse. 

There  is  a halo  about  the  head  of  the  seeming  martyr.  It  should  be  noted  that  (1) 
the  tree  of  sacrifice  is  living  wood  as  indicated  by  leaves  growing  thereon;  (2)  that  the 
face  expresses  deep  entrancement,  not  suffering;  (3)  that  the  figure,  as  a whole, 
suggests  life  in  suspension,  but  life  and  not  death.  It  is  a card  of  profound  significance 
but  all  the  significance  is  veiled.  His  arms,  clasped  behind  him,  form  an  upright 
Triangle,  and  this  radiates  Light.  His  mouth  is  resolutely  closed.  Waite  dismisses  most 
interpretations  saying  very  simply  that  for  him  it  expresses  the  relation,  in  one  of  its 
aspects,  between  the  Divine  and  the  Universe.  He  who  can  understand  that  the  story 
of  his  higher  nature  is  embedded  in  this  symbolism  will  receive  intimations 
concerning  a great  awakening  that  is  possible,  and  will  know  that  after  the  sacred 
Mystery  of  Death  there  is  a glorious  Mystery  of  Resurrection. 


18 


VOLUME  TWO 


It  is  attributed  to  the  letter  Mem,  the  element  of  Water,  joining  Geburah  to 
Hod;  Mars  to  Mercury. 

You  will  remember  that  the  letter  Mem  occupies  the  middle  position  in  the 
series  of  the  Three  Mothers.  It  is  said  in  the  Zohar  that  its  open  operation  is  through 
the  descent  of  its  influence  to  the  abyss,  and  thus  it  restrains  the  rising  of  those  great 
waters  by  which  the  earth  would  otherwise  again  be  inundated.  In  its  close 
operation,  it  restricts  the  power  of  judgement  from  the  downward  course  thereof.  It  is 
also  said  that  it  is  like  a vessel  which  in  turn  is  sealed  and  unsealed,  according  as  there 
is  inhibition  or  indulgence  of  its  influx  to  the  emanations  which  are  below. 

With  the  more  general  import  of  the  Hanged  Man  you  will  be  already  familiar; 
but  in  this  Grade  you  are  invited  to  regard  it  after  a new  manner,  which  can  still  be 
brought  into  harmony  with  the  previous  forms  of  interpretation,  since  it  is  simply  an 
advance  thereon.  The  enforced  sacrifice  and  punishment,  the  involuntary  and  fatal 
loss,  which  are  ascribed  to  it  in  our  Tarot  teaching,  are  here  connected  with  the 
Divine  death,  with  the  sacrifice  of  God  himself.  That  death  connects  closely  with 
the  true  meaning  attached  to  the  High  Ceremony  of  the  Corpus  Christi  wherein  the 
Chief  Adept  typifies  at  once  the  Founder  of  the  Rosicrucian  Order  and  the  Founder 
of  the  Universe. 

Year  by  year,  the  Order  is  withdrawn  for  one  moment  of  time  that  it  may  be 
again  formulated  out  of  chaos;  the  Builder  is  also  withdrawn  into  the  concealment  of 
the  Tomb,  as  you  are  told  in  the  symbolism  of  the  5 equals  6 grade.  The  Founder  of 
our  Rosicrucian  Fraternity  was  taken  hence  that  Light  should  come  to  His  disciples, 
and  the  Maker  of  the  great  world  entered  into  another  concealment,  for  God  dies  in 
order  that  man  shall  live,  and  shall  not  only  seek  but  find  Him. 

The  symbolism  with  which  we  are  here  dealing  also  recalls  the  Apocalyptic 
figures  of  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  in  correspondence 
with  previous  explanations,  it  indicates  that  the  palmary  misfortune  of  the  universe, 
which  is  exoterically  called  the  Fall  of  Man,  exercised  a species  of 
incomprehensible  compulsion  upon  the  Divine  Nature,  so  that  the  scheme  of  what 
is  familiar  to  everyone  under  the  name  of  redemption  comes  before  us  in  a certain 
manner  as  an  eternal  necessity  and  as  a consequence  of  the  free  will  rather  of  man 
than  God. 

The  importance  which  has  been  attached  throughout  the  Grades  of  our  Two 
Orders  to  Egyptian  symbolism  should  also  remind  us  that  Mem,  through  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ,  has  analogy  with  the  legend  of  the  dead  Osiris,  one  of  whose  appellations 
was  the  shipwrecked  or  drowned  Mariner,  even  as  this  terrible  Key,  which  you  see 
now  in  its  true  form,  represents  a drowned  giant. 

The  23rd  Path  of  the  Tree  is  referred  to  the  Elemental  sign  of  Water,  and  in  this 
diagram  the  drowned  giant  is  depicted  reposing  on  the  rocky  bed  of  the  ocean  with  the 
rainbow  at  his  feet,  corresponding  to  that  other  rainbow  seen  in  the  apocalyptic  vision 
around  the  Throne  of  the  Slain  Lamb.  A symbol  familiar  to  the  brethren  of  the 
Second  Order  is  here  interpreted  with  reference  to  its  most  exalted  sense. 

The  drowned  giant  is  that  which  has  been  sunk  below  the  phenomenal  world 

by  a 


19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


sacrifice  eternally  preordained,  which,  in  one  of  its  aspects  at  least,  is  the 
necessary  limitation  suffered  by  the  Divine  Nature  in  the  act  of  becoming  manifest. 
The  Divine,  in  a word,  is  drowned  in  the  waters  of  natural  life  and  that  which  in  this 
respect  obtains  in  the  external  world,  obtains  also  for  humanity,  wherein  the  Divine 
Spark,  beyond  all  plummets  of  the  sense,  all  reach  of  the  logical  understanding  is 
immersed  in  the  waters  of  the  material  existence.  In  both  cases,  the  symbol  with  which 
we  are  dealing  corresponds  to  the  legend  of  our  Founder,  sleeping  in  the  centre  of  the 
Tomb  which  is  encircled  by  the  Rainbow,  as  in  the  Sanctuary  of  Israel  there  was  the 
abiding  Presence  of  the  Shekinah. 

11th  KEY-JUSTICE 

That  to  which  your  attention  is  especially  drawn  is  the  Key  of  Justice, 
referrable  to  the  letter  Lamed,  whereto  many  attributions  are  given.  The  writers  of 
the  Zohar  and  the  old  scholiasts  thereon  dwell  upon  the  form  of  Lamed  which  is  the 
highest  of  all  the  letters;  they  say  also  that  it  is  composite,  being  formulated  of  Vau 
and  Kaph.  These  are  the  accidents  of  their  subtlety,  but  you  should  know  that  its 
dominion  is  in  the  hour  of  the  planet  Shabbathai  or  Saturn,  because  from  Binah, 
which  is  the  great  Sabbath,  the  rest  whereof  we  desire,  there  is  an  influx  to  the  Path 
of  Lamed  through  the  Path  of  Geburah,  from  the  Sephirah  Binah. 

It  further  denotes  the  Mystery  of  Equilibrium.  Now,  the  place  of  Geburah 
can  be  withstood  only  by  those  who  restrain  their  concupiscence,  because  it  is  the 
Supernal  Tribunal,  and  Geburah  in  this  sense,  signified  the  force  of  will,  as  Lamed  is 
the  condition  of  equilibrium,  which  represents  the  Portal  of  the  Mysteries. 

The  ideas  which  have  been  thus  expressed  are  found  differently  exhibited  by 
another  order  of  symbolism  in  the  two  Pillars  which  stand  at  the  Western  Angles  of  the 
Altar,  (in  the  6 equals  5 ritual)  bearing  respectively  a lighted  candle  and  a human 
skull.  With  the  conventional  attributions  of  light  in  the  numerical  order  and  the 
obvious  lessons  to  be  derived  from  the  disjecta  membra  of  humanity,  we  have  no 
concern  here.  They  speak  too  fully  for  themselves. 

Of  that  death-watch  which  encompasses  us  in  the  midst  of  ordinary  life  there  is 
however  little  realization.  All  that  falls  short  of  the  mystic  end  falls  short  of  the  life  of 
life,  outside  of  which  we  are  still  in  the  sphere  of  simulacra..  . 

It  is  possible,  however,  that  another  light  may  be  added  to  his  natural  condition, 
by  which  the  desire  of  the  true  end  which  is  set  before  all  beings,  and  of  the  life  which  is 
beyond  all  life  of  the  apparent  order.  It  is  then  that  he  is  made  ready  to  set  out  on  the 
great  search,  when  the  higher  light  which  has  now  entered  within  him  goes  also  before 
him,  and  the  desire  of  the  Holy  House  is  enkindled  in  his  heart.  In  this  manner  he 
passes  under  the  judgments  and  the  severities  of  his  election,  behind  which  is  the 
concealed  love  that  shall  take  him  to  his  term.  Lor  as  the  natural  man  is  impelled  by  a 
certain  elementary  justice  suited  to  his 


20 


VOLUME  TWO 


condition,  so  there  is  a justice  which  is  above,  working  in  the  souls  of  the 
chosen  ones,  so  that  once  indeed,  they  shall  taste  death,  that  they  may  pass  into  life 
forever,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Faithful  Intelligence. 

Justice  is  the  Daughter  of  the  Lord  of  Truth,  The  Holder  of  the  Balances. 

10th  KEY-WHEEL  OF  FORTUNE 
The  Lord  of  the  Forces  of  Life 

The  form  of  the  Order's  Key  of  The  Wheel  of  Fortune  is  much  more  simple 
than  most  renditions.  There  are  shown  only  three  figures  - the  winged  Sphynx  above,  the 
revolving  wheel  in  the  center,  while  below  is  a sitting,  pensive  monkey,  a 
cynocephalus. 

The  Sphynx  is  half  beast  and  half  human,  female  as  indicated  by  breasts,  while 
the  head  is  covered  by  a nemyss  encircled  by  a halo.  Thus  it  represents  humanity  as  a 
whole,  evolving  from  its  primordial  animal  state  to  human  self-consciousness.  But 
that  is  not  all.  The  presence  of  large  wings,  indicate  the  divinity  of  the  figure,  so  that 
the  symbol  as  a whole  suggests  the  Real  Self  of  man  hidden  behind  the  veil  of  the 
lower  Sephiroth,  the  lower  self  or  personality.  The  higher  Triad  is  well  represented  by 
being  above  the  other  two  symbolic  figures. 

The  wheel  is  the  symbol  of  time,  cyclic  progression  and  thus  of  karma.  The 
wheel  of  the  zodiac  and  astrology  per  se  are  representative  of  the  cosmic  clock 
constantly  ticking  away  to  bring  into  fresh  activity  the  latent  seeds  of  ancient  deeds 
whereby  we  rise  or  fall  as  our  fortunes,  in  the  broadest  sense  of  the  term,  fluctuate 
with  the  passage  of  time. 

The  cynocephalus  is  below,  often  described  as  Hermanubis,  the  combination  of 
Hermes  the  messenger  of  the  Gods,  and  lower  mind,  and  Anubis,  the  dog-faced  (or 
jackal)  God  who  presided  over  death  and  mummification,  and  the  watcher  over  the 
tombs  of  the  dead.  Watching  over  the  tomb  is  required  to  permit  resurrection  - and 
thus  he  is  associated  with  immortality,  rising  through  the  wheel  of  life  from 
transitoriness  to  the  overshadowing  sphynx  above,  eternity. 

It  is  symbolized  by  the  letter  Caph,  referred  to  Jupiter  on  The  Tree.  Caph  is  not 
a closed  hand,  nor  an  open  hand,  but  a curved  hand,  as  if  to  hold  or  contain 
something. 

9th  KEY-THE  HERMIT 

The  Hermit  on  most  packs  of  the  Tarot  is  practically  the  same.  It  is  a hooded 
and  cloaked  figure,  an  old  man,  bearing  a staff  in  one  hand,  and  a lamp  or  lantern  in 
the  other.  Like  Diogenes  of  old,  he  may  be  looking  for  Truth  - the  truth  about  man 
and  his  relationship  with  the  universe.  He  is  a solitary  figure;  there  is  none  other  with 
him.  In  the  search  to  reach  the  divine,  one  is  alone  in  quest  of  the  Alone.  At  the  same 
time  he  represents  the  Kerux  in  the  initiatory  rituals,  the  shower  of  the  way  - the 
Kerux  who  points  out  the  way  to  the  hidden  knowledge. 

The  Hermit  is  attributed  to  the  letter  Yod  on  the  Tree  and  to  the  sign  Virgo, 
ruled  by  Mercury.  Mercury  is  not  yet  knowledge,  but  is  the  means  whereby 
knowledge  is 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


transmitted,  the  symbol  of  the  nervous  system,  with  all  its  circuits  - from  the 
most  primitive  to  those  that  are  in  the  process  of  development. 

Insofar  as  Virgo  is  the  sign  to  which  the  Hermit  is  attributed,  it  has  a 
connection  with  human  sexuality  in  its  yet  virginal  or  prepubescent  state.  It 
represents  man  on  the  edge  or  precipice  of  Becoming,  of  the  adolescent  emerging 
from  latent  potentiality,  of  the  adept  who  has  not  yet  arrived  at  the  full  stage  of  all 
his  possibilities,  but  who  is  nevertheless  enroute. 

His  magical  title  is  The  Magus  of  the  Voice  of  Light,  The  Prophet  of  the 

Gods. 

8th  KEY-STRENGTH 

There  are  many  versions  of  this  Key,  all  variations  of  the  Woman  with  the 
Lion.  Some  cards  show  her  closing  the  mouth  of  the  Lion,  others  opening  the  mouth 
of  the  Lion.  The  Order  card  shows  her  side  by  side  with  the  Lion,  both  in  an 
amicable  relationship. 

She  represents  Nature  in  all  her  Vastness,  the  Genetrix  from  which  the  vast 
universes  are  made  and  from  which  they  are  constructed.  The  Lion  in  the  Order  is 
the  sign  of  Leo,  not  merely  the  fifth  sign  in  the  natural  zodiac,  referred  to  the  5th 
house  - sex  and  love,  but  not  yet  marriage  - but  it  is  the  Lirst  Sign  of  the  reconstructed 
or  Initiated  Zodiac  from  which  all  the  decanates  and  quinaries  begin.  It  therefore 
symbolizes  esoterically  the  Beginning  or  Creation  of  things,  and  to  that  extent  has 
many  subtle  meanings. 

It  is  referred  to  the  letter  Teth  on  the  Tree,  meaning  a serpent,  having  in  Genesis 
a sexual  connotation.  The  Serpent  is  also  the  spermatozoon,  the  stimulator  of  new  life 
in  the  female.  As  such  it  also  represents  Kundalini,  the  spinal  spirit-fire  without 
which  there  can  be  no  transmutation,  no  spiritual  growth  or  development,  no  new 
birth.  Kundalini  is  the  human  aspect  of  the  great  Goddess  Shakti,  the  cosmic  energy 
or  Lohat,  depending  on  the  system  you  employ,  whose  seven  sons  carve  seven  holes  in 
space  wherein  develop  the  seven  planets  - or  chakras  in  the  merely  human  sense. 

The  card  itself  therefore  is  replete  with  many  significations  and  requires  deep 
meditation  to  discern  its  concealed  mysteries. 

Here  the  magical  title  is  Daughter  of  the  Llaming  Sword,  Leader  of  the  Lion. 

7th  KEY-THE  CHARIOT 

In  the  Order  system,  the  chariot  is  not  grounded  or  fixed  as  in  most  other 
renditions.  It  is  soaring  through  space  drawn  by  two  horses,  the  positive  and 
negative  forces  of  nature,  given  direction  by  the  head  of  a Sphynx,  again 
symbolizing  the  Higher.  The  charioteer  is  the  King,  the  Yod  of  Tetragrammation, 
the  Lather  of  all. 

In  all  renditions,  however,  the  symbolic  meaning  conveyed  is  the  union  of  two 
opposites,  which  together  can  draw  the  vehicle  of  the  Higher  Man  towards  the 
Great  Goals  he  is  attempting  to  reach.  It  is  reminiscent  of  the  Oath  of  the  Adeptus 
Minor  in  which  he  promises  to  become,  with  the  divine  aid,  more  than  human  by 
uniting  himself  with  his  higher  and  divine  Genius. 


22 


VOLUME  TWO 


As  such  it  is  the  symbol  of  the  Great  Work,  represented  by  the  letter  Cheth, 
meaning  a Fence,  and  whose  Gematria  is  418.  These  numbers  add  to  13,  which  are  also 
the  numbers  of  Ahavoh,  Love,  and  Echod,  One  or  Unity.  Both  together  equal  26,  the 
Gematria  of  Tetragrammation. 

The  magical  title  of  this  Key  is  Child  of  the  Power  of  the  Waters,  Lord  of  the 
Triumph  of  Light. 

6th  KEY-THE  LOVERS 

Of  all  the  historical  designs,  this  Golden  Dawn  Tarot  card  is  certainly  the  most 
different.  Most  others  show  a man  and  woman  standing  before  a vast  Angelic 
figure.  In  this  particular  key,  we  have  a woman  chained  to  a rock  before  which  is  a 
monster  or  threatening  dragon.  Above,  we  perceive  the  descent  of  Perseus  with  radiant 
shield,  winged  helmet,  and  a sword  in  his  right  hand  about  to  rescue  the  helpless 
maiden. 

One  of  the  many  possible  interpretations  is  the  liberating  effect  of  the 
descent  of  the  higher  Genius,  the  freeing  effect  of  illumination.  To  quote  Robert 
Wang  in  his  book  The  Golden  Dawn  Tarot,  "Here  Perseus  is  shown  freeing 
Andromeda  from  the  solid  rock  of  materialism,  and  from  the  Dragon  of  Fear.  The 
'Love'  here  is  one  of  the  divine  Union,  a mystery  not  even  hinted  at  by  the  usual 
image  of  a man  and  woman  whose  earthly  union  is  being  blessed  by  a central 
Angelic  figure." 

The  Hebrew  letter  to  which  this  Key  is  attributed  is  Zayin,  meaning  a sword 
- in  this  instance  not  merely  the  sword  of  division  and  discrimination,  but  the  sword 
of  conquest  and  liberation.  Its  number  is  7,  which  also  refers  indirectly  to  Netzach 
Victory,  and  to  the  planet  Venus  whose  meaning  is  Love  and  Union  and  Fertility. 

The  magical  title  of  this  Key  is  Children  of  the  Voice  Divine,  the  Oracles  of 
the  Mighty  Gods. 

5th  KEY-THE  HIEROPHANT 

Again,  the  Golden  Dawn  card  is  radically  different  from  those  in  other  packs.  It 
shows  a seated  figure,  bearded  and  crowned  with  a triple  tiara,  seated  on  a throne 
whose  two  arms  end  with  bulls'  heads.  Quite  simply,  the  card  is  attributed  to  the 
letter  Vav,  also  attributed  to  Taurus,  the  zodiacal  Bull. 

In  the  Order  teaching,  the  Hierophant  is  the  Expounder  of  the  Mysteries  and 
his  throne  is  in  the  East  of  the  Temple.  He  is  representative  of  Osiris,  the 
resurrection  god  of  Egypt,  and  as  such  never  moves  from  the  dais.  If  he  does  move,  he 
represents  Aroueris,  one  of  the  forms  of  Horus  the  Elder,  and  in  moving  he 
administers  the  obligation  to  the  candidate  and  subsequently  officiates  and  confirms 
the  fact  of  initiation. 

Initiation  in  the  Order  really  takes  place  between  the  two  pillars  when  the 
Higher  Genius 

is,  as  it  were,  poised  to  make  contact  with  the  aspiring  ego  of  the  Candidate. 

He  also  is  bearer  of  the  Banner  of  the  East,  which  indicates  the  rising  of  the 
Light,  the 

central  fact  of  initiation.  Some  of  the  older  packs  describe  him  as  the  Pope, 

the  highest 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


authority  of  the  Catholic  Church.  But  Pope  means  in  reality  Father  and  as  the 
Initiator,  the  Hierophant  certainly  represents  an  authoritative  father  figure  - the  one 
whose  power  and  function  is  to  stir  up  and  initiate  the  creative  process  in  the 
Genetrix  or  Mother. 

His  magical  title  is  Magus  of  the  Eternal  Gods. 

4th  KEY-THE  EMPEROR 

The  symbolism  of  this  card  is  forthright,  in  that  it  depicts  the  Emperor  sitting  on 
a throne  with  an  actual  ram  (for  Aries)  under  his  feet,  and  carrying  a wand  with  the 
head  of  a ram.  Since  Aries  is  ruled  by  Mars,  this  card  represents  enormous  creative 
energy  and  of  course  rulership.  One  set  of  Order  symbols  or  attributions  depicts  the 
Mars  decanate  of  Pisces  as  the  end  of  one  cycle  of  the  year,  and  another  Mars 
decanate  in  Aries  to  represent  the  tremendous  power  involved  in  the  return  of  Spring 
when  Nature  begins  to  evidence  growth  and  the  emergence  of  Life  once  more  in 
Spring. 

One  of  the  apparent  paradoxes  of  the  Order  symbolism,  is  that  this  card  is 
attributed  not  merely  to  Mars,  a very  masculine  symbol  but  to  the  letter  Heh  which  is 
distinctly  feminine.  It  is  the  first  Heh  of  Tetragrammaton,  signifying  the  Mother.  All 
symbols  contain  their  own  opposites,  thus  creating  a balance  of  opposing  forces, 
without  which  the  universe  would  come  to  an  end. 

The  Emperor  is  patently  the  consort  of  the  Empress,  the  preceding  card 
attributed  to  Venus  and  Daleth,  indicating  that  the  two  had  better  be  considered 
together.  One  is  masculine  and  the  other  is  feminine.  One  is  force  and  fire;  the  other 
is  beauty,  luxury  and  fecundity.  It  is  worth  remembering  that  a poet  once  wrote  that 
man  is  peace  and  the  woman  is  power. 

This  magical  title  is  Son  of  the  Morning,  Chief  among  the  Mighty. 

3rd  KEY-THE  EMPRESS 

The  Empress  here  is  not  unlike  most  of  the  figures  in  other  and  older  packs. 
She  is  attributed  to  the  letter  Daleth,  meaning  a Gate,  and  is  the  uppermost  of  the 
so-called  Reciprocal  Paths  on  the  Tree,  joining  Chokmah  to  Binah,  the  celestial 
Father  and  Mother.  Venus  is  attributed  to  that  wall  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts  which  is 
the  entry  to  the  Vault  and  the  Pastos,  which  is  thus  the  symbol  rebirth. 

She  is  a stately  figure,  seated  on  a throne,  having  rich  vestments  and  royal  aspect, 
as  - says  Waite  - of  a daughter  of  heaven  and  earth.  There  is  a dove  to  the  right  of  her, 
descending  as  it  were  from  above.  She  bears  a sceptre,  that  of  royalty,  surmounted  by  a 
globe,  while  in  the  other  hand  is  the  Ankh,  the  symbol  both  of  Venus  and  of  eternal 
Life.  In  Waite's  lovely  language,  in  which  he  fears  to  use  an  English  phrase  when  a 
Latin  one  will  do  better,  she  is  not  the  Queen  of  Heaven,  but  nonetheless  she  is  still 
the  Refuge  of  all  Sinners,  the  fruitful  Mother  of  thousands.  There  are  also  certain 
aspects  of  this  card  which  correctly  describe  her  as  desire  and  the  wings  thereof,  as 
the  woman  clothed  with  the  Sun,  as  Gloria  Mundi  and  the  veil  of  the  Holy  of 
Holies. 


24 


VOLUME  TWO 


She  is  above  all  things  universal  fecundity  and  desire,  but  there  is  no  direct 
message  which  has  been  given  to  man  like  that  which  is  borne  of  woman. 

In  another  order  of  ideas,  the  card  of  the  Empress  signifies  the  door  or  gate  by 
which  an  entrance  is  obtained  into  this  life,  as  into  the  Garden  of  Venus,  or  as  in  the 
Vault  of  the  Adepti.  Then  the  way  which  leads  out  therefrom,  to  the  secret  known  to 
the  High  Priestess;  is  communicated  only  to  the  elect. 

Her  magical  title  is  Daughter  of  the  Mighty  Ones. 

2nd  KEY-THE  HIGH  PRIESTESS 

The  Golden  Dawn  card  is  almost  simplistic  without  any  of  the  mur  complex 
and  elucidatory  symbols  of  the  other  packs.  She  is  clearly  a lunar  symbol, 
representing  the  Path  of  Gimel  leading  from  Kether  to  Tiphareth,  passing  through  the 
Abyss  without  at  y break  in  continuity. 

Instead  of  having  the  crescent  moon  at  her  feet  as  in  most  of  the  current  packs, 
she  wears  the  crescent  on  her  forehead,  above  her  eyes,  and  holds  a Cup  (rather  like 
the  Order  Water  cup)  in  her  hands  over  her  chest.  In  this  aspect,  she  seems  more 
like  the  Stolistes,  the  cup-bearer  in  the  Golden  Dawn  ceremonies.  Nor  is  she  placed 
between  the  two  Pillars  of  Jachin  and  Boaz,  of  Severity  and  Mildness,  as  in  many 
other  of  the  more  commonly  used  decks;  she  does  not  thus  represent  the  Hegemon, 
the  guide  or  leader  of  the  Aspirant. 

Her  clothing  or  vestments  are  flowing  and  gauzy,  blue  in  color,  and  the  whole  is 
bathed  in  an  aura  of  light,  a shimmering  radiance.  To  quote  Waite  once  more,  she  is 
the  spiritual  Bride  and  Mother,  the  daughter  of  the  Stars  and  the  higher  Garden  of 
Eden.  The  symbol  of  the  Shekinah,  the  abiding  presence  of  the  Most  High,  the  co- 
habiting glory.  She  is  the  Queen  of  the  Borrowed  Light,  since  the  moon  reflects  the 
light  of  the  Sun,  but  this  is  the  light  of  all. 

The  Priestess  of  the  Silver  Star  is  her  honorary  title,  and  thus  is  the  means 
whereby  entry  is  gained  into  the  invisible  Third  or  Highest  Order  within  the  Order. 

1st  KEY-THE  MAGICIAN 

This  is  a young  man,  with  the  Caduceus  on  his  chest  vestments,  facing  the  altar 
on  which  are  the  four  elemental  weapons  so  frequently  spoken  of  in  the  Golden 
Dawn.  They  are  depicted  here  exactly  as  they  are  in  the  document  describing  the 
making  of  the  four  elemental  weapons  which  have  almost  a universal  application. 
They  not  only  represent  the  four  suits  of  the  Tarot,  the  four  Worlds  of  the  Kabalah, 
the  four  Beasts  of  the  Apocalypse  -the  four  Kerubic  signs  - they  represent  the  four 
letters  of  the  Tetragammaton  and  so  are  the  vice-regents  of  the  Holy  Name. 

Again,  the  Order  has  made  a radical  departure  from  most  packs.  This  magician 
does  not  have  one  hand  raised  towards  heaven,  and  the  other  pointing  downwards. 
They  are  poised  as  if  to  grasp  one  of  the  magical  weapons  wherewith  he 
accomplishes  his  rites. 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


His  hat  has  a wide  brim  resembling  the  figure  eight  in  a lateral  position,  the 
symbol  of  infinity,  the  sign  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  like  an  endless  cord,  almost  like  a 
serpent  appearing  to  devour  its  own  tail,  reminding  one  of  the  last  line  of  the  Bornless 
Invocation  -"I  am  He,  the  Grace  of  the  World;  the  Heart  girt  with  a Serpent  is  my 
Name." 

Insofar  as  he  is  attributed  to  the  Letter  Beth  and  to  Mercury,  and  since  he  has 
the  symbol  of  the  Staff  of  Mercury  on  his  chest,  he  is  the  higher  Mercury,  Thoth  the 
God  of  Wisdom  and  of  Utterance,  the  God  who  cometh  forth  from  the  Veil. 

His  magical  title  is  The  Magus  of  Power. 

0-THE  FOOL 

In  this  card  the  most  complete  departure  from  the  conventional  packs  is 
depicted.  Instead  of  showing  a man  in  motley,  striding  along,  heedless  of  the  dog 
which  is  yapping  at  his  heels,  we  have  revealed  a naked  child  standing  beneath  a rose- 
tree  bearing  yellow  roses.  They  represent  the  golden  Rose  of  Joy  as  well  as  the  Rose 
of  Silence.  While  reaching  up  to  the  Roses,  he  yet  holds  in  leash  a grey  wolf, 
wordly_  wisdom  held  in  check  by  perfect  innocence  and  the  divine  nature. 

Waite  describes  him  as  a prince  of  the  other  world  on  his  travels  through  this 
one  - all  amidst  the  morning  glory,  in  the  keen  air.  He  is  the  Spirit  in  search  of 
experience. 

Probably  the  finest  description  of  the  Fool  is  to  be  found  in  that  profound 
work,  The  Book  of  Thoth  by  Aleister  Crowley.  Though  his  designs  for  the  Fool  as 
painted  by  Frieda  Harris  differ  enormously  from  the  Order  version,  nonetheless  the 
reader  would  do  well  to  study  what  Crowley  has  to  say  in  this  connection.  This  alone 
should  shatter  any  convictions  one  may  have  about  Crowley's  supposed  perplexities. 
There  is  more  wisdom  in  this  one  description  and  interpretation  than  in  many  a tome 
on  all  the  Tarot  trumps  contributed  by  anyone  else.  I go  further  than  this,  and  suggest 
that  the  student  study  the  Golden  Dawn  Tarot  deck  in  conjunction  with  his  book,  and 
even  with  his  own  version  of  the  Tarot  cards  themselves. 

The  magical  title  is  the  Spirit  of  Ether. 


26 


VOLUME  TWO 


V 

V 


NOTES  ON  GEOMANCY 

No  authorship  has  been  ascertained  for  this  paper.  Quite  patently  it  is  neither 
by  S.  R.  M.  D.,  nor  by  N.O.M.  It  is  not  listed  as  amongst  the  Flying  Rolls.  I gather  it 
to  have  been  contributed  by  one  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the  Order  members  who  had 
found  some  interest  in  Geomancy. 

Students  are  often  inclined  to  set  aside  Geomancy  as  a thing  of  little  use  and 
small  account,  a fantastic  and  empiric  mode  of  divination,  merely  a species  of  ultra 
elaborate  tossing  up,  pure  chance  in  fact,  laboriously  interpreted.  The  reason  seems 
to  be  that  in  all  the  books  and  manuscripts  dealing  with  Geomancy  no  elementary 
explanation  of  it  is  ever  vouchsafed.  This  the  student  is  assumed  to  know,  and  is 
given  straight  away  rule  a for  the  erection  of  figures  and  elaborate  lists  of  the  names 
and  sigils  of  Genii  and  Rulers  until  he  naturally  finds  himself  bored  or  wearied. 

It  is  to  supply  this  lack  that  this  paper  is  written  in  the  hope  that  some  students 
may  find  therein  what  they  have  been  lacking.  First  then  as  to  the  word  itself.  All  words 
ending  in  the  termination  "mancy"  refer  to  some  form  of  prophecying,  from  Mantis,  a 
prophet.  By  this  I mean  not  necessarily  in  fortune  telling,  though  this  too  may  be 
included,  but  rather  the  setting  forth  of  the  things  that  are  behind  the  Veil  of  matter. 
All  inspired  utterances,  in  a sense  all  great  poems,  are  prophecying.  The  priest  is  the 
commissioned  executant,  and  as  such  is  subordinate  to  the  prophet.  Now  the  prophet 
takes  some  material  manifestation,  and  at  this  point  lifts  a corner  of  the  veil, 
disclosing,  under  the  appearance  of  some  material  token,  the  essential  Divine  Truth 
laying  behind.  Thus  cheiromancy  is  prophecying  from  the  hand.  Necromancy  (which 
is  black  magic)  is  prophecying  from  the  corpse  (a  method  in 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


favor  with  the  Roman  Augurs  who  used  the  bodies  of  sacrificial  victims). 
Geomancy,  from  Gaia  the  Earth,  is  prophecying  from  the  Earth  itself.  We  have  then  to 
consider  how  the  veil  that  hides  while  it  manifests  the  mystery  of  creation  is  lifted  to 
the  gaze  of  the  inspired  Seer.  For  this  is  the  Veil  of  Isis,  the  penetration  of  which  was 
the  goal  and  object  of  the  Egyptian  Seers. 

As  above,  so  below,  was  the  arcanum  of  the  Emerald  Tablet  of  Hermes.  We 
are  taught  that  the  eternal  ideas  of  God  are  revealed  as  in  a picture  book  by  the 
starry  sphere  to  the  eyes  of  those  who  can  see,  and  the  starry  sphere  is  reflected  in  the 
Earth,  so  that  every  spot  is  the  reflection  of  some  constellation  or  star  group,  and  over 
these  wander  the  planets  in  their  order.  Four  great  Archangels  keep  watch  and  ward 
over  the  four  quarters.  From  this  knowledge  we  may  see  the  reasons  for  the 
characteristics  of  countries,  towns  and  places  persisting  quite  independently  of  the 
race  that  inhabit  them.  We  can  see  why  it  is  that  ever  in  Rome  is  the  imperial  spirit  of 
domination  and  material  power,  whether  it  was  inhabited  as  at  first  by  the  outcasts 
and  broken  men  from  every  race,  the  great  "Asylum"  as  it  was  called,  or  afterwards  a 
homogeneous  Republic,  then  an  Empire  with  world  dominion,  then  a hierarchy  with 
well  nigh  a universal  spiritual  dominion,  but  always  the  same  spirit.  Or  why  again,  the 
various  races  that  have  come  to  China  have  one  and  all  become  ultra  Chinese.  In  every 
case  the  spirit  of  the  place  sometimes  is  strong  enough  to  dominate  all  who  come  in. 
Or  in  other  cases  to  produce  its  own  effect.  Thus  we  may  perhaps  say  that  all  the 
forces  behind  the  veil  shine  through  and  can  be  perceived.  If  the  prophet  can  catch 
and  translate  these  he  can  give  information  of  high  value  to  his  brethren.  Obviously 
to  do  this  he  must  entirely  sink  and  obliterate  his  own  personality,  for  his  intellect 
can  only  perceive  and  reason  about  this  side  of  the  veil.  While  his  attention  is  fixed 
on  this  he  is  necessarily  blind  to  the  indications  of  what  lies  behind. 

Let  us  for  a moment  look  at  some  other  terminations.  "Nomy"  signifies  laws 
- as  astronomy  is  the  law  of  this  starry  universe.  That  is  to  say  (for  we  can  really 
know  nothing  of  the  laws  governing  this  great  universe)  the  methodical  synthesis  of 
observation. 

"Ology"  is  the  "word"  - the  divine  messenger  drawn  from  the  manifestation  - 
thus  Astrology  is  the  message  drawn  from  the  stars,  the  discourse  concerning  them,  as 
shown  by  the  science  of  astronomy.  But  as  to  the  Earth,  we  have  Geology,  which 
signifies  the  discourse  concerning  the  earth  though  as  yet  this  discourse  concerns 
merely  the  age  of  the  earth,  and  the  kind  of  creatures  that  inhabited  it  thousands  of 
centuries  ago,  and  the  changes  that  have  passed  over  its  surface.  There  is  also 
Geometry  or  the  measurement  of  earth  which  is  a more  subtle  science,  for  it  concerns 
itself  with  abstract  numbers  and  figures. 

Now  at  the  outset  of  Geomancy,  as  set  forth  in  books  and  manuscripts,  we  are 
confronted  with  the  lists  of  the  names  of  the  Rulers,  Genii,  Angels,  and  Intelligences, 
which  have  no  apparent  reason,  and  with  seemingly  arbitrary  figures  called  Sigils.  The 
learning  of  these  to  some  is  a weariness  and  it  seems  profitless.  But  let  the  student  then 
look  on  them  as  the  names  of  personalities  with  whom  he  will  become  acquainted. 
You  know,  for  example,  that  your  friend's  name  is  John  or  David;  your  enemy's  name 
may  be  Hans  or  Karl.  The 


28 


VOLUME  TWO 


mention  of  these  names  at  once  brings  to  your  mind  the  idea  of  that 
personality.  We  could  not  discuss  these  friendly  or  hostile  ideas  without  using  these 
names.  We  do  not  know  why  our  friend  was  christened  John,  but  we  accept  the  fact, 
and  just  so  we  regard  the  Sigils,  as  we  do  the  letters  of  the  Alphabet.  We  do  not  know 
why  the  letter  J'  has  the  particular  power  that  it  has,  but  if  we  wish  to  communicate  to 
another  in  writing  the  idea  denoted  by  'John'  we  employ  it,  and  the  children  must 
learn  the  alphabet  before  they  can  begin  to  read. 

Now  as  to  the  mechanical  method  employed  by  the  Geomantic  diviner.  As  we 
have  seen  he  must  entirely  subordinate  his  own  personality,  his  reason,  his  intellect,  his 
human  will.  He  must  become  completely  passive.  We  have  all  heard  of  the  process  of 
automatic  writing  where  the  seer  as  medium  allows  his  hand  to  be  used  by  some 
superhuman  or  subhuman  intelligence,  that  messages  may  be  written  through  him 
without  his  will,  often  without  his  consciousness.  But  herein  it  is  extremely  difficult 
to  entirely  withdraw  the  will  so  that  the  message  is  not  coloured,  even  transmuted, 
or  at  least  modified,  by  his  own  brain.  The  Geomantic  method  of  making  a series  of 
dots  or  strokes  on  paper  without  counting,  ensures  so  far  as  it  is  possible  that  the 
intellect  has  no  part  therein.  What  is  it  then  that  determines  whether  the  number  be 
odd  or  even?  The  answer  is  clear;  it  is  rhythm.  Consider  then  any  four-lined  verse, 
with  alternate  feminine  and  masculine  endings.  The  rhythm  of  this  will  give  a 
geomantic  figure  of  two  dots,  one  dot,  two  dots,  one  dot. 


When  the  brain  is  entirely  quiescent,  the  message  from  behind  the  veil  of 
physical  matter  may  be  perceived  in  the  form  of  rhythm,  not  consciously  indeed,  but 
affecting  the  nerves  and  pulses,  affecting  the  hand.  A tune  we  may  say,  dances 
through  the  body,  the  rhythm  of  it  manifests  in  the  strokes  unconsciously  made. 
Whence  then  comes  this  tune?  The  starry  sky  is  the  reflex  of  God's  thought  of 
Himself,  the  earth  in  the  reflex  of  the  firmament,  the  aura  of  man  is  the  reflex  of  the 
earth.  The  rhythm  of  the  tune  then  manifests  the  idea  behind  the  veil.  The  geomantic 
figure  sets  down  in  geometric  form  the  rhythm  of  the  tune  and  consequently  the 
idea. 

Let  us  now  consider  what  we  mean  by  an  idea.  Old  John  Heydon,  the  most 
profound  writer  in  Geomancy,  defines  the  idea  as  an  invisible  created  spirit.  This 
may  be  more  comprehensible  if  we  imagine  any  manifest  object  - a man,  a flower,  a 
tree,  or  what  you  will.  Take  the  sum  of  all  the  attributes  you  know  of  that  object, 
and  then  make  up  the  ideal 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


presentment  in  the  idea  thereof.  It  is  invisible,  but  it  is  there.  So  we  may  say  a 
sculptor  has  the  idea  of  his  statue  before  he  has  made  the  roughest  sketch.  And  a 
genius  he  defines  as  a certain  divine  spirit  that  worketh  secret  things  in  nature 
miraculously.  So  that,  he  says,  there  is  no  great  difference  between  a Genius  and  a 
Divine  idea. 

Now  as  you  stand  in  a definite  spot  on  the  earth's  surface  and  ask  a question, 
the  answer  is  there,  involved  in  your  question,  if  you  can  but  get  at  it.  The  question  and 
answer  are  both  in  the  divine  idea,  and  the  idea  is  manifested  by  the  rhythmic 
movement,  the  tune,  that  your  spirit  catches  from  behind  the  veil. 

Take  then  for  example  a stanza  with  alternate  feminine  and  masculine 
endings.  Broadly  the  effect  is  exhilarating.  It  goes  to  a dance  rhythm,  it  is  full  of  hope 
and  joy,  it  tells  of  the  gaining  of  something  desired,  and  the  geomantic  figure  we 
have  formed  is  thus: 


and  we  learn  to  call  it  "Acquisitio.  We  are  further  taught  to  make  a talismanic 
figure  by  joining  the  dots  we  have  set  down  thus: 


This  seems  at  first  sight  a purely  empiric  and  practically  useless  thing.  But  let  us 
look  at  it  in  another  way.  We  wish  to  receive  the  information  we  desire,  and  the 
natural  method  is  to  hold  out  some  receptacle.  Our  appropriate  symbol  is  a cup  to 
receive  the  wine  of  divine  grace,  and  a cup  is  the  natural  symbol  of  "Acquisitio."  The 
spiritual  gift  is  behind  the  veil,  the  material  reflex  of  it  is  the  gift  of  what  we  desire 
on  Earth.  Two  cups  therefore  appropriately  symbolize  the  answer  to  our  question. 


30 


VOLUME  TWO 


Now  as  in  Egypt  the  picture  writing  gradually  conventionalized  into 
hieroglyphics,  so  the  representation  of  the  two  cups  may  become  the  hieroglyphic 
symbol,  the  dots  and  angles  of  Acquisitio. 

These  indicate  the  rhythm  that  has  come  from  behind  the  veil,  bearing  the 
answer  to  our  query.  We  have  now  to  consider  that  every  point  on  the  surface  of 
Earth  has  its  own  occult  forces,  which  are  here  manifested.  To  a certain  extent  this 
will  be  generally  admitted.  We  know  that  there  are  sacred  places,  often  in  the  old 
days  marked  with  stone  circles,  and  that  the  influence  of  them  is  so  strong  that  in  spite 
of  themselves,  succeeding  races  and  different  peoples  will  involuntarily  build  their 
sacred  shrines  in  the  same  spots. 

Many  believe  that  ill-luck  invariably  follows  the  profaning  of  such  sites.  It  is 
commonly  said  that  about  certain  places  there  is  a special  influence  for  good  or 
evil,  which  any  sensitive  person  who  comes  there  can  feel.  If  this  is  true  of  certain 
places  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  every  place  has  its  special  influence  and  occult 
forces,  which  can  be  there  manifested.  But  the  forces  that  manifest  in  any  place  are 
not  fixed  and  invariable. 

Imagine  then  that  you  stand  on  a point  of  the  earth's  surface  and  your  mind  is 
troubled  with  some  question  and  intuition  comes  to  you  to  seek  the  solution  behind 
the  veil.  You  are  feeling  in  your  mind  the  Divine  influence  ruling  that  particular 
spot,  and  unconsciously  it  may  be  so.  You  know  that  it  holds  within  it  the  answer 
could  you  but  get  at  it.  Perhaps  you  consider  no  ordinary  method  of  divination,  but 
there  comes  to  you  a feeling  of  hope  and  joy,  of  exhilaration,  a certain  sense  that  all 
will  be  well. 

Your  inner  being  has  caught  the  rhythm  that  promises  success.  Here  then 
Geomancy  enables  you  to  set  down  the  rhythm  in  black  and  white,  and  to  interpret 
in  detail. 

But  it  does  more  than  this.  To  the  vague  sense  that  has  permeated  your  inner 
being  there  is  much  risk  of  delusion.  It  is  impossible  to  exclude  the  material 
personality,  the  outer  side  of  the  veil.  Modes  of  exhilaration  or  depression  may 
come  from  physical  causes. 

Geomancy,  as  we  have  seen,  excludes,  so  far  as  it  is  possible,  the  personality  - the 
working  of  the  material  brain  and  enables  you  to  catch  the  rhythm,  wherein  is  the 
answer  to  your  question.  So  you  ask  whether  you  shall  obtain  something  eagerly 
desired,  and  the  rhythm  sings  to  you  the  idea  of  Acquisitio  and  you  set  down  the 
geomantic  figure,  and  there  appears  to  you  the  hieroglyphic  of  the  Cups  and  you 
know  that  you  hold  forth  the  material  cup,  and  behind  the  veil  the  spiritual  cup  is 
held  forth  to  receive  the  wine  of  blessing.  And  now  because  there  must  be  some  name 
by  which  you  shall  call  that  divine  spirit  which  you  have  perceived,  you  are  taught 
to  give  it  the  name  of  Hismael. 

Take  this  if  you  wish  to  be  a purely  fancy  name.  While  it  is  the  name  you  are 
to  know,  think  of  that  spirit  and  you  know  so  far  that  it  is  a genial  generous  spirit  that 
gives  you  what  you  desire,  and  as  such  you  recognize  this  spirit  as  the  ruler  of  the  idea 
of  "Acquisitio."  You  learn  also  the  sigil  of  Hismael.  You  do  not  know  the  meaning  of 
this,  or  why  it  is  employed.  Perhaps  you  never  will.  It  is  not  very  important.  You  will 
never  probably  know  the  origin  of  the  letter  J,'  but  this  does  not  prevent  you  knowing 
that  I'  is  the  initial  of  J ohn,  the  name  of 


31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


your  friend.  To  help  in  the  knowledge  and  recognition  of  the  Geomantic 
figures,  the  old  books  give  various  characteristics  describing  Hismael.  For  instance, 
as  noble  and  generous  and  affable;  a genial  and  handsome  man,  laughter-loving,  a 
great  lover  and  forgiver.  Descriptions  are  also  given  of  the  places  that  he  most 
frequents. 

Fruits,  plants  and  trees  are  so  especially  favoured  by  him,  precious  stones, 
animals,  birds  and  fishes  consonant  to  his  nature,  etc.  But  the  student  need  not  be 
concerned  with  those  at  present.  They  belong  to  more  advanced  parts  of  the  subject. 
The  chief  points  to  note  now  are  that  we  have  seen  the  lines  or  strokes  he  makes  are 
not  haphazard  and  meaningless  but  reveal  to  him  a certain  rhythm  and  that  rhythm  is 
the  expression  of  an  idea.  The  idea  is  the  answer  to  the  question  shown  him  by  the 
ruler  whose  name  and  sigil  also  he  knows  and  somewhat  of  his  character. 

Having  grasped  this  much  there  will  be  less  difficulty  in  comprehending  the 
meaning  of  the  Genii,  Angels,  Archangels,  etc. 

We  see  then  how  we  get  a certain  result  with  one  figure  resulting  from  four 
lines  of  strokes.  But  there  are  four  quarters  of  the  world,  and  four  elements.  We  must 
inquire  four  times  if  we  would  have  a reliable  answer.  So  it  is  necessary  to  make  16 
lines  of  strokes  resulting  in  four  figures.  But  the  principle  of  all  is  the  same.  We  have 
discovered  here  only  "Acquisitio."  Further  comments  must  be  reserved  for  a future 
paper. 


ASTROLOGY 

The  Knowledge  Lectures  contain  tid-bits  of  a variety  of  topics.  None  of  these 
do  more  than  scratch  the  surface.  This  is  admitted  by  Mathers  in  a paper  devoted  to 
describing  the  "least  amount  of  information  a student  needs  to  pass  the  necessary 
examinations."  After  awhile  the  astrological  material  - apart  from  naming  the 
planetary  and  zodiacal  symbols  and  their  attributions  to  the  Tree  of  Life  - was 
dropped  altogether.  If  not  in  the  Golden  Dawn,  at  least  a generation  later  in  the 
Stella  Matutina.  The  reason  for  this  deletion  was  a simple  one  - the  gradual 
appearance  of  some  very  well-written  books  on  Astrology.  At  the  time  the  Order  was 
founded,  there  was  a dearth  of  good  astrological  books,  so  the  Knowledge  Lectures 
were  needed  to  make  good  what  publishers  and  writers  had  failed  to  do.  Any  good 
catalogue  from  a reliable  occult  bookseller  will  reveal  nowdays  practically  hundreds 
of  titles  of  astrological  books.  Not  all  of  them  are  good  by  any  manner  or  means. 
Nonetheless,  a certain  number  are  outstanding. 

Though  I have  left  some  of  the  basic  astrological  material  intact  in  the 
Knowledge  Lectures,  I would  like  to  name  a few  good  textbooks  that  the  reader 
could  consult  to  considerable  advantage.  For  example,  there  are  the  two  books  by 
Grant  Lewi  - Astrology0  for  the  Millions  and  Heaven  Knows  What  (Llewellyn 
Publications).  A more  complete  and  comprehensive  textbook,  though  nowhere  as  well 
written  or  as  interesting,  is  the  A-Z  Horoscope  Maker  and  Delineator  by  Llewellyn 
George.  Perhaps  the  best  of  the  lot  is  a series  of  slim  volumes  covering  every  phase 
of  astrology  by  Noel  Tyl  (Llewellyn 


32 


VOLUME  TWO 


Publications).  There  is  also  a specializing  volume  on  one  particular  topic  that 
should  not  be  ignored  - Saturn  by  Liz  Greene  (Samuel  Weiser,  Inc.)  This  can 
certainly  supplant  the  skimpy  and  superficial  data  provided  by  the  Knowledge 
Lectures. 

However,  there  are  a couple  of  items  to  be  found  in  different  places  throughout 
the  Order  teaching  that  deserve  to  be  integrated  into  the  common  body  of  astrological 
knowledge  and  practice.  The  data  in  the  Tarot  material,  relating  to  starting  the 
Zodiac  from  the  star  Regulus  in  Leo,  said  to  make  the  signs  and  constellations 
coincide,  is  an  important  theoretical  concept  that  must  not  be  ignored.  It  makes  the 
system  similar  to  sidereal  rather  than  tropical  astrology  and  therefore  deserves  a new 
system  of  interpretation.  Furthermore,  there  is  an  isolated  paper  dealing  with  the 
Convolutions  of  the  Serpent  Formulae  around  the  North  Pole,  which  has  all  sorts  of 
hints  and  possibilities  that  only  a student  here  and  there  has  sensed,  to  the  best  of  my 
knowledge. 

ESOTERIC  ASTROLOGY 
By 

FRANCIS  KING 

Between  1908  and  1912  Mathers  issued  side  lectures  and  other  manuscripts  to 
those  Temples  that  were  loyal  to  him.  Much  of  this  additional  material  reached  the 
Stella  Matutina  (via  Brodie  Innes)  but  some  did  not  do  so. ..Some  of  these  later 
manuscripts  are  of  great  interest,  and  one  in  particular,  that  seems  to  have  been  issued 
to  Theorici  Adepti  Minores,  is  of  real  importance;  for  it  outlines  an  astrological 
system  that  differs  in  some  respects  from  both  the  normal  western  astrology  taught 
in  the  Golden  Dawn  and  its  offshoots,  to  members  of  the  Portal  Grade,  and  the 
sidereal  ("starry")  astrology  used  by  the  Hindus  and  a minority  of  modern  western 
astrologers. 

Therefore  I would  suggest  the  reader  consult  any  of  the  modern  textbooks  on 
sidereal  astrology  with  a view  to  gaining  some  insight  into  their  particular  kind  of 
interpretation.  (For  example  in  tropical  astrology  my  ascendant  is  about  0 degrees 
Scorpio.  By  Mathers  calculations  that  would  be  shifted  back  to  about  the  middle  of 
Libra.  And  I can  assure  the  reader  that  my  basic  characteristics  are  no  more  Libran 
than  the  man  in  the  moon.  I.R.). 

In  considering  this  'initiated  astrology'  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  signs 
of  the  Zodiac  in  popular  astrology  are  completely  out  of  step  with  the  constellations 
bearing  the  same  names.  The  situation  has  arisen  because  of  the  precession  of  the 
equinox  - the  fact  that  the  equinoctial  point  (i.e.  the  point  of  the  zodiac  at  which  the 
sun  lies  when  it  crosses  the  equator  on  March  21st  each  year)  moves  steadily  through 
the  zodiac  in  a reverse  direction  to  the  motion  of  the  planets.  In  spite  of  this  fact, 
tropical  astrologers  insist  on  calling  this  invisible,  moving  equinoctial  point  to  the  0 
degrees  of  Aries  although  it  is,  in  reality,  many  degrees  away  from  the  constellation 
of  that  name. 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


In  Mathers'  system  the  moving,  or  tropical,  zodiac  is  abandoned  in  favour  of  a 
fixed  sidereal  zodiac  in  which  the  signs  and  constellations  coincide  and  is  measured 
from  the  star  called  Regulus,  which  is  taken  as  being  in  0 degrees  Leo.  This  sidereal 
zodiac  requires  a correction  to  the  tropical  longitudes  given  in  all  ephemerides  (lists 
of  planetary  and  zodiacal  positions)  used  by  astrologers  - and  this  correction  varies 
each  year.  Mathers  supplied  a table  of  these  corrections  for  the  years  1800-1911.  As  it 
seems  likely  that  some  of  the  readers  of  this  book  will  have  astrological  interests  - a 
recent  poll  showed  that  no  less  than  twenty  percent  of  the  adult  population  of  England 
and  Wales  take  astrology  seriously  I think  it  worth  reproduction.  In  each  case 
Column  I indicated  the  year  and  Column  II  indicated  the  degrees  and  minutes  to  be 
subtracted  from  the  planetary  and  house  positions  as  calculated  from  an  ephemeris. 


Col  1 

Co 

II 

Col  I 

Co 

II 

Col  I 

Co 

II 

Col  I 

Co 

II 

180(1 

27 

04 

1828 

27 

27 

1856 

27 

51 

1884 

28 

13 

1801 

27 

05 

1829 

27 

28 

1857 

27 

52 

1885 

28 

14 

1802 

27 

06 

1830 

27 

29 

1858 

27 

53 

1886 

28 

15 

1803 

27 

07 

1831 

27 

30 

1859 

27 

53 

1887 

28 

15 

1804 

27 

08 

1832 

27 

31 

1860 

27 

54 

1888 

28 

16 

1805 

27 

08 

1833 

27 

31 

1861 

27 

55 

1889 

28 

17 

1806 

27 

09 

1834 

27 

32 

1862 

27 

56 

1890 

28 

18 

1807 

27 

10 

1835 

27 

33 

1863 

27 

56 

1891 

28 

19 

1808 

27 

11 

1836 

27 

34 

1864 

27 

57 

1892 

28 

20 

1809 

27 

12 

1837 

27 

35 

1865 

27 

58 

1893 

28 

21 

1810 

27 

12 

1838 

27 

36 

1866 

27 

59 

1894 

28 

22 

1811 

27 

13 

1839 

27 

37 

1867 

27 

59 

1895 

28 

23 

1812 

27 

14 

1840 

27 

37 

1868 

28 

00 

1896 

28 

24 

1813 

27 

15 

1841 

27 

38 

1869 

28 

01 

1897 

28 

25 

1814 

27 

16 

1842 

27 

39 

1870 

28 

01 

1898 

28 

26 

1815 

27 

17 

1843 

27 

40 

1871 

28 

02 

1899 

28 

27 

1816 

27 

18 

1844 

27 

41 

1872 

28 

03 

1900 

28 

28 

1817 

27 

19 

1845 

27 

42 

1873 

28 

04 

1901 

28 

29 

1818 

27 

19 

1846 

27 

43 

1874 

28 

05 

1902 

28 

30 

1819 

27 

20 

1847 

27 

44 

1875 

28 

06 

1903 

28 

31 

1820 

27 

21 

1848 

27 

44 

1876 

28 

06 

1904 

28 

32 

1821 

27 

22 

1849 

27 

45 

1877 

28 

07 

1905 

28 

32 

1822 

27 

23 

1850 

27 

46 

1878 

28 

08 

1906 

28 

33 

1823 

27 

23 

1851 

27 

47 

1879 

28 

09 

1907 

28 

34 

1824 

27 

24 

1852 

27 

48 

1880 

28 

10 

1908 

28 

35 

1825 

27 

25 

1853 

27 

49 

1881 

28 

11 

1909 

28 

36 

1826 

27 

26 

1854 

27 

50 

1882 

28 

11 

1910 

28 

37 

1827 

27 

27 

1855 

27 

50 

1883 

28 

12 

1911 

28 

37 

This  is  the  end  of  the  quotation  from  Mr.  King's  use  of  McGregor  Mathers' 
segment  on  Esoteric  Astrology.  The  dates  end  at  the  year  of  1911,  but  I would  gather 
one  could  proceed  from  that  date  to  the  present  following  more  or  less  the  same 
procedure.  Anyway  the  student  versed  in  sidereal  astrology  should  have  no  difficulty 
in  dealing  with  this  schema.  The  tropical  astrologer  likewise  ought  to  be  able  to  use 
the  above  data  to  his  advantage  and  bring  it  up  to  date. 


34 


VOLUME  TWO 


INTRODUCTORY  PAPER  ON  THE  TATTWAS 
By 

G.H.  FRATER  SUB  SPE 


Red  Triangle 
TEJAS  — FIRE 


Black  Egg 

AKASA  — SPIRIT 


Silver  Crescent 
APAS  — WATER 


THE  TATTWAS 

I.  What  the  Tattwas  are. 

The  conditions  which  make  all  life  possible  on  the  earth,  whether  human, 
animal  or  vegetable,  are  derived  from  the  Sun:  e.g.,  light,  heat,  electricity, 
magnetism  etc.  This  is  termed  "the  life  of  the  Sun'  or  "Solar  Prana'.  The  Solar  Prana  is 
communicated  to  the  earth  in  waves  of  vibration  through  the  ether.  These  waves  are  of 
widely  varying  lengths  and  rates  of  motion  but  they  are  all  traversing  the  ether  at  the 
same  time,  forming  a very  complicated  system. 

The  student  should  endeavour  to  familiarize  himself  with  this  conception.  He 
will  find  a useful  illustration  in  the  sounds  of  a great  orchestra:  all  the  sound  waves, 
from  the  long  slow  heavy  ones  of  the  bassoon,  to  the  short  high  rapid  notes  of  the  fife 
or  piccolo  --  are  all  passing  at  the  same  time  to  the  ear,  yet  the  sensitive  ear  can  pick 
out  and  follow  the  waves  of  sound  proceeding  from  each  instrument.  Another 
illustration  is  found  in  the  waves  of  colour  proceeding  from  a landscape;  the  heavy 
long  red  waves  and  all  the  gamut  of  colour  up  the  shortest  and  most  rapid  blues  are 
traversing  the  luminiferous  ether  at  the  same  time  yet  the  eye  can  pick  out  each  one 
without  trouble. 

The  same  idea  can  be  visualized  by  considering  the  waves  of  the  sea:  the  long 
heavy  rollers  pass  along,  and  on  their  surface  we  can  see  multitudes  of  small,  short 
and  rapid  waves,  passing  simultaneously  in  the  same  direction.  Now  just  as  the  notes 
of  a musical  scale  are  divided  into  seven  distinct  tones,  each  representing  a certain 
number  of  aerial 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


vibrations  per  second;  and  just  as  the  vibrations  of  the  luminiferous  ether  are 
divided  into  the  seven  colours  of  the  spectrum  --  so  the  vibrations  of  the  Solar  Prana 
are  divided  into  seven  groups,  groups  which  are  determined  by  their  wave  lengths  and 
frequencies.  Two  of  these  groups  are  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper,  but  the 
remaining  five  will  be  briefly  explained. 

The  Solar  Pranas  will  be  best  understood  by  considering  their  effects  on 
visible  and  tangible  matter,  and  should  always  be  called  by  their  Sanscrit  names, 
which  having  no  other  connotation,  will  be  less  liable  to  confusion. 

Consider  then  first  the  process  by  which  the  Mulaprakriti  or  'world  stuff  is 
moulded  into  a planet.  At  first  it  is  inert,  at  rest  as  it  were,  a formless  cloud  of  finely 
distributed  matter  having  in  itself  only  the  potential  of  form  and  substance;  this  is  the 
condition  known  as  AKASA.  Then  motion  begins,  the  mass  is  whirled  into  a spherical 
form  and  becomes  a nebula.  This  condition  is  called  VAYU. 

Now  imagine  the  infinitesimally  small  particles,  whirled  around  and 
continually  colliding  with  each  other,  gradually  growing  hot  and  incandescent,  until 
the  nebula  becomes  a fiery  mass.  This  condition  is  called  TEJAS.  Gradually  it  cools 
but  remains  fluid;  this  condition  is  called  APAS.  Further,  as  time  goes  on,  the  fluid 
mass  solidifies  and  becomes  a globe  or  planet.  In  this  condition  it  is  termed 
PRITHIVI. 

These  names  should  be  accurately  learned  and  associated  with  the  conditions 
to  which  they  refer.  It  will  be  seen  that  they  correspond  with  fair  accuracy  to  those 
states  of  energy  --matter  which  are  commonly  called  the  four  elements.  Thus  Vayu  has 
qualities  of  Air,  Tejas  of  Fire.  Apas  of  Water  and  Prithivi  of  Earth.  But  as  these 
words  are  limited  in  common  speech,  it  is  not  advisable  to  use  them  in  speaking  or 
thinking  of  the  Tattwas.  Akasa  in  this  connection  would  represent  the  negative  or 
passive  condition  of  rest.  Another  useful  illustration  may  be  found  by  considering  the 
operation  of  the  Tattwas  in  reverse  order:  as  in  the  familiar  chemical  compound  known 
as  H"0,  recognized  in  its  fluid  form  as  water.  If  this  be  subjected  to  refrigeration  it 
becomes  solid,  called  in  the  terminology  of  the  elements,  Prithivi  --  or  'Earth'.  This 
state  results  from  the  action  of  Prithivi  on  H'O.  Now  suppose  heat  is  applied:  the 
chunk  of  ice  melts  and  the  substance  returns  to  its  elemental  state  --Water.  It  is  now 
under  the  Tattwa  of  Apas.  Continue  to  increase  the  heat  under  the  Tattwa  of  Tejas  and 
the  water  becomes  steam,  or  vapour  and  is  thus  under  the  Tattwa  of  Vayu.  The  Steam 
diffuses,  it  enters  the  Tattwa  condition  of  Akasa,  with  the  potential  of  condensing 
and  returning  to  earth  as  rain. 

From  these  illustrations  the  student  should  be  able  to  gain  a clear  conception 
of  the  nature  of  the  Tattwas,  regarding  them  always  as  more  or  less  arbitrary 
divisions  of  the  Solar  Prana. 


36 


VOLUME  TWO 


II.  The  Symbols  of  the  Tattwas. 

It  has  been  found  convenient  to  denote  each  Tattwa  by  a conventional  symbol 
--specialized  as  to  figure,  form  and  colour.  These  symbols  are  not  arbitrarily  selected, 
but  are  derived  from  the  form  of  the  wave,  its  frequency  and  its  formative  effect  on 
the  etheric  substance.  This,  however,  is  so  complex  and  difficult  an  investigation 
that  the  student  is  advised  to  defer  its  consideration  for  the  present,  and  consider  the 
symbols  as  being  merely  conventional  forms  sufficiently  appropriate  to  make  them 
easy  to  remember.  Thus  the  Akasa  is  symbolized  by  an  egg-shaped  figure  in  dark 
purple  or  indigo.  An  egg  as  the  root  and  origin  of  life  is  manifestly  appropriate  as  a 
symbol  of  life  --  the  latency  of  the  life  force,  the  force  within  the  egg  before  it  is 
stimulated  into  overt  activity;  and  purple  is  eminently  a colour  of  rest. 

Vayu  is  symbolized  by  a circle  of  clear  blue,  the  air  being  obviously  a sphere 
of  blue  colour.  There  is  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  correct  shade  of  blue, 
which  varies  with  different  persons:  the  best  rule  is  to  try  and  reproduce  the  deepest 
and  most  beautiful  sky  blue  the  student  has  ever  seen.  If  he  has  been  in  the  East  or  on 
the  Mediterranean,  he  will  see  Vayu  a darker,  deeper  shade  than  if  he  has  never  been 
out  of  the  northern  latitudes. 

Tejas  is  symbolized  by  a triangle  of  flame  red,  the  shape  and  colour  being  both 
obviously  appropriate.  Apas  is  symbolized  by  a crescent  in  silver,  alluding  to  the  Moon 
as  ruler  of  the  waters,  and  their  silvery  colour  when  not  reflecting  the  sky  or  any 
earthly  object.  Prithivi  is  symbolized  by  a square  form  of  a yellow  colour,  the  stability 
of  earth  being  denoted  by  the  square  or  cube;  since  the  perfect  form  of  earth 
according  to  the  alchemists  is  gold,  the  colour  yellow  is  appropriate. 

The  student  should  now  thoroughly  acquaint  himself  with  these  forms  and 
endeavour  to  imagine  or  visualize  them  in  connection  with  the  manifestation  of  the 
appropriate  elemental  state.  Thus  when  the  shades  of  night  are  descending  and  he  is 
sinking  to  sleep,  let  him  imagine  a vast  egg-shaped  cloud  of  deep  purple  light  closing 
round  and  enveloping  him  in  warm  mysterious  darkness,  the  home  of  dreams. 
Whenever  he  looks  on  the  sky,  or  on  the  distant  hills,  tinted  to  soft  shades  in  the  blue 
air,  let  him  imagine  the  blue  sphere  of  Vayu  floating  colossal  in  size  before  his  eyes; 
through  this  see  the  landscape. 

So  again  if  he  looks  on  any  fire,  whether  it  be  the  fire  on  the  domestic  hearth,  a 
furnace,  a bonfire,  or  a volcano  in  eruption,  let  him  imagine  the  vast  red  triangle  of 
Tejas  before  his  eyes.  Again  looking  on  any  water:  the  sea,  a river,  lake,  or  even  the 
water  in  his  own  hand  basin,  let  him  train  himself  to  see  the  silver  crescent  with  the 
points  turned  upward.  Over  anything  hard  and  solid  let  him  see  the  yellow  cube  of 
Prithivi,  imagining  that  if  the  visualized  symbol  were  in  solid  form  it  would  be  like 
pure  gold. 

When  this  exercise  has  been  practiced  till  some  degree  of  perfection  is  reached, 
it  can  be  benefical  to  reverse  the  process  thus:  take  a lump  of  ice  and  put  it  in  a heavy 
saucepan.  It  should  now  need  no  effort  to  see  over  it  a yellow  cube  or  square.  Now 
bring  the  pan  near  a 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


fire;  when  the  surface  of  the  ice  begins  to  melt  and  water  pours  down  its  sides 
imagine  the  silver  crescent  appearing  gradually  on  the  yellow  square,  occupying  about 
one  quarter  of  its  area.  Make  this  grow  brighter  and  clearer  as  the  ice  becomes  liquid; 
then  when  the  block  is  nearly  melted  imagine  the  silver  crescent  increasing  in  size 
and  gradually  replacing  the  yellow  square  altogether,  so  that  when  the  ice  has 
liquified  the  crescent  alone  remains. 

Now  put  the  saucepan  on  the  fire,  and  watch  the  water  growing  hot.  As  it  does 
so  imagine  the  red  triangle  of  Tejas  forming  itself  on  the  crescent,  just  as  the  crescent 
did  on  the  square,  until  when  the  water  boils,  the  red  triangle  will  have  replaced  the 
crescent.  As  the  steam  rises  and  floats  into  the  air  the  student  should  similarly  see 
the  red  triangle  becoming  charged  with  the  blue  circle;  this  should  increase  in  size 
and  overshadow  the  triangle  entirely  as  the  water  is  changed  into  steam.  Then  as  the 
steam  cloud  disperses  and  becomes  mere  latent  moisture  in  the  air,  the  blue  circle 
should  merge  into  the  purple  egg  of  Akasa.  This  exercise  will  familiarize  the  student 
with  the  idea  of  the  Tattwa  symbols,  charged  with  what  are  known  as  their 
subtattwas. 

At  this  stage  it  will  be  useful  for  him  to  make  a series  of  cards  with  the  Tattwa 
symbols.  These  should  be  about  the  size  and  proportion  of  playing  cards.  The  length 
of  the  symbol  should  not  be  more  than  one  half  the  maximum  length  of  the  card:  i.e., 
if  the  card  is  four  inches  long,  the  symbol  should  be  two  inches,  leaving  an  inch 
above  and  an  inch  below  it.  The  symbols  should  be  exactly  and  carefully  cut  in 
coloured  paper  or  painted,  the  proportions  true,  and  the  edges  smooth.  The  cards 
should  be  kept  scrupulously  clean.  The  student  should  now  train  himself  when 
looking  at  the  cards  to  recall  some  form  of  the  element  to  which  each  is  attributed: 
thus  a calm  sea  with  Apas,  a rough  windy  sea  with  Apas  charged  with  Vayu,  a boiling 
spring  with  Apas  charged  with  Tejas,  etc. 

Gradually  he  will  find  the  symbol  and  the  element  belonging  to  that  symbol 
linked  so  closely  together  in  his  mind  that  one  involuntarily  recalls  the  other:  for 
instance  the  mere  thinking  of  Tejas  will  make  him  feel  warm  on  a cold  day. 

III.  Of  the  Swara  and  the  Breaths. 

Swara  is  the  Spirit,  the  Soul  of  the  Universe.  Or  as  it  is  said  in  the  Sanscrit 
work  on  the  science  of  breath:  'It  is  the  manifestation  of  the  impression  on  matter  of 
that  power  which  knows  itself.  Therefore  it  is  called  the  Great  Breath.  Now  breath  is 
dual:  out  breathing  and  inbreathing.  In  the  East  the  technical  symbol  of  out  breathing 
is  'SA',  and  the  point  of  rest  between  the  two  is  'HAM',  whence  the  word  HAMSA, 
which  is  taken  to  mean  God  and  which  is  a symbolic  representation  of  the  two 
eternal  processess. 

Now  as  Swara  is  the  Soul  of  the  Universe,  it  follows  that  everything  that  has 
life  must  partake  of  the  nature  of  Swara:  we  expect  to  find  positive  and  negative 
action  in  the  Solar  Prana,  of  which  the  Tattwas  are  modifications.  Moreover  in 
physical  matter  prepared  for  the  reception  of  life  --  as  an  egg  — we  expect  to  find  a 
center  capable  of  manifesting  the  two  forms  of  the  life  current.  Thus  in  an  egg,  during 
incubation,  we  find  the  formation  of  two  centers;  from  these  eventually  develop  the 
brain-nerve  system,  and  the  heart-blood  system; 


38 


VOLUME  TWO 


each  of  these  has  a double  function  as  it  develops.  So  also  is  it  with  man,  and 
with  every  created  thing  that  has  life,  and  even  with  the  world  itself. 

The  Solar  Prana  comes  either  direct  from  the  Sun  to  Earth,  or  is  reflected 
from  the  Moon.  The  former  is  said  to  be  positive,  the  latter  negative.  Therefore 
when  under  the  influence  of  Swara,  the  Solar  Prana  is  positive  and  the  technical  name 
is  Sun  Breath;  when  it  is  negative  it  is  called  Moon  Breath.  The  student  is  advised  for 
the  present  to  regard  these  merely  as  technical  terms,  and  not  to  attempt  to  trace  the 
analogies  farther;  the  subject  is  very  complex. 

The  Moon  Breath  manifested  through  the  Solar  Prana  is  termed  IDA  and  the 
Sun  Breath  is  called  PINGALA;  the  neutral  point  of  rest  between  the  two  is 
SUSUMNA.  Now  Ida  manifests  especially  in  the  nerves  on  the  left  side  of  the  body, 
Pingala  in  those  on  the  right  and  Susumna  in  the  central  column.  Hence  it  is  said  that 
when  the  Solar  Prana  is  in  Ida,  if  the  breath  be  drawn  in  with  a quick  inspiration  it  is 
felt  chiefly  in  the  left  nostril,  and  if  in  Pingala  in  the  right. 

The  student  is  advised  not  to  put  too  much  store  in  such  experiments  at  first 
for:  (1)  the  slightest  cold  in  the  head  will  often  prevent  or  alter  the  sensations;  (2) 
many  illnesses,  it  is  said,  bring  the  breath  to  the  wrong  side;  (3)  the  breath  can  be 
altered  at  will  so  as  to  be  perceptible  on  one  side  or  the  other,  as  is  done  in  certain 
magical  processes.  It  should  also  be  understood  that  the  so-called  change  of  breath 
from  one  side  to  the  other  is  more  a matter  of  sensation  arising  from  the 
functioning  of  the  nerves,  than  an  actual  flowing  of  material  air;  of  all  this  more 
will  be  said  hereafter. 

Now  the  course  of  the  breaths  in  the  Solar  Prana  can  be  calculated  so  that  it  is 
possible  to  know  exactly  what  breath  is  in  action  at  any  moment  of  the  day  or  night. 
This  is  judged  by  the  Moon.  As  is  well  known,  the  Moon  increases  during  a 
fortnight,  called  the  Bright  Fortnight.  The  Bright  Fortnight  begins  from  sunrise  after 
the  new  Moon.  Observe  --  this  must  be  exact.  Thus  if  the  Sun  rises  at  6 o'clock  on  a 
particular  morning  and  the  new  Moon  at  6:30,  the  Bright  Fortnight  will  begin  on  the 
following  day  at  sunrise.  The  Solar  Prana  is  then  in  Ida,  and  the  breath  will  be  in  the 
left  nostril  for  the  space  of  two  hours  (called  in  Sanscrit  one  "Ghari');  then  the  breath 
will  change  to  Pingala,  and  be  in  the  right  nostril  for  another  two  hours.  Alternating 
throughout  the  whole  twenty-four  hours,  it  passes  through  twelve  Gharis  in  the 
course  of  a day  and  night. 

Between  each  Ghari  occurs  Susumna  which  lasts  for  about  twenty  minutes, 
the  transition  period,  i.e.,  ten  minutes  during  which  the  breath  is  passing  from  the 
side  which  was  active  to  the  central  position,  where  it  is  in  both  nostrils  equally, 
and  ten  minutes  getting  fully  developed  in  the  other  nostril,  with  a very  brief  interval 
when  it  is  exactly  equal  in  both. 

This  continues  for  three  days,  changing  on  the  fourth  day.  On  the  first  Ghari 
after  sunrise  on  the  fourth  day  the  Solar  Prana  is  in  Pingala,  and  the  breath  in  the 
right  nostril.  On  the  second  Ghari  it  changes  to  Ida,  and  so  on  for  three  days.  On  the 
seventh  day  it  changes  again  back  to  Ida,  for  the  first  Ghari.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  the 
third  twenty-four  hours  will  end  with  Pingala  and  the  fourth  will  begin  with  the 
same.  The  sixth  will  end  with  Ida  and 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  seventh  begin  with  the  same.  Moreover  owing  to  the  increase  or  decrease 
of  daylight  hours  the  periods  of  twenty-four  hours  will  not  be  exact.  This  course  is 
continued  until  the  full  Moon. 

At  the  time  of  the  first  sunrise  after  the  full  Moon,  i.e.,  the  beginning  of  the 
Dark  Fortnight  --  the  Solar  Prana  is  in  Pingala,  whether  the  preceding  term  of  three 
days  has  been  completed  or  not;  and  the  same  process  is  gone  through  again  until  the 
following  new  Moon.  Now  during  each  Ghari  the  five  Tattwas  come  successively  into 
operation  beginning  with  Akasa.  Each  therefore  will  be  of  about  twenty  minutes 
duration.  Thus  suppose  the  sun  rises  at  8 o'clock,  Akasa  will  be  current  till  8:20,  Vayu 
from  8:20  to  8:40,  Tejas  from  8:40  to  9:00  and  so  on.  During  Ida  the  Tattwas  will  be 
of  a negative  character,  and  during  Pingala  positive. 

Moreover  each  Tattwa  is  divided  into  five  Subtattwas,  the  course  of  which  is 
commenced  by  a Subtattwa  of  its  own  nature.  Thus  Vayu  commences  with  Vayu 
charged  with  Vayu  that  is  the  simple  Tattwa  which  lasts  for  four  minutes  and  is 
followed  by  Vayu  charged  with  Tejas,  then  Vayu  with  Apas  and  so  on.  The  last  is 
Vayu-Akasa  followed  by  Tejas  charged  with  Tejas,  Tejas  charged  with  Apas  etc. 
These  of  course  are  symbolized  by  the  cards  the  student  has  already  prepared.  It 
will  be  seen  that  the  Tattwa  or  breath  in  operation  at  any  moment  of  the  day  or 
night,  of  any  day  in  the  year,  can  be  instantly  and  easily  calculated. 

An  adept  who  is  in  perfect  health  and  has  sufficiently  trained  his  faculties  can 
discover  without  calculation  which  Tattwa  is  in  operation  by  various  simple 
methods.  One  of  these  is  to  place  five  small  balls  or  marbles,  painted  with  the 
Tattwa  colours,  in  his  pocket  and  draw  out  one  haphazard;  this  ball  should  be  of  the 
colour  of  the  Tattwa  in  operation.  Another  method  is  to  close  the  eyes  and 
endeavour  to  see  a colour;  the  first  that  comes  to  the  mind  should  be  that  of  the 
ruling  Tattwa. 

As  has  been  said  this  depends  on  perfect  health,  and  also  training:  the  student 
must  not  expect  to  attain  success  until  after  considerable  practice.  When  he  has 
practiced  for  some  time  he  will  also  find  that  he  can  perceive  the  physical  effects  of 
the  Tattwas  at  the  time  when  they  are  in  operation.  Thus  when  Vayu  functions  he 
may  expect  a certain  feeling  of  restlessness,  in  Tejas  warmth  and  energy,  in  Apas  a 
cold  phlegmatic  sensation  and  in  Prithivi  steadiness  and  solid  strength.  These 
feelings  will  be  very  slight  and  at  first,  only  barely  perceptible,  but  with  time  and 
practice  they  will  become  more  distinct,  and  may  be  very  useful  in  determining 
when  to  perform  certain  actions.  If  a man  is  making  a call  and  has  no  reason 
whatever  for  leaving  at  one  time  or  another  he  is  almost  certain  to  go  as  soon  as  Vayu 
is  well  established. 

It  will  follow  that  if  he  desires  to  do  something  demanding  energy,  he  had  better 
wait  till  the  Tejas  Tattwa,  or  the  Sun  Breath  is  in  operation;  if  a material  business 
is  to  be  commenced  it  will  probably  be  best  done  under  the  Prithivi  Tattwa.  So 
again  a work  of  imagination  or  any  negative  or  receptive  undertaking  will  prosper 
most  under  Ida,  the  Moon  Breath. 


40 


VOLUME  TWO 


By  making  a chart  of  the  Breaths,  Tattwas,  and  Subtattwas  through  each  day 
for  some  time,  and  carefully  trying  to  notice  their  effect  in  himself,  the  student  may 
in  short  time  attain  to  a very  competent  knowledge  of  the  subject,  and  acquire  a 
perception  of  the  course  of  the  Solar  Prana  which  will  be  of  great  assistance  to  him 
in  his  future  work.  But  let  him  beware  of  prematurely  trying  to  test  the  existence  of 
the  Tattwas  by  experimenting  to  see  if  he  can  feel  them;  in  so  doing  he  starts  with  a 
suggestion  to  himself  that  they  do  not  exist.  This  will  infallibly  blunt  the  very 
delicate  instrument  of  his  sensation,  and  cause  the  failure  of  his  efforts,  as  well  as 
loss  and  damage  to  his  powers. 

THE  TATTWAS  OF  THE  EASTERN  SCHOOL 
Index 

General  Observations 
The  Swara  in  the  Body 
Course  of  the  Breath 
Course  of  the  Tattwas 
The  Ida 
The  Pingala 
The  Sushumna 
Note 

The  Tattwas 
Test  of  the  Tattwas 

Actions  suitable  to  the  several  Tattwas 
Meditation  and  Mastery  of  the  Tattwas 
Cure  of  Disease 
Forecasts 
Wrong  Swara 

(N.B.  This  document  is  labelled  August  1894,  and  was  originally  issued  to 
F.L.  Gardner,  Frater  De  Profundis  ad  Lucem.  It  was  supposed  to  have  been  circulated 
in  the  Outer  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  to  the  initiate  of  the  Philosophus  grade. 
From  the  Golden  Dawn,  it  passed  after  the  Revolt  to  almost  every  other  Order 
founded  on  its  ruins.  Some  have  thought  it  to  be  opposed  in  principle  to  the 
Western  Tradition  espoused  by  the  Order,  though  the  basis  for  the  so-called  Skrying 
in  the  Spirit  Vision  was  firmly  established  in  this  Eastern  System. 

Those  who  know  something  of  early  Theosophical  literature  will  have 
perceived  that  it  is  either  a precis  of  or  an  extrapolation  from  Rama  Prasad's  most 
interesting  and  informative 

book  Nature's  Finer  Forces.  Reading  this  book  is  a m ust.  I fancy  that  at 
this  point  in  time,  it 

is  out  of  print.  A photographic  edition  has  been  published  by  Health 
Research  of  Mokelumne  Hill  in  California,  making  it  readily  available. 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Some  have  been  inclined  to  the  belief  that  this  original  book  is  highly  complicated  — 
though  it  is  no  more  so  than  the  Qabalah,  for  example.  However,  there  is  an  interesting  and 
most  useful  simplified  approach  to  the  whole  topic  of  the  Tattwas  in  The  Law  of  the  Rhythmic 
Breath  by  Ella  Adelia  Fletcher  (R.F.  Fenno  & Co.,  N.Y.  1908),  dedicated  to  Rama  Prasad.  I do 
not  know  if  this  book  is  still  in  print,  though  used  copies  may  still  be  available.  If  a sufficient 
demand  is  created,  I fancy  that  Health  Research  might  be  persuaded  to  bring  out  a photographic 
edition  of  this  too.  I.R.) 

General  Observation 

There  are  five  Tattwas  or  Principles: 

1.  Akasa  - Ether. 

2.  Vayu  --  the  Aerial  principle. 

3.  Tejas  - the  Principle  of  Light  and  Heat. 

4.  Apas  - Watery  Principle. 

5.  Prithivi  — the  Earthy  Principle. 

But  the  first  Cause  of  these  is  the  Great  Controller  of  all  things,  the  One  Light,  the 
Formless.  From  Him  first  came  into  appearance  Ether;  thence  the  Air,  the  motion  producing 
Ether  waves  which  causes  Light  and  Heat,  and  so  on  in  the  above  order. 

The  Yogi  comes  to  know  the  principle  of  these  five  Tattwas,  their  Sukshma  Sharira,  but 
how?  Further  on  you  will  see  how.  The  Astrologer  who  has  no  knowledge  of  the  Swara  is  as 
worthless  as  a man  without  a wife.  It  is  the  soul  itself;  it  is  the  Swara,  the  Great  Controller  of 
all,  who  creates,  preserves,  and  destroys,  and  causes  whatsoever  is  in  this  World.  Experience 
and  Tradition  both  say  no  knowledge  is  more  precious  than  this  knowledge  of  the  Swara.  None 
else  lays  bare  the  workings  of  the  machinery  of  this  world,  or  the  secret  workings  of  this  world. 

By  the  power  of  Swara  may  be  destroyed  an  enemy.  Power,  wealth,  and  pleasure,  all 
these  can  be  commanded  by  Swara.  The  beginner  in  our  Science  must  be  pure  and  calm  in  mind 
and  in  thought,  virtuous  in  actions,  and  having  unmixed  faith  in  his  spiritual  teacher.  He  must 
be  strong  in  his  determination,  and  grateful. 

Swara  in  the  Body.  Ten  manifestations  of  this  Swara  are  in  the  body.  But  before  the 
Neophyte  is  told  this,  he  must  gain  a thorough  knowledge  of  the  nervous  system.  This  is  very 
important,  and  according  to  his  knowledge  of  this  science,  the  Neophyte  gains  success.  To  give 
a rough  outline  of  the  parts  we  have  chiefly  to  deal  with  in  our  endeavour  to  explain  the 
elementary  treatise.  There  are  ten  principal  nerves,  this  includes  the  tubes,  etc.  It  is  in  the  ten 
manifestations  of  Swara  that  the  ten  so-called  Vayus  move.  We  mean  by  this  ten  forces  which 
perform  ten  different  functions.  The  three  most  important  nerves  are  the  following,  as  the 
beginner  has  only  to  deal  with  these: 


42 


VOLUME  TWO 


1.  Ida,  the  left  bronchus. 

2.  Pingala,  the  right  bronchus. 

3.  Sushumna,  in  the  middle. 

The  ten  Vayus  are: 

1.  Prana,  in  the  breast. 

2.  Apana,  about  the  excretory  organs. 

3.  Samana,  in  the  navel. 

4.  Udana,  middle  of  the  throat. 

5.  Vyana,  pervading  the  whole  body. 

6.  Kurmana,  the  eyes,  helping  them  open. 

7.  Kirkala,  in  the  stomach,  producing  hunger. 

8.  Nag,  whence  comes  vomiting. 

9.  Devadatta,  causes  yawning. 

10.  Dhananjaya,  that  which  doth  not  leave  the  body  after  death. 

These  ten  Vayus,  or  forces,  have  their  play  in  the  ten  principal  nerves,  not  one  in  each. 
They  are  the  regulators  of  the  body  of  man.  If  they  go  on  working  properly,  a man  remains 
perfectly  healthy;  if  not,  different  kinds  of  diseases  spring  up. 

A Yogi  keeps  them  always  working,  and  consequently  diseases  never  come  to  him.  The 
key  to  all  these  nerves  lies  in  the  working  of  the  Prana  Vayu,  or  vital  principle  drawing  the  air 
through  the  Ida,  the  Pingala,  and  the  Sushumna.  When  the  Air  is  drawn  through  the  Ida  it  is  felt 
coming  out  or  going  in  through  the  left  nostril.  When  through  the  Pingala,  in  the  right  nostril. 
When  through  the  Sushumna  it  is  felt  through  both  nostrils  simultaneously.  The  air  is  drawn  or 
felt  through  either  or  both  of  the  nostrils  at  certain  appointed  times.  Whenever  in  any  given 
time,  the  Breath  goes  in  and  comes  out  of  the  wrong  nostril  it  is  a sure  sign  some  sort  of  disease 
is  coming  on. 

The  Ida  is  sometimes  called  the  Chandra  Nadi,  or  the  Moon  Nerve.  The  Pingala,  the 
Surya  Nadi  or  Sun  nerve.  These  are  called,  the  former,  the  Chandra  Swara  and  the  latter  the 
Surya  Swara. 

The  reason  is  that  when  the  breath  is  in  the  Ida  it  gives  coolness  to  the  body,  and  that 
when  in  the  Pingala  it  gives  heat  to  the  body.  The  Ancient  Magi  used  to  say  the  place  of  the 
Moon  in  the  human  body  was  in  Ida,  and  the  Sun  in  Pingala. 

The  Course  of  the  Breath.  The  Lunar  month,  it  is  well  known,  is  divided  into  two  parts, 
the  fortnight  of  the  Waxing  and  the  fortnight  of  the  Waning.  On  the  first  fortnight,  or  the  Bright 
Fortnight,  just  at  Sunrise  of  the  first  day  the  Breath  must  come  into  the  left  nostril  and  must  be 
so  for  the  three  succeeding  days,  when  again  the  7th  day  must  begin  with  the  Moon  breath,  and 
so  on  in  the  same  order.  Thus  we  have  said  that  such  and  such  days  begin  with  such  and  such 
breath. 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


But  how  long  is  our  breath  to  remain  in  one  nostril?  For  five  Gharis,  or  2 hours. 
Thus  when  the  first  day  of  the  Bright  fortnight  begins  with  the  Moon  Breath,  after  five  Gharis, 
the  Sun  Breath  must  set  in,  and  this  again  must  change  into  the  Moon  Breath  after  the  same 
interval  of  time.  So  on  for  every  day. 

Again,  the  first  day  of  the  dark  fortnight  must  begin  with  the  Sun  Breath,  and  proceed  in 
the  same  way,  changing  after  five  Gharis  and  the  three  succeeding  days.  It  will  be  seen  that  all 
the  days  of  the  month  have  been  divided  into  the  Ida  and  the  Pingala.  In  the  Sushumna,  the 
Swara  flows  only  when  it  changes,  either  in  its  natural  course  or  in  certain  other  conditions  to 
be  afterwards  mentioned.  This  is  the  course  of  Nature.  But  a Yogi  commands  Nature.  He  turns 
everything  into  his  own  way.  Rules  for  this  will  be  given  in  the  proper  place.  (Coloured 
illustrations  of  the  tattwas  will  be  found  in  the  colour  plate  section  of  this  book). 

COURSE  OF  THE  TATT  WAS 

For  five  Gharis,  as  we  have  above  said,  the  breath  flows  through  our  nostrils.  In 
these  5 Gharis,  or  two  hours  periods,  the  Tattwas  have  their  course.  In  the  first  we  have  Akasa, 
in  the  second  Vayu,  in  the  third  Tejas,  in  the  fourth  Apas,  in  the  fifth  Prithivi.  Thus  in  one  night 
and  day,  or  60  Gharis,  we  have  twelve  courses  of  these  5 Tattwas,  each  remaining  one  Ghari 
and  returning  again  in  two  hours.  There  are  again  further  five  subdivisions  of  each  Tattwa  in  a 
Ghari.  Thus,  Akasa  is  subdivided  into  Akas-Akasa;  Akas-Vayu;  Akas-Tejas;  Akas-Apas;  Akas- 
Prithivi  and  similarly  with  the  other  four. 

How  to  know  which  of  the  Tattwas  is  at  a certain  time  in  course,  not  merely  by  a 
mathematical  calculation  but  with  the  certainty  of  an  eye  witness,  is  of  the  greatest  importance 
in  the  practical  part  of  this  science.  We  shall  come  to  it  further  on. 

The  Ida.  When  the  Breath  is  in  Ida,  that  is  in  the  left  Nostril,  then  only  is  it  well  to 
perform  the  following  actions.  Stable  works  such  as  erecting  a building,  or  the  construction  of  a 
well  or  tank,  going  on  a distant  journey,  entering  a new  house,  collection  of  things,  giving  gifts, 
marriage,  making  jewels  or  clothes,  taking  medicines  and  tonics,  seeing  a superior  or  master  for 
any  purpose  of  trade,  amassing  of  wealth,  sowing  of  seed  in  a field,  negotiations, 
commencement  of  trade,  seeing  of  friends,  works  of  charity  and  faith,  going  home,  buying  of 
animals,  doing  work  for  the  benefit  of  others,  placing  money  on  security,  singing,  dancing, 
taking  up  abode  in  any  village  or  city,  drinking  or  making  water  at  the  time  of  sorrow,  pain, 
fever,  etc.  All  these  acts  should  be  done  when  the  Swara  is  in  Ida.  It  must  however  be  kept  in 
mind  that  the  Tattwas  Vayu  and  Tejas  are  to  be  excluded  from  these  actions,  likewise  Akasa. 

During  the  Tattwas  Prithivi  and  Apas  only,  are  these  actions  to  be  done.  In  a 
fever,  the  Yogi  keeps  his  Chandra  Swara  going,  and  brings  the  Apas  or  Water  Tattwa  in  course, 
so  the  fever  is  all  over  in  a very  short  time.  How  mastery  is  gained  over  the  Tattwas  will  come 
further  on. 

The  Pingala.  In  the  Surya  Swara  only,  are  the  following  actions  to  be  done. 
Reading  and  teaching  hard  and  difficult  subjects  of  knowledge,  sexual  intercourse,  shipping, 
hunting, 


44 


VOLUME  TWO 


mounting  a hill  or  fort,  riding  a donkey,  camel  or  horse,  swimming  over  a powerful 
stream  or  river,  writing,  painting,  buying  and  selling,  fighting  with  swords  or  hands,  seeing  a 
king,  bathing,  eating,  shaving,  bleeding,  sleeping,  suchlike.  All  these  secure  success  and  health, 
as  the  case  may  be,  if  done  in  the  Surya  Swara. 

The  Sushumna.  When  the  Breath  comes  not  out  of  both  nostrils  at  the  same  time,  it  is 
flowing  in  the  Sushumna.  Nothing  ought  to  be  done  under  these  conditions,  for  everything 
turns  out  badly.  The  same  is  the  case  when  the  Breath  is  now  in  one  and  now  in  the  other 
nostril.  When  this  is  the  case,  sit  down  and  meditate  upon  or  over  the  Sacred  Hansa.  This 
joining  of  the  Breath  is  the  only  time  for  Sandha,  meditation. 

NOTE:  Zanoni  secured  success  in  gaming  for  Cetosa  and  overcame  the  effects  of  the 
poisoned  wine  of  the  Prince  di  D.  as  follows.  In  the  first  place,  he  changed  his  breath  to  the 
right  nostril,  and  threw  an  envelope  of  the  Akasa  Tattwa  over  his  antagonist,  who  consequently 
became  all  empty,  the  money  in  gaming  flowing  towards  the  Surya  Swara.  In  the  latter  case  he 
brought  the  Water,  Apas,  Tattwa  into  course,  directed  it  with  the  full  force  of  his  trained  will 
towards  the  poisoned  wine,  and  consequently  the  burning  heat  of  the  poison  was  counteracted 
for  a very  long  time,  and  before  it  could  recover  strength  enough  to  act  on  the  system,  it  was 
there  no  longer.  S.R.M.D. 


THE  TATTWA 

To  each  of  the  five  Tattwas  a special  colour  has  been  assigned.  Akasa  — Black  or 
Indigo.  Vayu  — Blue.  Tejas  — Red.  Apas  — Silver.  Prithivi  — Yellow.  It  is  by  these  colours  that 
a practical  man  finds  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  which  Tattwa  is  at  the  time  in  course.  Besides, 
these  Tattwas  have  different  shapes  and  tastes.  These  figures  are  seen  by  taking  a bright  mirror 
and  letting  the  breath  fall  upon  it,  as  it  comes  out  of  the  Nose.  The  divided  part  takes  one  of  the 
following  forms  according  to  the  Tattwa  then  in  course.  Prithivi  — a square.  Apas,  a crescent. 
Tejas,  a triangle.  Vayu,  a sphere.  Akasa,  egg  shaped.  To  sum  up  their  qualities: 

Prithivi  — moves  always  in  the  middle  of  the  Paths  of  Air  and  Water.  Apas  — 
downwards,  straight  through  the  nose.  Tejas  — upwards.  Vayu  — obliquely  towards  the  right  or 
left  arm,  as  the  case  may  be.  Akasa  — transversely  always. 


Distance  of 


Tattwa 

Colour 

Form 

Taste 

Breath 

under 

Nostril 

Principle 

Prithivi 

Yellow 

Square 

Sweet 

12fingers 

Bulky 

Apas 

Silver 

Crescent 

Astringent 

16  fingers 

Cold 

Vayu 

Blue 

Sphere 

Acid 

8 fingers 

Moving 

Tejas 

Red 

Triangle 

Hot  tastes 

4 fingers 

Hot 

Akasa 

Indigo 

Oval 

Bitter 

Upwards 

All 

pervading 

45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Tests  of  the  Tattwas.  For  practice,  take  five  little  bullets  or  counters  coloured:  red, 
yellow,  blue,  silver,  and  black.  Place  or  carry  them  in  a pocket.  Now  let  him  close  his  eyes  and 
at  random  take  one  of  them  out  of  his  pocket.  The  colour  of  the  bullet  will  be  that  of  the  Tattwa 
in  course.  While  still  keeping  the  eyes  closed  let  him  see  if  the  colour  of  the  bullet  floats  before 
the  eyes. 

He  must  not  suppose  he  will  be  correct  immediately.  Eventually  the  confusion  will 
disappear,  and  well  defined  colours,  more  or  less  stable,  will  appear  before  him  so  that  the 
colour  of  the  bullet  will  be  the  same  as  that  floating  before  his  eyes.  Then  he  will  have  gained 
the  power  of  knowing  which  of  the  Tattwas  is  in  course,  and  can  at  will  find  them. 

There  is  a special  method  of  the  concentrating  the  mind  and  practising  with  the  eyes  for 
this  purpose,  which  will  come  with  practice. 

Let  him  ask  any  of  his  friends  to  imagine  a flower.  He  will  only  have  to  shut  his  eyes  to 
find  the  Tattwa  then  in  course  and  he  can  astonish  his  friends  by  naming  the  colour  of  the 
flower.  Again  if  a man  sitting  amongst  his  friends  finds  the  Vayu  active  let  him  ascertain  those 
of  his  friends  who  are  healthy  mentally  and  physically  wish  to  go  away.  Let  him  ask  them  to 
answer  frankly  and  they  will  say  ‘yes’. 

In  what  way  other  Tattwas  affect  both  the  body  and  mind  of  man  will  be  stated  later. 
Some  higher  secrets  are  deliberately  reserved  for  those  who  safely  and  honestly  pass  the 
elementary  stage.  When  one  has  reached  the  stage  of  finding  at  Will  any  of  the  Tattwas,  do  not 
imagine  you  have  become  perfect. 

If  one  goes  on  practising  his  inner  sight  becomes  keener  so  that  he  will  recognize  the 
five  Tattwic  subdivisions.  Continue  with  the  meditations  and  innumerable  shades  of  colour  will 
be  recognized  according  to  the  different  proportions  of  the  Tattwas.  His  work  will  be  tedious 
while  he  is  trying  to  distinguish  between  the  different  shades  of  colour.  Tedious  at  first  because 
when  the  many  shades  of  colour  become  fixed  and  defined  by  persevering  practice  he  will  see 
an  ever  changing  rainbow  of  the  most  beautiful  shades  of  colour  and  for  a time  this  will  be 
sufficient  food  for  his  mind. 

To  avoid  the  tediousness  meditate  upon  the  breath  as  is  laid  down  in  the  chapter  on 
meditation  on  the  Tattwas. 

Action  to  be  taken  during  the  different  Tattwas.  Actions  of  a sedate  and  stable  nature  as 
enumerated  under  the  Chandra  Swara  are  best  done  during  the  course  of  Prithivi,  the  earthy 
principle.  Those  of  a fleeting  nature  which  are  to  be  done  and  gone  through  quickly  should  be 
done  during  Apas.  Actions  such  as  a man  has  to  make  of  a violent  struggle  to  hold  his  own,  are 
best  done  during  Tejas.  If  a Yogi  wishes  to  kill  a man  he  should  do  so  with  the  Vayu  Tattwa.  In 
the  Akasa,  nothing  should  be  done  but  meditation,  as  works  begun  during  this  Tattwa  always 
end  badly.  Works  of  the  above  nature  only  prosper  in  the  specified  Tattwas;  and  those  whose 
actions  prosper  may  see  this  by  experiment. 


46 


VOLUME  TWO 


MEDITATION  AND  MASTERY  OVER  THE  TATTWAS 

We  have  previously  given  summary  rules  for  distinguishing  the  various  colours  of  the 
different  Tattwas.  But  now  we  are  going  to  explain  the  final  method  of  mastering  the  Tattwas 
and  of  practising.  This  is  a secret  which  was  only  imparted  to  the  most  promising  Adepts  of 
Yoga.  But  a short  practise  will  fully  show  the  important  results  to  be  gained  by  this  practise. 

By  degrees  the  student  will  become  able  to  look  into  the  future  at  will  and  have  all  the 
visible  world  before  his  eyes,  and  he  will  be  able  to  command  Nature. 

During  the  day  when  the  sky  is  clear  let  him  once  or  twice  for  about  an  hour  or  two 
withdraw  his  mind  from  all  external  things,  and  sitting  on  a easy  chair  let  him  fix  his  eyes  on 
any  particular  part  of  the  blue  sky  and  continue  gazing  without  allowing  the  eyes  to  blink.  At 
first  he  will  see  the  waves  of  the  water,  the  watery  vapour  in  the  atmosphere.  Some  days  later  as 
the  eyes  become  more  practised  he  will  see  different  sorts  of  buildings,  etc.  in  the  air.  When  the 
Neophyte  reaches  this  state  of  practice  he  is  sure  of  success. 

After  this  he  will  see  different  sorts  of  mixed  colours  of  Tattwas  in  the  sky,  which  will 
show  themselves  in  their  proper  and  respective  Tattwic  colours. 

To  test  the  truth  of  this  the  Neophyte  should  occasionally  close  his  eyes  during  the 
practise,  and  compare  what  is  floating  in  the  sky  with  that  which  he  sees  inwardly.  When  both 
are  the  same  the  operation  is  right.  Other  tests  have  been  given  before  and  other  wonders  will 
present  themselves  later  to  the  Yogi.  This  practise  is  to  be  done  in  the  day  time. 

For  the  night,  let  the  student  rise  about  2 AM.  when  everything  is  calm,  when  there  is  no 
noise  and  when  the  cold  light  of  the  stars  breathe  holiness  and  a calm  rapture  enters  into  the 
soul  of  man.  Let  him  wash  his  hands,  feet,  the  crown  of  his  head,  and  the  nape  of  his  neck  with 
cold  water.  Let  him  put  his  shin  bones  to  the  ground  and  let  the  back  of  the  thighs  touch  his 
calfs,  and  let  him  put  his  hands  upon  his  knees,  his  fingers  pointing  toward  the  body.  Let  him 
now  fix  his  eyes  on  the  tip  of  his  nose.  To  avoid  tediousness  he  must  always  meditate  on  the 
inhalation  and  exhalation  of  his  breath. 

Besides  the  above  this  has  many  other  advantages  described  elsewhere.  It  may  be  said 
here,  by  constant  practise  one  is  able  to  develop  two  distinct  syllables  in  his  thought.  It  is 
evident  that  when  a man  inhales  a sound  is  produced  like  HAN.  When  exhaling  the  sound  is 
SA.  By  constant  practise,  the  breath  becomes  associated  with  these  sounds  so  that  effortlessly 
the  mind  understands  HANSA  in  relationship  to  the  Tattwas.  Thus  we  see  that  one  full  breath 
makes  HANS  A which  is  the  name  of  the  Ruler  of  the  Universe  together  with  His  Powers.  They 
are  exerted  during  natural  phenomena.  At  this  stage  of  perfection  the  Yogi  should  commence  as 
follows. 

Getting  up  at  2 or  3 in  the  morning  and  washing  himself  in  the  aforementioned  manner, 
let  him  know  and  fix  his  mind  upon  the  Tattwa  then  in  course.  If  the  Tattwa  be  Prithivi  at  that 
moment,  think  of  it  as  something  that  is  a yellow  square,  sweet  smelling,  small  in  size  and  able 
to  eliminate  all  disease.  Let  him  at  the  same  time  say  LAM.  It  is  very  easy  to  imagine  this. 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Much  the  same  is  true  of  the  other  Tattwas  which  are  described  in  the  chart  above, 
which  the  student  should  again  consult.  However,  be  aware  that  the  words  VAM  are  related  to 
Apas,  RAM  to  Tejas,  PAM  to  Vayu,  and  HAM  to  Akasa. 

By  diligent  practise  these  syllables  become  definitely  associated  with  the  Tattwas. 
When  he  repeats  them  the  special  Tattwa  appears  with  as  much  force  as  he  may  will,  and  thus  it 
is  that  a Yogi  can  cause  whatever  he  likes  — lightning,  rain,  wind,  etc. 

CURE  OF  DISEASES 

Every  disease  causes  the  breath  to  flow  out  of  the  wrong  nostril  and  the  wrong  Tattwa  to 
come  into  course.  When  the  breath  is  therefore  restored  to  the  proper  nostril,  and  the  proper 
Tattwa  has  been  brought  into  course,  do  not  expect  that  that  is  all  to  be  done.  If  the  disease  be 
obstinate  and  the  attack  a violent  one,  one  will  have  to  persevere  a long  time  before  success  is 
gained. 

If  success  does  not  come  quickly  resort  to  use  of  the  appropriate  medications  and  Swara 
will  soon  be  restored. 

You  may  notice  the  Chandra  Swara  is  generally  the  best  for  the  cure  of  any  disease.  Its 
flow  is  an  indication  of  the  soundness  of  health.  In  colds,  coughs  and  other  diseases  this  Swara 
should  flow. 

No  one  Tattwa  or  Swara  causes  pain  if  it  flows  properly.  In  this  state  it  should  not  be 
unduly  meddled  with,  but  when  any  one  Tattwa  or  Swara  becomes  overdominant  and  causes 
disease  it  should  be  changed  at  once.  Experience  shows  that  the  Apas  and  the  Prithivi  Tattwas 
are  the  only  ones  generally  good  for  health.  Indeed  the  fact  that  during  the  course  of  the  Apas 
Tattwa  the  breath  is  felt  16  fingers  breadth  below  the  nose  and  during  the  Prithivi  12  fingers, 
argues  that  at  those  times  there  is  a more  sound  and  powerful  working  of  body  functions  than 
when  it  is  felt  only  8 or  4 or  no  finger  breadths  below  the  nose. 

Akasa  therefore  is  the  worst  for  health  and  when  sick  one  would  find  Akasa,  Vayu,  or 
Tejas  in  course. 

When  need  be  therefore  proceed  in  the  following  manner.  After  having  changed  the 
breath  from  the  wrong  nostril  to  the  proper  one,  generally  the  left,  and  pressing  the  opposite  by 
a cushion  so  that  it  may  not  change  readily  again,  sit  on  an  easy  chair  and  bind  the  left  thigh  a 
little  above  the  knee  joint  with  a handkerchief.  Shortly  he  will  perceive  that  the  Tattwa  changes 
to  the  one  immediately  below  it  and  so  on;  and  then  the  next,  etc.  If  he  be  an  acute  observor  of 
bodily  conditions  he  will  perceive  that  slowly  his  mind  is  becoming  more  easy.  Then  let  him 
tighten  his  bandage  still  more.  When  at  last  he  reaches  Prithivi,  he  will  find  his  health  a great 
deal  better.  Let  him  persevere  in  this  state  or  still  better  the  Apas  Tattwa  for  some  time,  and 
return  to  it  occasionally  for  some  days  even  after  the  disease  has  disappeared.  Undoubtly  he 
will  be  cured. 


48 


VOLUME  TWO 


FORECAST  OF  FUTURITY 

Although  a Yogi  obtains  the  power  of  knowing  everything  that  is,  has  been,  or  is  to  be, 
beyond  the  reach  of  the  senses,  yet  generally  he  becomes  indifferent  to  such  knowledge.  He 
forgets  himself  in  his  eternal  presence  before  the  Light,  which  breathes  beauty  into  all  we  see  in 
the  world.  We  shall  therefore  represent  him  here  revealing  if  not  all  his  knowledge  of  futurity 
then  only  specific  questions  put  to  him  by  others.  But  our  Neophytes  may  as  well  put  the 
questions  themselves,  and  then  answer  them  according  to  the  laws  here  laid  down. 

When  a Yogi  is  asked  a question,  let  him: 

(a)  Determine  what  Tattwa  is  in  course.  If  it  be  Prithivi  then  the  question  is 
about  something  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  or  where  the  element  earth  is  dominant. 

(b)  If  it  be  Apas  the  question  relates  to  life,  birth,  death,  etc. 

(c)  If  Tejas  the  question  concerns  metals,  gain  or  loss,  etc. 

(d)  If  Akasa  the  questioner  has  nothing  to  ask. 

(e)  If  Vayu  it  relates  to  a journey. 

These  are  but  elementary  things.  The  practical  Yogi  who  can  distinguish  between  the 
mixture  of  the  Tattwas  can  name  the  particular  things. 

Now  let  him  determine  through  which  of  his  nostrils  the  breath  is  flowing,  which  is  the 
fortnight  then  in  course  of  passing,  which  the  days  and  what  direction  of  himself,  the  enquirer. 

If  the  breath  comes  through  the  left  nostril,  to  secure  complete  success  the  work  which 
is  the  subject  of  the  question  and  which  will  be  specified  under  IDA,  he  must  have  the 
following  coincidences.  The  fortnight  must  be  bright.  The  day  must  be  even,  the  direction  must 
be  east  or  north.  If  these  things  coincide  the  questioner  will  get  what  he  wants. 

Again  if  the  Surya  and  Swara  coincide  with  a dark  fortnight,  the  day  odd,  the  direction 
south  and  west,  a similar  result  will  be  predicted,  but  only  partially.  The  action  will  be  of  the 
sort  described  under  Pingala. 

If  any  of  these  coincide,  the  success  will  vary.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  breath  at 
the  time  must  not  be  flowing  through  the  wrong  nostril. 

If  the  wrong  Swara  is  at  the  commencement  of  the  day  the  wrong  Swara  arises,  the 
Lunar  for  the  Solar  or  vica  versa,  one  may  expect  something  wrong.  If  it  happens  the  first  day 
there  is  sure  to  be  some  sort  of  anxiety.  If  the  second  some  loss  of  money.  If  the  third  there  will 
be  a journey.  If  the  fourth  some  dear  object  will  be  destroyed.  If  the  fifth,  loss  of  Kingdom.  If 
the  sixth  loss  of  everything.  If  the  seventh  illness  and  pain  are  sure  to  come.  If  the  eighth,  death. 

If  the  Sun  breath  flows  in  the  morning  and  at  noon,  and  the  Moon  in  the  evening,  a sad 
discomforture  will  result,  the  reverse  being  a sign  of  Victory. 

If  a man,  about  to  travel  which  coincides  in  direction  with  the  empty  nostril  at  the  time, 
he  will  not  get  what  he  desires. 


49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ALCHEMY 

By 

V.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 


There  are  within  the  Knowledge  Lectures  innumerable  references  to  Alchemy,  and  there 
are  some  minor  elucidations  of  alchemical  terms  with  diagrams  of  one  type  or  another. 
There  were  some  so-called  Flying  Rolls  on  the  subject  - non-official  papers  written  either  by 
the  Chiefs  or  by  some  of  the  more  well-informed  members.  None  of  them  are  really 
illuminating  and  throw  very  little  light  on  the  subject.  Finally,  there  is  the  section  on 
Alchemy  in  that  most  remarkable  document  Z-2,  which  essentially  breaks  down  the 
Neophyte  Ritual  into  a variety  of  many  points  which  can  then  be  applied  to  different  topics. 
One  of  them  was  Alchemy.  But  unless  you  obtained  an  alchemical  orientation  from  some 
other  source,  (such  as  from  Frater  Albertus  of  the  Paracelsus  College  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah)  that  schema  was  not  going  to  be  very  illuminating. 

Yet,  historical  data  are  firm  in  their  statement  that  some  of  the  Rosicrucian  societies  that 
sprang  up  in  Germany  some  considerable  time  after  the  appearance  of  the  three 
Rosicrucian  manifestoes  did  actually  teach  Alchemy.  But  the  Golden  Dawn  did  not,  to  the 
best  of  my  knowledge  - apart  from  the  above  named  references. 

Yet  in  recent  months  I have  heard  from  a Temple  descended  from  the  original  Lelkins 
group  affirming  that  Alchemy  has  been  and  still  is  taught  as  part  of  their  basic  Rosicrucian 
Curriculum.  Beyond  that  affirmative  information  I have  no  specific  knowledge  of  what  that 
entails.  But  it  is  encouraging  to  learn  that  this  particular  branch  of  Occult  knowledge  is  not 
being  neglected  by  the  Order. 

One  of  the  older  clerical  members  of  the  Order,  the  Rev.  W.  Ayton,  who  is  usually  but 
probably  unfairly  described  as  a doddering  old  dreamer,  did  practice  or  experiment  with 


50 


VOLUME  TWO 


Alchemy.  What  he  did  with  it  and  what  he  accomplished  is  not  known  to  the  world  at  large. 
But  rumor  has  it  that  he  and  some  other  clerics  of  the  Golden  Dawn  were  Latin  scholars 
who  translated  some  of  the  more  famous  hermetic  texts  into  English.  Apparently  they  were 
not  anxious  to  be  identified  with  that  subject  - no  doubt  for  fear  of  censure  from  their 
ecclesiastical  superiors.  So,  rumor  has  it,  they  turned  over  their  translations  to  Arthur  E. 
Waite  who  then  claimed  to  be  the  editor  and  translator,  and  published  them,  (under  his 
own  name).  The  Aquarian  Press  in  England  has  announced  its  intention  to  publish  The 
Ayton  Papers  which  are  the  letters  of  the  Rev.  W.A.  Ayton  to  Frederick  Leigh  Gardner 
who  was  Frater  De  Profundis  ad  Lucem  (to  whom  many  of  the  papers  used  in  this 
Complete  Golden  Dawn  System  of  Magic  were  issued)  - letters  extending  from  1 8 8 9 to 
1904  . It  is  too  soon  to  evaluate  the  value  of  these  letters,  but  by  mid-summer  1 984  the  book 
should  be  issued  so  that  later  in  this  series  mention  can  be  made  of  it.  My  only  fear  is  that 
Ellie  Howe  is  the  editor  of  that  book  - and  I have  previously  expresssed  myself  in  no 
uncertain  terms  what  I think  about  Mr.  Howe's  editing.  That  is,  it  is  full  of  prejudice  and 
bias.  [See  Suster's  superb  critique  of  Howe  in  What  You  Should  Know  About  The  Golden  Dawn, 
Falcon  Press  1 98  3 . ] 

Be  that  as  it  may,  Alchemy  was  recognized  if  not  actively  taught  in  the  Golden  Dawn. 
Several  of  its  members  did  do  some  active  literary  work  on  older  manuscripts  and  books, 
many  of  which  were  published  as  volumes  of  the  Collectanea  Chemica,  some  of  which  are 
being  reprinted  in  this  day  and  age. 

A friend  of  mine,  Hans  Nintzel  of  Dallas,  Texas,  has  written  several  illuminating  and 
simple  papers  on  Alchemy,  and  he  has  granted  me  permission  to  quote  bits  here  and  there 
which  may  finally  give  us  some  clear  and  basic  definitions  of  Alchemy. 

Mr.  Nintzel  holds.  . ."Alchemy  is  the  Western  tradition  as  is  Qabalah,  despite  very  strong 
ties  to  Eastern  tradition.  The  relation  of  the  various  metals  to  the  planets  is  pure  Qabalah.  . 
.In  concluding  this  study,  we  can  state  that  Astrology  reveals  WHO  you  are,  Qabalah 
reveals  WHERE  you  are  going,  and  Alchemy  provides  the  MEANS  of  getting  there.  . .A 
one  word  definition  of  Alchemy  would  be  Evolution.  That  is  to  say,  the  spiritual 
development  from  base,  dense  states  to  that  higher  vibratory  rate  where  joyous 
communion  with  the  Creator  exists.  This  applies  to  all  created  matter,  minerals  and  metals 
as  well  as  man.  The  purpose  of  the  alchemist  then,  is  to  hasten  this  evolution.  To  speed  the 
spiritual  growth  of  all  of  God's  creatures." 

Several  years  ago  I wrote  an  article  on  alchemy  in  which  is  to  be  found  the  argument: 
"The  alchemists  of  olden  time  were  spiritually  enlightened  - not  merely  blind  and  stupid 
workers  or  seekers  in  the  chemistry  laboratory.  This  fact  must  never  be  forgotten.  They 
sought  to  perfect  all  phases  of  man  - his  body,  his  mind,  and  his  spirit.  No  one  of  these 
aspects  of  the  total  organism  should  be  neglected.  It  was  their  belief  that  man  is  indefinitely 
perfectable.  They  were  highly  religious,  and  not  disposed  to  deceive  and  swindle  the 
treasury  of  the  country  in  which  they  lived. 

"Art  perfects  what  nature  began.  Man,  and  all  the  gross  and  subtle  constituents  of  nature 
unaided  fails  to  achieve  this  perfection.  Evolution  may  ultimately  succeed,  though  the  time 


51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


factor  seems  so  preposterously  slow  when  one  watches  through  recorded  history,  the 
cumbersome,  the  appallingly  slow,  progress  of  mankind.  So  the  alchemists  sought  to 
intervene  by  their  art  - to  speed  up  the  process  of  growth  and  evolution,  and  so  to  aid  God's 
work." 

The  following  is  an  essay  written  on  Alchemy,  by  Hans  Nintzel;  it  is  quoted  in  full  with 
his  kind  permission. 

ALCHEMY 

By 

HANS  W.  NINTZEL 


'Lately  there  is  a revival  of  interest  in  Alchemy.  Whereas  a few  years  ago,  the  very  word 
was  hardly  mentioned  in  polite  conversation,  we  are  now  seeing  an  occasional  article  or 
book  being  devoted  to  the  subject.  We  even  find  Alchemy  being  taught  as  a subject  in  some 
Universities.  Accordingly,  it  seems  well  to  set  down  some  basic  ideas  to  explain  what 
Alchemy  is,  its  roots,  and  perhaps,  what  it  is  not.  This  Holy  Science  is  of  such  great 
importance,  even  more  so  today  than  it  was  yesterday,  that  a great  many  readers  may  profit 
by  some  additional  ideas  on  this  seemingly  recondite  subject.  We  can  start  with  the 
universal  idea  that  alchemists  are  those  who  turn  lead  into  gold.  While  there  is  the  seed  of 
truth  in  this  notion,  there  is  much  more  to  it  than  that.  And  what  can  be  more  valuable  than 
gold?  In  fact,  if  you  asked  this  question,  you  are  really  in  need  of  Alchemy. 

First  of  all,  the  alchemists,  modern  and  medieval,  followed  a certain  credo.  Their  goal 
was  to  alleviate  the  suffering  of  their  fellow  man.  Physically  and  spiritually.  One  such 
means  was  to  produce  medicines  that  could  aid  man's  progress  in  both  realms.  That  is,  a 
medicine  or  'Elixir'  could  be  made  that  produced  a dichotomous  effect  in  that  physical 
problems  could  be  alleviated  from  the  usage  of  an  alchemically  produced  medicine. 
Moreover,  this  elixir  could  act  as  the  agent  to  purge  the  body  of  those  dross  matters  that 
inhibited  the  finer  vibrations  from  being  received.  While  Alchemy  was  definitely  an 
attempt  to  demonstrate,  from  the  physical  viewpoint,  experimentally  and  on  the  material 
plane,  the  validity  of  certain  philosophical  views  of  the  Universe,  its  end  goal  was  the 
exaltation  of  its  subjects.  That  subject,  in  addition  to  others,  was  man  himself. 

A one  word  definition  of  Alchemy  would  be  'evolution.'  This  in  turn  can  be  thought  of  as 
being  synonomous  with  'transmutation,'  although  this  latter  term  has  a connotation  of 
instantaneous  action.  By  evolution  we  mean  the  (usually)  gradual  change  of  something 
from  a base  or  coarse  existence  into  something  finer,  more  noble.  In  the  mineral  kingdom, 
the  age-old  analogy  quickly  comes  to  mind,  that  is:  lead  becomes  gold.  However,  this 
concept  is  also  extended  to  the  animal  kingdom  and  man.  That  is,  man  in  his  crude,  self- 
centred,  ignoble  state  can  be  transmuted  into  a fine,  loving,  God-centred  person.  A more 
spiritual  person.  Everyone,  I am  sure,  can  relate  to  this  idea  and,  in  fact,  many  of  us, 


52 


VOLUME  TWO 


deep  down,  yearn  for  this  evolution,  this  transmutation.  We  may  not  think  of  it  in  terms  of 
Alchemy,  but  who  has  never  felt  that  call  to  rid  themselves  of  the  coarse  outer  garments  and 
become  more  spiritual,  closer  to  the  Creator?  This  is  the  goal  of  Alchemy,  this 
transmutation,  this  evolution.  However,  the  alchemist  takes  these  ideas  a few  steps  further 
and  declares  that  ALL  things  are  evolving.  Not  only  man,  but  all  creatures  in  all  kingdoms. 
Plants  and  herbs  are  evolving,  cats  and  dogs  are  evolving,  rocks  and  metals  are  evolving,  in 
fact,  this  entire  planet  is  in  a state  of  upward  evolution.  The  earth  aspires  to  become 
enlightened,  like  the  Sun. 

This  perhaps  startling  concept  is  fundamental  to  Alchemy.  It  says,  among  other  things, 
that  all  base  creatures  are  gradually  becoming  finer  creatures.  Man  is  evolving  from  his 
base,  brute-like  beginnings  to  a beautiful,  saintly  creature.  Metals  are  evolving  from  their 
base  beginnings,  as  lead,  to  a more  noble  existence  as  gold.  Nor  does  anything  have  to  be 
done  to  insure  this  transmutation  or  evolution.  Slowly,  but  surely,  ALL  things  will  arrive  at 
their  zenith  on  the  evolutionary  scale.  It  is  as  if  we  were  on  a huge  upwinding  spiral.  This 
spiral  slowly  winds  its  way  'heavenward.  If  nothing  was  done  to  hasten  this  evolutionary 
action,  or  to  impede  it,  one  day  all  would  arrive  at  the  goal:  full  spiritual  evolution. 
However,  by  alchemical  processes,  this  evolution  in  all  creatures  can  be  hastened.  That  is, 
man  can  volitionally  speed  up  the  cycle  of  evolution  for  himself  or  for  other  creatures 
creatures  unable  to  have  any  effect  on  their  own  spiritual  growth. 

By  the  same  token,  God  has  given  man  free  will  and  with  this,  man  can  impede  his  own 
progress.  At  given  times,  as  we  look  about  us,  we  suspect  that  the  evolutionary  process  has 
turned  into  a devolution.  This  is  NOT  the  case,  although  individuals  can  elect  to  sink  back 
into  the  material  mire  from  which  others  struggle  to  escape.  Another  way  of  looking  at  this 
is  to  state  that  the  purpose  of  Alchemy  is  to  raise  the  rate  of  vibrations  of  both  the 
practitioner  (man)  and  his  subjects.  These  subjects  may  be  medicaments  or  mineral 
compositions.  Just  how  one  can  use  Alchemy  to  more  rapidly  approach  Divinity  will  be 
touched  on,  but  let  us  look  briefly  at  the  history  of  alchemy  first. 

Some  ideas  about  the  roots  of  Alchemy  may  provide  a stronger  foundation  upon  which 
other  ideas  and  understanding  can  be  built.  Looking  to  the  past,  we  find  that  Egyptian 
goldsmiths  existed  about  3000  B.C.  and  around  3500  B.C.,  Sumerian  metalworkers 
practised  their  trade  in  Mesopotamia.  In  China  and  India,  in  remote  times,  (as  well  as 
today,  of  course),  gold  was  looked  upon  as  a magical  medicine.  Alchemical  ideas  arose  in 
China  as  early  as  the  fifth  century  B.C.  Chinese  Alchemy  is  closely  allied  with  Taoism,  a 
system  containing  philosophy  and  religion.  They  believed  in  the  curative,  and  even  life- 
extending properties  of  jade,  pearl  and  cinnabar.  These  ideas  were  picked  up  by 
subsequent  practitioners  of  the  art,  moving  to  Greece,  through  Europe  and  finally,  through 
other  parts  of  the  western  world  - ideas  that  are  as  strong  today  as  they  were  then. 
Alchemy  was  also  as  indicated  above,  in  Greece.  It  is  known  that  during  the  Alexandrian 
period,  4th  to  7th  century  A.D.,  Alchemy  flourished.  As  did  other  cultures,  the  Greeks 
added  to  the  body  of  Alchemy,  various  ideas  and  practices  peculiar  to  themselves. 


53 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Just  precisely  where  Alchemy  originated  is  not  really  known.  The  most  likely  theory 
holds  that  the  ancient  Egyptians,  who  were  known  to  be  skilled  in  chemical  knowledge, 
including  metallurgy,  glass-tinting  and  dyeing,  were  perhaps  the  founders  of  the  art  as  we 
know  it  today.  Egypt  was  known  as  K HEM,  the  "dark  land.”  Thus,  Al-Khem  was  the 
Islamic  term  for  the  father  of  the  dark  earth  and  this  phrase  was  westernised  into  Al-Chemy. 
Futher,  there  is  a body  of  literature  referring  to  Hermes  Trismegistos  as  being  the  father  of 
Alchemy.  Hermes,  whilst  essentially  a Greek  god,  is  the  analog  of  Thoth,  the  Egyptian 
Ibis-headed  god.  Doberman,  in  his  book,  The  Goldmakers,  suggests  that  Alchemy 
commenced  with  the  inhabitants  of  Atlantis.  That  when  this  continent  submerged  during 
cataclysms  of  the  earth,  there  were  those  who  escaped  and  tenanted  the  deltas  of  the 
Euphrates  and  Indus,  on  the  north  shore  of  the  Arabian  sea,  and  further  inland  at  the  head 
of  the  Persian  gulf.  The  people,  tall  and  black-haired,  eventually  mixed  with  the  tribes  of 
the  Near  East.  The  Hebrews  referred  to  them  as  Sumerians.  They  knew  how  to  work  with 
tin,  gold,  silver,  copper,  lead,  antimony,  and  iron.  Copper  and  tin  produced  the  bronze  so 
common  to  the  Sumerians  and  the  Indus  civilisations.  Artifacts  were  discovered  here  such 
as  leaden  goblets,  iron  daggers  and  a vase  made  of  pure  antimony.  The  Sumerians  then  set 
out  to  that  land  now  known  as  Egypt,  bringing  with  them  their  arts.  It  is  from  the 
Sumerians  then,  that  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt  learned  their  crafts,  the  arcane  arts  of 
Alchemy. 

Whatever  its  origin,  certain  basic  ideas  are  found  to  be  common  to  all  the  cultures  in 
which  Alchemy  flourished.  One  such  idea  is  the  principle  of  the  four  elements  as  being  the 
basic  foundation  of  all  Alchemy.  In  China,  we  find  five  elements,  but  the  notion  is  the  same. 
The  philosophy  of  the  four  elements  is  classically  attributed  to  Aristotle  who  postulated  the 
existence  of  four  fundamental  'qualities'  imbued  in  all  bodies.  These  were  the  hot  and 
moist,  along  with  their  opposites,  the  cold  and  dry.  To  these  'qualities'  were  assigned  the 
symbolism  of  the  four  material  elements,  fire,  air,  water,  and  earth.  They  were  seen  as 
having  their  origin  via  conjuctions  of  these  four  properties.  It  might  be  noted  that  the 
symbol  for  fire  is  opposite  to  the  symbol  of  water  and  water  is  the  inversion  or  opposite  of 
fire.  The  symbol  for  air  is  the  fire  symbol  with  a line  through  it.  If  we  combine  the  polar 
opposites,  with  their  dual  aspects,  we  obtain  a familiar  symbol  of  the  Shield  of  Solomon, 
the  Hexagram.  It  is  the  symbol  of  the  unity  of  the  opposites. 

These  qualities,  as  symbolised  by  the  four  elements  are  also  associated  with  certain 
physical  aspects.  That  is,  the  element  of  Fire  reflects  heat  or  thermal  emissions.  Air  is 
associated  with  gases.  Water  with  all  liquids,  and  Earth  with  all  solids.  Bodies,  then,  were 
thought  of  as  being  constituted  of  the  four  elements  in  varying  proportions.  This  gave  rise 
to  the  idea  that  one  body  could  be  transformed  into  another  simply  by  altering  the 
proportion  of  one  or  more  of  these  elements.  Associated  with  this  idea  was  the  concept  of  a 
"Prima  Materia,"  a primordial  matter  or  basic  building  stuff.  This  was  the  fundamental 
essence  from  which  all  other  substances  were  made.  Also,  all  substances  or  matter  could  be 
reduced  to  this  lowest  common  denominator,  this  prima  materia.  It  was  now  a mere 
extrapolation  to  consider  reducing  a base  metal,  such  as  lead,  to  its  prima  materia,  then 


54 


VOLUME  TWO 


adding  to  it  the  proper  amounts  of  elemental  matter  to  change  it  to  a different  substance, 
i.e.  gold.  The  idea  of  a prima  materia  is  a basic  concept  extant  in  Indian  literature  under  the 
name  of  'Mulaprakriti.  In  Chinese  alchemy,  we  find  this  idea  expressed  as  'T'ai  Chi.'  These 
very  basic  Alchemical  theories  were  further  refined  and  expanded  in  the  course  of  time,  and 
they  gave  rise  to  certain  ideas  that  are  with  us  today.  That  is,  the  principle  that  all  things  are 
composed  of  three  essential  constituents  or  bases.  These  three,  known  in  Indian  literature 
as  the  'three  Gunas,'  are  called  by  alchemists,  'Sulphur, "Salt,'  and  'Mercury.'  The  ancient 
alchemists  were  prone  to  veil  their  writings  in  obscure  symbolism,  mythology  and  various 
blinds.  In  this  case,  the  principle  of  Sulphur  is  not  common  sulphur  or  brimstone.  Salt  did 
not  indicate  common  table  salt  (sodium  chloride),  nor  did  Mercury  reflect  the  matter  found 
in  thermometers,  quicksilver.  There  was  an  analog  between  these,  but  definitely  not  a 
one-to-one  relationship.  This  blind  hindered  many  a budding  alchemist.  It  is  interesting  to 
note  that  one  of  these,  Mercury,  was  referred  back  to  the  four  elements  and  known  as  the 
'Quintessence,'  a fifth  principle,  as  found  in  Chinese  Alchemy  where  there  are  five  elements: 
water,  fire,  wood,  metal  and  earth.  Now,  the  quintessence  is  also  the  prima  materia,  the  T'ai 
Chi.  It  is  from  this  UNITY,  this  ONE,  that  the  law  of  Polarity  is  derived.  The  'ONE'  is  God, 
the  Divinity,  the  All. 

The  duality  of  the  law  of  Polarity  is  exemplified  in  Chinese  alchemy  as  the  'Yin'  and  the 
'Yang.'  The  female  and  the  male,  negativity  and  positivity,  passivity  or  receptivity  and 
dynamism  or  action.  Yin  and  Yang  were  also  associated  with  the  moon  and  sun, 
respectively,  while  the  five  elements  were  associated  with  certain  planets:  Water  with 
Mercury,  Fire  with  Mars,  Wood  with  Jupiter,  Metals  with  Venus,  and  Earth  with  Saturn. 
Yin  and  Yang,  the  pair  of  opposites,  are  embodied  in  many  religious  and  alchemical 
philosophies.  They  are  the  Isis  and  Osiris  of  Egyptian  mythology,  the  Mercury  and  Sulphur 
of  Alchemy,  the  concepts  of  hot  and  cold,  good  and  evil,  love  and  hate,  etc,  etc.  In  today's 
'alchemical  circle1  there  is  a maxim  that  combines  all  of  these  ideas.  This  maxim  is  stated  as: 
"The  One  became  two  by  the  law  of  Polarity  which  is  revealed  within  the  three  essentials 
that  will  be  found  within  the  four  elements,  wherein  is  to  be  found  the  Quintessence  which  is 
not  of  the  four  but  one  of  the  three." 

The  principle  of  Sulphur  is  the  principle  of  combustion.  It  is  the  colour  of  subjects,  in 
plants  it  gives  the  odour.  The  Arabic  alchemist,  Geber,  said  sulphur  is  the  "fatness. 
Alchemists  attributed  to  sulphur  the  principle  of  the  soul,  the  consciousness.  In  a 'tincture' 
it  is  what  tincts.  It  is  the  vitality  in  animals  and  has  the  role  of  coagulation,  to  concentrate 
the  life-force.  It  is  red,  hot,  masculine,  active  and  is  symbolised  by  the  Sun.  It  is  associated 
with  Gold.  The  vital  life-force  or  'prana'  is  the  Mercury.  The  Yin  or  feminine  aspect, 
Mercury,  endows  gold  with  its  lustre,  even  as  Sulphur  endows  it  with  its  colour.  Mercury  is 
the  basis  for  gold's  malleability  and  fusibility.  Mercury  is  the  Spirit,  the  'Water  of  the  Wise,' 
the  Prima  Materia,  Luna,  the  seed  or  sperm  of  all  things.  Where  Sulphur  exhibits  itself  as 
an  oily  substance,  Mercury  is  a volatile  liquid  in  its  corporeal  forms.  In  the  plant  world, 
alcohol  is  the  vehicle  for  the  life-force,  for  Mercury.  Sulphur,  in  the  plant  world,  is  the 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


essential  oils  contained  therein.  Finally,  Salt  is  the  body  of  all  matter.  It  is  the  basic 
principle  of  fixity  and  solidification.  It  confers  resistance  to  the  fire.  In  the  plant  world,  the 
salt  is  the  ash  of  the  burned  or  calcined  plant,  usually  a grey-to-white  'salty'  substance.  It  is 
the  medium  in  which  Sulphur  and  Mercury  can  combine. 

This  'chemical  marriage  is  brought  about  by  the  catalytic  action  of  the  Salt  to  bring 
Sulphur  and  Mercury  to  their  earthly  state.  This  union  of  the  opposites,  this  marriage  of  the 
Sun  and  Moon,  is  the  state  sought  after  by  alchemists.  Such  a state  can  be  arrived  at  in  all 
the  kingdoms.  Now,  since  all  things  already  consist  of  these  three  principles,  it  is  logical  to 
say  that  one  thing  can  be  changed  to  another  by  varying  the  proportion  of  these  principles. 
That  is,  as  Basil  Valentine  wrote:  "Iron  is  found  to  have  the  least  portion  of  Mercury  but 
more  of  Sulphur  and  Salt..  . Copper  is  generated  of  much  Sulphur  but  its  Mercury  and  Salt 
are  in  equality.  . .Saturn  (Lead)  is  generated  of  little  Sulphur,  little  Salt  and  much  gross, 
unripe  Mercury  while  Gold  hath  digested  and  refined  the  Mercury  to  a perfect  ripeness. 
What  Valentine  is  saying  is  that  the  metals  are  different  due  to  the  different  proportions  of 
the  three  essentials.  In  more  modern  parlance,  consider  the  fact  that  if  one  brought  together 
one  proton  and  one  electron  and  one  neutron,  an  atom  of  'heavy  hydrogen1  would  be 
produced.  Now,  if  we  changed  the  proportions  of  these  three  'essentials’  by  adding,  for 
example,  one  additional  proton  and  one  additional  electron,  we  would  have  an  atom  other 
than  hydrogen.  These  subject  matters  are  both  gases  but  have  very  different 
characteristicts.  So,  by  changing  the  ratio  of  the  essentials,  we  have  wound  up  with 
different  matters.  A transformation  has  taken  place.  It  is  conceded  that  making  hydrogen 
into  helium  is  no  small  task.  However,  in  1941  the  physicists,  Sherr,  Bainbridge,  and 
Anderson,  succeeded  in  transmuting  a radioactive  isotope  of  mercury  (quicksilver)  into 
pure  gold.  To  be  sure,  the  cost  of  doing  this  was  prohibitive,  and  a linear  accelerator  had  to 
be  employed.  But  the  point  is,  it  was  done.  A transmutation  had  taken  place.  We  can  put  a 
cap  on  these  ideas  with  a statement  by  an  ancient  alchemist,  Eirenaeus  Philalethes,  who 
encapsulated  a very  fundamental  idea  of  Alchemy  with  these  words  in  his  book,  The 
Metamorphosis  of  Metals,  "All  metallic  seed  is  the  seed  of  gold,  for  gold  is  the  intention  of 
nature  in  regard  to  all  metals.  . .all  metals  are  potentially  gold." 

At  this  point  we  have  made  a case  that  all  things,  consist  of  three  essentials,  Sulphur,  Salt 
and  Mercury.  This  Trinity  is  also  found  in  religion,  mythology  and  symbolism.  We  have  the 
physical  properties  of  solids,  liquids  and  gases,  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  the  three 
Graces,  the  three  Furies,  the  three  Fates,  Fire,  Water  and  Earth,  Osiris,  Horus  and  Isis, 
Brahma,  Shiva,  Vishnu,  the  Faw  of  the  Triangle,  protons,  neutrons  and  electrons,  and  so 
forth.  Some  of  these  analogies  are  a little  less  than  direct,  but  the  general  idea  underlying 
them  holds  true.  But  how  can  this  be  used  in  our  daily  lives?  What  good  can  come  from  this? 
What  are  the  practicalities?  To  fully  answer  these  questions  would  require  a book,  but  we 
can  give  at  least  one  set  of  ideas  on  how  Alchemy  can  enrich  our  lives.  Moreover,  we  can  get 
some  inkling  as  to  how  it  will  affect  not  only  our  physical  well-being,  but  exert  a parallel 
salutary  effect  on  our  'spiritual  lives.' 


56 


VOLUME  TWO 


First,  we  must  state  that  Alchemy  as  a discipline,  has  as  its  foundations,  certain  other 
disciplines.  These  are  Astrology,  Magic  and  Qabalah.  One  cannot  be  a good  Alchemist 
without  being  a good  Qabalist.  One  cannot  be  a good  Qabalist  without  being  adept  at 
Magic  and  one  cannot  be  adept  at  Magic  not  having  a background  in  Astrology.  We  will 
give  some  ideas  of  how  the  fundamentals  of  Magic,  Qabalah  and  Astrology  play  a vital  role 
in  Alchemical  work.  But  before  that,  let  us  briefly  consider  one  of  the  ancient  writers  on 
Alchemy,  Gerhard  Dorn.  Dorn  was  a disciple  of  the  great  Paracelsus  and  wrote  some  very 
cogent  observations  on  Alchemy.  It  has  to  be  recognised  that  Dorn  did  not  have  the 
psychological  insights  we  have  today,  nor  even  the  extensive  vocabulary  to  fully  express  his 
ideas.  Flowever,  his  fundamental  beliefs  can  be  easily  understood  as  evidenced  by  his 
writings  translated  by  Louise-Marie  von  Franz  in  her  book:  Alchemist  Active  Imagination, 
she  indicates  that  Dorn  wrote:  "Through  study  (of  alchemical  literature)  one  acquires 
knowledge,  through  knowledge,  love;  which  creates  in  oneself  experience,  virtue  and 
power,  through  which  the  miraculous  work  is  done  and  the  work  in  nature  is  of  this 
quality."  Von  Franz  explains  that  what  Dorn  means  is  that  by  simple  alchemical  literature, 
one  attains  "love."  This  "love"  is  a kind  of  unconscious  fascination,  where  one  now  begins 
to  understand,  becomes  passionate,  about  finding  the  "truth." 

The  import  of  this  is  very  dramatic  even  though  Dorn's  material  did  not  come  across  as 
explosive.  The  gist  of  it  is  that  the  very  process  of  DOING  something,  actual  laboratory 
work,  meditation  on  Alchemy  or  even  the  innocuous  activity  of  reading  alchemical 
literature,  causes  something  to  happen  in  the  practitioner.  Let's  suppose  one  is  working 
with  physical  Alchemy  such  that  he  is  "cooking"  something  up  in  the  laboratory,  or  even  in 
his  kitchen.  He  is  making  some  sort  of  transmutation  take  place  in  his  retort  or  pans. 
Actually,  Dorn  is  saying  that  TWO  transmutations  are  taking  place.  One  that  is  visible,  in 
the  retort,  and  one  not  visible,  in  the  practitioner.  Moreover,  that  as  the  work  continues, 
this  transmutation  accelerates  such  that  there  is  a feedback  loop  generated.  That  is,  the 
more  one  does  the  work,  of  any  kind,  the  greater  will  be  the  success.  This  may  sound  like  a 
simple  case  of  practice  makes  perfect.  This  is  not  what  Dorn  means.  What  he  is  saying  is 
best  shown  by  an  example. 

Consider  two  people.  One,  a chap  who  has  been  doing  some  kind  of  alchemical  activity, 
reading  or  simple  experiments  of  some  sort.  The  other  man  has  not  done  anything  in 
Alchemy  whatsoever.  The  first  man  then  decides  to  try  a different  experiment.  He  wants  to 
take  a substance  A and  add  it  to  a substance  B to  make  substance  C.  He  pours  A into  B and 
behold.  He  has  C.  Not  all  that  impressive  except,  the  second  man  comes  along  and,  using 
the  same  substances,  the  same  equipment,  he  fails  to  come  up  with  C.  Why?  Because,  the 
inner  transmutation  has  not  been  going  on  in  him  as  it  has  in  the  first  person.  A subtle 
change  has  occurred  in  the  first  person  that  allows  his  experiment  to  be  a success.  This 
change  is  VERY  subtle,  possibly  not  even  discernible  to  the  individual.  But  it  takes  place 
nonetheless,  and  to  the  degree  that  the  practitioner  has  conditioned  or  prepared  himself.  If 
he  has  been  making  elixirs  to  purge  his  physical  being  of  dross  in  order  to  be  more  receptive 
to  higher  vibrations,  the  changes  will  be  proportionately  more  pronounced. 


57 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Further,  von  Franz  also  cites  the  Arab  alchemist,  Ibn  Sina,  who  wrote  that  through 
ECSTACY,  man  could  acquire  some  of  the  capacity  of  God.  That  is,  through  such 
practices  as  meditation,  alchemy,  ritual,  etc,  one  can  achieve  a state  of  mind  Ibn  Sina  calls 
"ecstacy."  In  this  state  one  can,  even  for  a brief  moment,  have  powers  analagous  to  those  of 
God.  Sufis  also  obtained  this  state  through  physical  practices  such  as  dancing  or  whirling, 
(i.e.  the  'whirling  dervishes').  Today,  we  know  that  this  exalted  state,  wherein  things 
'happen'  can  be  achieved  through  techniques  such  as  Magic  as  exemplified  by  Qabalah. 
Dom  Pernety's  book,  The  Great  Art,  contains  a reference  to  indicate  that  the  ancient 
Rosicrucians  blended  Alchemy  and  Qabalah  into  a cohesive  system.  Further,  their 
mysticism  was  based  on  truths  that  they  were  able  to  demonstrate  in  the  laboratory.  We 
can  see  some  strong  evidence  then,  that  there  IS  a connection  between  Magic,  Qabalah  and 
Astrology 

It  was  stated  that  in  Alchemy  one  can  make  various  medicaments;  that  these  elixirs  have 
a salutary  effect  both  physically  and  spiritually.  The  base  matters  used  for  such  medicines 
can  be  plants  or  herbs  or  various  metals.  But  where  does  one  start?  What  herb,  for  example, 
can  one  use  for  some  specific  ailment?  Or  what  metal?  Our  answers  come  from  a knowledge 
of  Qabalah-Magic,  specifically  knowledge  of  that  mighty  glyph  known  as  the  Tree  of  Life, 
and  from  the  laws  of  Astrology.  For  example,  Astrology  tells  us  that  those  people  born 
under  the  same  'sign'  will  exhibit  the  same  characteristics.  That  is,  an  individual  born  in 
early  April  is  under  the  sign  of  Aries.  Others  born  under  this  sign  will  tend  to  have  similar 
traits,  such  as  being  dynamic,  head-strong,  jumping  from  one  interest  to  another  without 
finishing  the  first,  etc.  Aries  is  a zodiacal  'picture'  that  has  in  it  the  planet  Mars.  This  picture 
composed  of  stars,  sends  rays  or  influences  to  the  earth.  The  sun  acts  as  a step-down 
transformer  and  absorbs  some  of  these  rays,  dispersing  the  rest  to  earth.  It  is  these  stellar 
influences  that  'imprint'  a person  at  the  moment  of  birth,  and  what  other  positions  were 
maintained  by  the  other  planets,  these  are  the  influences  which  make  him  who  he  (or  she)  is. 
By  careful  study  of  these  planetary  configurations,  one  can  determine  why  they  are  who 
they  are. 

What  is  perhaps  new  to  the  reader  is  the  idea  that  not  only  are  there  Arian  and  Libran 
people,  there  are  also  Arian  and  Libran  plants  and  minerals.  The  other  kingdoms  also  come 
under  the  dominion  of  the  astral  influences.  And  this  is  where  the  key  to  making  medicines 
alchemically  comes  in.  Lor  instance,  we  know  that  the  planet  Mercury  'rules'  the  nervous 
system.  We  can  determine  that  Mercury  also  rules  the  herbs  valerian  and  marjoram. 
Lurther,  the  planet  Mercury  rules  over  the  condition  known  as  insomnia.  So  then,  if  we  had 
a nervous  condition  or  had  insomnia,  what  herb  would  possibly  make  a good  medicine  for 
these  problems?  Valerian  or  marjoram,  because  they  are  'correspondences'  in  that  they 
have  the  same  ruler.  We  can  take  this  a step  further,  the  planet  Mercury  rules  over 
Wednesday.  It  is  a simple  matter  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the  best  day  to  pick  valerian 
would  be  on  a.  . .Wednesday.  By  the  same  token,  the  best  time  to  make  a medicine,  or  to 
take  that  medicine  would  also  be  a Wednesday.  An  additional  refinement  is  that  the  day  is 
divided  into  several  parts.  Each  part,  both  the  day  and  the  night,  have  periods  of  time  when 


58 


VOLUME  TWO 


the  influence  of  one  planet  is  stronger  than  any  other.  That  is  to  say,  twice  during  Thursday, 
the  influence  of  Mars  is  stronger  than  at  any  other  time.  Thus,  one  might  find  out  what  this 
time  period  is  and  not  only  make  and  take  the  medicine  on  the  'correct'  day,  but  do  it  during 
the  'correct'  times. 

In  the  mineral  kingdom,  the  same  sort  of  logic  prevails.  If  we  had  a problem  with  the 
head  or  with  hemorrhaging,  we  could  use  an  herb  such  as  garlic,  anise  or  cayenne.  A 
tincture  could  be  made  of  one  of  these  herbs  or,  if  the  practitioner  had  the  knowledge,  he 
could  exalt  the  herb  to  its  highest  level  and  confect  what  is  known  in  alchemy  as  a 'plant 
stone.1  This  is  the  highest  level  of  efficacy  any  herb  potent  in  medicine  could  have.  It 
requires  man  to  bring  the  plant  to  this  advanced  state  of  evolution.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
medicine  could  also  be  found  in  the  mineral  kingdom,  in  iron.  Mars  rules  iron  just  as  it  rules 
the  head  and  garlic,  etc.  But  how  can  one  make  medicine  from  iron?  This  is  where  practical 
laboratory  Alchemy  comes  in.  It  would  require  an  astute  reader  of  alchemical  literature  to 
arrive  at  the  proper  procedure,  or  more  aptly,  one  could  learn  from  a teacher  of  Alchemy. 
The  process  is,  to  separate  the  iron  (ore)  into  its  three  essentials.  Just  as  was  done  for  the 
plant.  To  make  the  herbal  medicine,  one  had  to  make  a tincture  of  the  herb  which  would 
extract  the  sulphur  principle.  The  sulphur  would  ’tinet’  or  colour  the  extraction  media  or 
'menstruum'  as  it  is  called.  This  colouring  is  caused  by  the  Sulphur  which  the  menstruum 
has  leached  out  of  the  herb.  The  sulphur  could  more  readily  be  obtained  by  a steam 
distillation  as  well.  The  mercury  of  the  plant  is  in  the  alcohol.  One  could  putrify  the  plant 
and  generate  alcohol  or  one  could  distill  alcohol  from  wine  (if  this  is  legal  in  the  reader's 
area)  or  purchase  grain  alcohol;  the  mercury  being  uniform  in  all  types  of  alcohol  obtained 
from  vegetable  matter.  Finally,  the  body  of  the  herb  will  be  burned  or  calcined  to  obtain  the 
Salt.  By  the  same  principle,  and  by  following  the  same  procedure,  one  could  separate  any 
body,  including  mineral,  into  its  three  essentials. 

Therefore,  one  could  take  iron  ore,  or  some  other  form  of  iron,  and  make  a tincture  using 
a suitable  menstruum.  The  tincture  would  be  driven  off  (i.e.  evaporated)  and  the  sulphur 
would  be  left  behind.  The  oil  of  iron,  then,  would  in  itself  be  a potent  medicine.  It  would  be 
more  potent  than  that  derived  from  a plant.  The  reason  being  that  the  minerals  have  'been 
around1  much  longer  than  any  plant  and  thus  have  abosorbed  greater  astral  influences  and 
thus  are  more  potent.  They  have  a higher  level  of  vibration.  In  any  event,  the  soul  of  the 
iron,  once  it  has  been  separated,  must  also  be  purified.  All  these  processes  involve  heat.  The 
mastery  of  the  heat  is  a technique  learned  from  a teacher,  or  by  (often  painful)  trial  and 
error.  Once  purified,  it  can  be  taken  as  is  or  it  can  be  combined  with  the  mercury  of  the 
mineral  kingdom  which  is  called  'alkahest.'  The  mercury  of  the  mineral  kingdom  is  not  so 
easily  come  by;  but  with  it  one  can  make  the  fabled  'Philosopher's  Stone.'  This  stone  can 
cure  all  illnesses  and  cause  instant  upward  evolutions  or  transmutations.  Does  this  sound 
as  if  it  could  change  a base  matter  into  a noble  one?  Yes,  it  can. 

To  return  to  just  the  sulphur  or  oil  of  iron,  consider  what  you  have,  once  you  know  how 
to  make  it.  Not  only  is  it  a medicine  for  the  head,  but  it  is  a medicine  for  all  other  ailments 


59 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


governed  by  Mars.  To  find  out  just  what  Mars,  and  all  other  planets,  govern,  one  could 
check  with  such  reference  works  as  The  Alchemist's  Handbook,  or  Bill's  Rulership  Book, 
etc.  Consider  just  one  aspect:  anaemia.  People  with  poor  blood  or  "tired  blood"  take 
products  such  as  Geritol.  This  fine  product  is  derived  from  iron,  sure  enough.  However,  it  is 
made  from  something  like  iron  oxide,  a non-organic  matter.  Or,  we  can  absorb  some  non- 
organic  material,  as  the  built-in,  inner  alchemist  we  all  have,  can  effect  such 
transmutations.  In  this  case  it  is  a 'biological  transmutation.'  The  tolerance  here  is  about 
3%  of  what  the  body  has  taken  in  of  non-organic  material.  Would  it  not  be  marvelous  if  we 
could  find  a substance  that  is  non-toxic,  can  be  absorbed  100%  by  the  body,  AND  has  no 
side  effects  like  some  products  do.  Did  you  think  of  oil  of  iron?  Correct.  This  substance 
CAN  be  totally  utilised  by  the  body  and  NOT  have  side  effects  that  are  unwanted.  More 
germane,  it  overcomes  the  anaemic  condition.  The  uses  of  minerals  in  Alchemy,  just  in  the 
field  of  medication,  are  endless.  Basil  Valentine  wrote  an  entire  book  on  one  mineral  alone, 
its  various  uses  in  medicine.  This  book  is  called  the  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.  It  is  a 
'recipe'  book,  explaining  the  various  preparations  of  that  metal  known  as  antimony. 
Antimony  is  poisonous?  Yes,  but  when  it  is  prepared  by  alchemical  processes,  'spagyrically,' 
it  is  not  only  rendered  non-toxic,  but  it  could  be  a panacea. 

To  give  the  reader  a flavour  of  this  incredible  book  by  Valentine  and  to  perhaps  "turn 
them  on"  to  Alchemy,  the  following  is  quote  of  a process  by  Valentine  using  antimony.  This 
was  extracted  from  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony  published  by  Dorman  Newman  in 
1678  in  England,  and  was  translated  by  Dr.  Theo  Kirkringius: 

"The  dose  of  it  before  coagulation  is  eight  grains  taken  in  wine.  It  makes  a man  very 
young  again,  delivers  him  from  all  melancholy  and  whatsoever  in  the  body  of  man  grows 
and  increaseth,  as  the  hairs  and  nails  fall  off  and  the  whole  man  is  renewed  as  a Phoenix  (if 
such  a feigned  bird,  which  is  only  here  for  example's  sake  named  by  me,  can  anywhere  be 
found  on  this  earth)  is  renewed  by  fire.  And  this  medicine  can  no  more  be  burned  by  the 
Fire,  than  the  feathers  of  that  unknown  salamander;  for  it  consumes  all  symptoms  in  the 
body,  like  consuming  fire,  to  which  it  is  deservedly  likened;  it  drives  away  every  evil  and 
expels  all  that  which  Aurum-Potabile  is  capable  to  expel". 

Does  not  that  description  sound  like  something  you  would  like  to  see  happen?  It  could, 
you  know.  Valentine  reveals  in  his  book  various  techniques  on  how  to  be  "successful"  in 
alchemical  work.  He  spoke  from  the  viewpoint  of  one  who  KNEW,  not  one  who  guessed  or 
who  thought  it  might  be  this  way.  And  Valentine  wasn't  the  only  good  writer  of  alchemical 
treatises.  The  writings  of  Paracelsus,  Geber,  Glauber,  Vaughn,  Sendivogius,  and  Flamel 
are  amongst  those  of  the  older  writers  that  are  particularly  noteworthy.  But  there  are  even 
modern  day  writers  such  as  Frater  Albertus,  Phillip  Hurley  and  Archibald  Cockren.  In 
Cockren's  book,  Alchemy  Re-discoverd  and  Restored  he  describes  various  alchemists  and 
their  writings.  He  was  particularly  impressed  with  Johannes  Isaaci  Hollander,  who,  he 
said,  wrote  so  clearly  and  plainly,  his  writings  have  been  totally  discounted.  Ah,  none  are  so 
blind  as  they  who  will  not  see.  Cockren  also  presents  a diary  of  his  own  alchemical 
experimentation.  Hurley  in  his  book.  Herbal  Alchemy,  integrates  magical  practices  with 


60 


VOLUME  TWO 


laboratory  work,  for  example,  making  talismans  for  a particular  laboratory  experiment.  In 
discussing  the  literature,  we  would  be  amiss  in  not  mentioning  the  work  of  Dr.  Carl  Jung. 
While  Dr.  Jung  did  not  appear  to  have  much  regard  for  physical  Alchemy  and  wrote 
nothing  thereon,  he  had  enormous  insight  and  grasp  of  the  psychological  aspects  of 
Alchemy.  In  this  respect,  he  has  done  mankind  a tremendous  service  in  his  fine  books  on 
this  subject.  Dr.  Jung  and  various  of  his  associates  have  delved  into  the  old  texts,  translated 
some  of  them,  and  given  us  insight  into  the  thinking  of  the  old  alchemist.  This  data 
combined  with  personal  research  provides  a sure  grasp  of  Alchemy.  While  it  is  clear  that 
Alchemy  will  not  become  as  popular  as  home  computers,  it  is  quite  possible  that  as  more 
people,  especially  those  trained  in  the  sciences  'discover'  Alchemy  and  contribute  to  the 
vast  body  of  knowledge  that  is  accumulating,  we  may  one  day  have  a 'breakthrough.1 
Thinking  people  seeking  answers  to  cosmic  questions,  greater  insight  into  themselves  and 
cures  for  incurable  ailments,  must  sooner  or  later  come  across  alchemical  knowledge.  As 
they  read  the  literature  and  experiment  in  the  lab  in  an  effort  to  unlock  the  mysteries,  the 
LV  X they  shed  will  not  only  illumine  the  path  but,  hopefully,  attract  countless  others  to  this 
Holy  Science." 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  UNIVERSAL  MERCURY 

“We  stood  upon  a dark  and  rocky  cliff  that  overhung  the  restless  seas.  In  the  sky  above  us 
was  a certain  glorious  sun,  encircled  by  that  brilliant  rainbow,  which  they  of  the  Path  of  the 
Chamelion  know. 

“I  beheld,  until  the  heavens  opened,  and  a form  like  unto  the  Mercury  of  the  Greeks  (1) 
descended,  flashing  like  the  lightning;  and  he  hovered  between  the  sky  and  the  sea.  In  his  hand 
was  the  staff  (2)  wherewith  the  eyes  of  mortals  are  closed  in  sleep,  and  wherewith  he  also,  at 
will,  re-awakeneth  the  sleeper;  and  terribly  did  the  globe  at  its  summit  dart  forth  rays.  And  he 
bare  a scroll  whereon  was  written: 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Lumen  est  in  Deo, 

Lux  in  homine  factum, 

Sive  Sol, 

Sive  Luna, 

Sive  Stelloc  errantes. 

Omnia  in  Lux, 

Lux  in  Lumine 
Lumen  in  Centrum, 

Centrum  in  Circulo, 

Circulum  ex  Nihilo, 

Quid  scis,  id  ens.  (3) 

F.I.A.T.  (4) 

E.S.T.  (5) 

E.S.T.O(6) 

E.RI.T.  (7) 

In  fidelitate  et  veritate  universas  ab  aetemitate.  (8) 

Nunc  Hora. 

Nunc  Dies. 

Nunc  Annus, 

Nunc  Saeculum, 

Omnia  sunt  Unum, 
et  Omnia  in  Omnibus. 

A.E.T.E.R.N.I.T.A.S.  (9) 

Then  Hermes  cried  aloud,  and  said: 

“I  am  Hermes  Mercurius,  the  Son  of  God,  the  messenger  uniting  Superiors  and  Inferiors. 

I exist  not  without  them,  and  their  union  is  in  me.  I bathe  in  the  Ocean.  I fill  the  expanse  of  Air.  I 
penetrate  the  depths  beneath.” 

And  the  Frater  who  was  with  me,  said  unto  me: 

“Thus  is  the  Balance  of  Nature  maintained,  for  this  Mercury  is  the  beginning  of  all 
movement.  This  He,  (10)  this  She,  this  IT,  is  in  all  things,  but  hath  wings  which  thou  canst  not 
constrain.  For  when  thou  sayest  ‘He  is  here’  he  is  not  here,  for  by  that  time  he  is  already  away, 
for  he  is  Eternal  Motion  and  Vibration.” 

Nevertheless  in  Mercury  must  thou  seek  all  things.  Therefore  not  without  reason  did  our 
Ancient  Fratres  say  that  the  Great  Work  was  to  “Fix  the  Volatile.”  There  is  but  one  place  where 
he  can  be  fixed,  and  that  is  the  Centre,  a centre  exact.  “Centrum  in  trigono  centri.”  (11)  The 
Centre  in  the  triangle  of  the  Centre. 

If  thine  own  soul  be  baseless  how  wilt  thou  find  a standing  point  whence  to  fix  the 
soul  of  the  Universe? 

“Christus  de  Christi, 

Mercury  de  Mercurio, 

Per  viam  crucis. 

Per  vitam  Lucis 
Deus  te  Adjutabitur!”  (12) 


62 


VOLUME  TWO 


TRANSLATION  OF  AND  NOTES 
ON  DOCUMENT  M 
By  C.  H.  FRATER,  S.RM.D. 

1.  Hermes  is  Greek,  Mercury  is  Roman. 

2.  Compare  with  v.  47  ODYSSEY:  “Him  promptly  obeyed  the  active  destroyer  of  Argus. 
Forth  sped  he,  and  under  his  feet  he  bound  his  ambrosial  sandals.  Then,  taking  his  staff 
wherewith  he  the  eyes  of  mortals  closeth  at  will,  and  the  sleeper  at  will  reawakens.” 

3.  Translation:  The  Light  is  in  God,  the  LVX  hath  been  made  into  Man.  Whether  Sun,  or 
Moon,  or  Wandering  Stars,  all  are  in  Lux,  the  Lux  in  the  Light,  the  Light  in  the  Centre,  the 
Centre  in  the  Circle,  the  Circle  from  the  Nothingness  (Negative  or  Ain)  What  thou  mayest  be 
(i.e.  what  thou  hast  in  thyself,  the  capability  of  being)  that  shalt  thou  be  (or  become). 

4.  Flatus.  Ignis.  Aqua.  Terra.  (Air.  Fire.  Water.  Earth.) 

5.  Ether.  Sal.  Terrae.  (Ether,  the  Salt  of  the  Earth.) 

6.  Ether.  Subtilis.  Totius.  Orbis.  (The  subtle  Ether  of  the  whole  universe.) 

7.  Ether.  Ruens.  In.  Terra.  (The  Ether  rushing  into  the  Earth.) 

8.  Let  it  be  (or  become).  It  is.  Be  it  so.  It  shall  be  (or  endure).  In  Universal  faithfulness 
and  truth  from  eternity.  Now  an  hour,  Now  a day,  Now  a year,  Now  an  age,  all  things  are  One, 
and  All  in  All.  ETERNITY. 

9.  These  ten  letters  are  Notaricons  of:  Ab  Kether.  Ex  Chokmah.  Tu  Binah.  Ex  Chesed. 
Regina  Geburah.  Nunc  Tiphareth.  In  Netzach.  Totius  Hod.  Ad  Yesod.  Saeculorum  Malkuth. 
(From  the  Crown,  out  of  Wisdom — Thou,  O Understanding  art  Mercy,  Queen  of  Severity.  Now 
the  perfect  Beauty,  in  the  Victory,  of  all  Splendour,  for  the  Foundation,  of  the  Ages  of  the 
Universe.) 

10.  Probably  alludes  to  the  Three  Principles. 

11.  This  was,  I believe,  but  am  not  certain,  the  motto  of  our  Frater  Count  Adrian  a 
Meynsicht,  otherwise  known  as  Henricus  Madathanus. 

12.  The  Christ  from  the  Christ.  The  Mercury  from  the  Mercury,  Through  the  Path  of  the 
Cross,  Through  the  life  of  the  Light,  God  shall  be  Thy  Help. 


63 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


64 


VOLUME  TWO 


VOLUME  THREE 


THE  CORE  OF  THE  TRADITION 

00 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


66 


VOLUME  THREE 


VOLUME  THREE 

THE  CORE  OF  THE  TRADITION 


THE  PILLARS 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  N.O.M. 

As  confusion  is  found  to  exist  with  regard  to  the  Right  and  Left  Pillars  of  the  Sephiroth  on  the 
Tree  of  Life  in  relation  to  the  right  and  left  sides  of  a man,  and  as  to  the  phases  of  the  Moon — you  must 
note: 

That  in  every  diagram  and  picture,  the  right  hand  side  of  the  observer  is  next  to  the  Pillar  of 
Mercy — Chokmah,  Chesed,  and  Netzach;  while  the  Pillar  of  Severity  is  on  the  observer’s  left  hand.  Yet 
when  you  apply  the  Tree  of  Life  to  yourself,  your  right  side,  arm,  and  leg  represent  the  side  of  Strength 
and  Severity,  Binah,  Geburah  and  Hod,  and  your  left  side  refers  to  the  Pillar  of  Mercy.  So  that  when  you 
look  at  a diagram,  you  are  looking,  as  it  were,  at  a man  facing  you,  that  your  right  side  faces  his  left.  His 
Merciful  side  forms  the  right  hand  Pillar  in  front  of  you,  so  that  it  is  as  if  you  looked  at  yourself  in  a 
mirror. 

Just  as  the  man  looks  at  you,  so  does  the  Moon  look  at  you  and  so  you  say  that  the  Moon  in  her 
increase  is  on  the  side  of  Mercy,  the  right  hand  pillar  of  the  Sephiroth;  and  in  her  decrease,  the  crescent  is 
on  the  left  hand  Pillar  of  Severity. 

A Diagram,  then,  is  a picture  of  a Man  or  the  Moon  facing  you.  The  Temple  Pillars  are  similar: 


Black  Pillar 

Severity 

Left  North 

White  Pillar 

Mercy 

Right  South 

Black  Pillar 

Boaz 

Stolistes 

White  Pillar 

Yachin 

Dadouchos 

1 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


That  is,  the  white  Mercy  or  Jachin  Pillar  is  on  your  right  hand  as  you  approach  the  Altar  from  the 
West  and  from  the  Hiereus.  (See  Chronicles  II.  iii,  17.)  “And  call  the  Name  on  the  right  hand  (of  him  who 
enters)  Jachin,  and  the  Name  of  that  on  the  left,  Boaz.” 

Now  Boaz  = Strength,  Seventy,  Binah,  Black  Pillar,  and  Jachin=  White  Pillar  of  Mercy. 

So  in  making  the  Qabalistic  Cross  on  your  breast  it  is  correct  to  touch  the  Forehead  and  say 
Ateh — Thou  art;  the  Heart — Malkuth;  Right  Shoulder,  yeGeburah;  left  shoulder  ve-Gedulah,  and  with  the 
fingers  clasped  on  the  breast  say,  Le,  olahm,  amen! 

The  Pillars  II 

In  the  explanation  of  the  Symbols  of  the  Grade  of  Neophyte,  your  attention  has  been  directed  to 
the  general  mystical  meaning  of  the  Two  pillars  called  in  the  Ritual  the  "Pillars  of  Hermes"  of  "Seth"  and 
of  "Solomon."  In  the  9th  chapter  of  the  Ritual  f the  Dead  they  are  referred  to  as  the  "Pillars  of  Shu,"  the 
"Pillars  of  the  Gods  of  Dawning  Light,"  and  also  as  "the  North  and  Southern  Columns  of  the  Gate  of  the 
Hall  of  Truth.”  In  the  125th  Chapter,  they  are  represented  by  the  sacred  gateway,  the  door  to  which  the 
aspirant  is  brought  when  he  has  completed  the  negative  confession.  The  archaic  pictures  on  the  one  Pillar 
are  painted  in  black  upon  a white  ground,  and  those  on  the  other  in  white  upon  a black  ground,  in  order  to 
express  the  interchange  and  reconciliation  of  opposing  forces  and  the  eternal  balance  of  light  and 
darkness  which  gives  force  to  visible  nature. 

The  black  cubical  bases  represent  darkness  and  matter  wherein  the  spirit,  the  Ruach  Elohim, 
began  to  formulate  the  Ineffable  NAME,  that  Name  which  the  ancient  Rabbis  have  said  "rushes  through 
the  universe,"  that  Name  before  which  the  Darkness  rolls  back  the  birth  of  time. 

The  flaming  red  triangular  capitals  which  crown  the  summit  of  the  Pillars  represent  the  Triune 
manifestation  of  the  Spirit  of  Life,  the  Three  Mothers  of  the  Sepher  Yetsirah,  the  Three  Alchemical 
Principles  of  Nature,  the  Sulphur,  the  Mercury  and  the  Salt. 

Each  Pillar  is  surmounted  by  its  own  light-bearer  veiled  from  the  material  world. 

At  the  base  of  both  Pillars  rise  the  Lotus  flowers,  symbols  of  regeneration  and  metempsychosis. 
The  archaic  illustrations  are  taken  from  the  vignettes  of  teh  17th  and  125th  chapter  of  the  Ritual  of  the 
Dead  the  Egyptian  Book  of  the  Per-em-Hru  or  the  Book  of  Coming  Forth  into  the  Day,  the  oldest  book  in 
the  world  as  yet  discovered.  The  Recension  of  the  Priests  of  ON  is  to  be  found  in  the  walls  of  the 
Pyramids  of  the  Kings  of  the  5th  and  6th  Dynasties  at  Sakarah,  the  recensions  of  the  1 1th  and  12th 
Dynasties  on  the  sarcophagi  of  thatperiod,  and  the  Theban  recension  of  the  1 8th  Dynasty  and  onward  is 
found  on  papyri,  both  plain  and  illuminated.  No  satisfactory  translation  of  these  books  is  avalable,  none 
having  been  yet  attempted  by  a scholar  having  the  qualifications  of  mystic  as  well  as  Egyptologist. 

The  Ritual  of  the  Dead,  generally  speaking,  is  a collection  of  hymns  and  prayers  in  the  form  of  a 
series  of  ceremonial  Rituals  to  enable  the  man  to  unite  himself  with  Osiris  the  Redeemer.  After  this  union 
he  is  no  longer  called  the  man,  but  Osiris  with  whom  he  is  now  symbolically  identified.  "That  they  also 
may  be  One  of  us,"  said  the  Christ  of  the  New  Testament.  "I  am  Osiris"  said  the  purified  and  justified 
man,  his  soul  luminous  and  washed  from 


2 


VOLUME  THREE 


sin  in  the  immortal  and  uncreated  light,  united  to  Osiris,  and  thereby  justified,  and  the  son  of  God; 
purified  by  suffering,  strengthened  by  opposition,  regenerate  through  self-sacrifice.  Such  is  the  subject  of 
the  great  Egyptian  Ritual. 

The  17th  Chapter  of  the  Theban  recension  consists  of  a very  ancient  text  with  several 
commentaries,  also  extremely  old,  and  some  prayers,  none  of  which  come  into  the  scheme  of  the  orginal 
text.  It  has,  together  with  the  12th  chapter,  been  very  carefully  translated  for  the  purpose  of  this  lecture 
by  the  V.H.  Frater  M.W.T,  and  the  V.H.  Soror  S.S.D.D.  has  made  many  valuable  suggestions  with  regard 
to  the  interpretation.  The  Title  and  Preface  of  the  17th  Chapter  reads: 

"Concerning  the  exaltation  of  the  Glorified  Ones,  of  Coming  and  Going  forth  in  the  Divine 
Domain,  of  the  Genies  of  the  Beautiful  land  of  Amentet.  Of  coming  forth  in  the  light  o fDay  in  any  form 
desired,  of  Hearing  the  Forces  of  Nature  by  being  enshrined  as  a living  Bai." 

And  the  rubric  is: 

"The  united  with  Osiris  shall  recite  it  when  he  has  entered  the  Harbour.  May  glorious  things  be 
done  thereby  upon  earth.  May  all  the  words  of  the  Adept  be  fulfilled." 

Owing  to  the  complex  use  of  symbols,  the  ritual  translation  of  the  Chapter  can  only  be  understood 
by  perpetual  reference  to  the  ancient  Egyptian  commentaries,  and  therefore  the  following  paraphrase  has 
been  put  together  to  convey  to  modern  minds  as  nearly  as  possible  the  ideas  conceived  by  the  old 
Egyptians  in  this  glorious  triumphal  song  of  the  Soul  of  Man  made  one  with  Osiris,  the  Redeemer. 

"I  am  TUM  made  One  with  all  things. 

"I  have  become  NU.  I am  RA  in  his  rising  ruling  by  right  of  his  power  I am  the  Great  God  self-begotten, 
even  NU,  who  pronounced  His  Names,  and  thus  the  Circle  of  Gods  was  created. 

"I  am  Yesterday  and  know  Tomorrow.  I can  never  more  be  overcome.  I know  the  secret  of  Osiris,  whose 
being  is  perpetually  revered  of  RA.  I have  finished  the  work  which  was  planned  at  the  Beginning.  I am 
the  spirit  made  manifest,  and  armed  with  two  vast  eagle's  plumes.  Isis  and  Nephthys  are  their  names, 
made  One  with  Osiris. 

"I  claim  my  inheritance.  My  sisns  have  been  uprooted  and  my  passions  overcome.  I am  Pure  White.  I 
dwell  in  Time.  I live  through  Eternity,  when  Initiates  make  offering  to  the  Everlasting  Gods.  I have 
passed  along  the  Pathway.  I know  the  Northern  and  the  Southern  Pillars,  the  two  Columns  at  the 
Gateway  of  the  Hall  of  Truth. 

"Stretch  unto  me  your  hands,  O ye  Dwellers  in  the  centre.  For  I am  transformed  into  a God  in  your 
midst.  Made  One  with  Osiris,  I have  filled  the  eye  socket  in  the  day  of  the  morning  when  Good  and  Evil 
fought  together. 

"I  have  lifted  up  the  cloud-veil  in  the  Sky  of  the  Storm.  Till  I saw  RA  born  again  from  out  of  the  Great 
waters.  His  strength  is  my  strength  and  my  strength  is  his  strength.  Homage  to  you,  Lords  of  Truth, 
chiefs  of  Osiris  rules.  Granting  release  from  Sin,  Followers  of  Ma  where  rest  is  Glorious.  Whose  throne 
Anubis  built  in  the  day  when  Osiris  said: 

"Lo!  A man  wins  his  way  to  Amentet.  I come  before  you,  to  drive  away  my  faults.  As  ye  did  to  the 
Seven  Glorious  Ones  who  follow  their  Lord  Osiris.  I am  that  Spirit  of  Earth  and  Sun." 

"Between  the  Two  Pillars  of  Flame.  I am  RA  when  he  fought  beneath  the  Ashad  Tree,  destroying  the 
enemies  of  the  Ancient  of  Days.  I am  the  Dweller  in  the  Egg.  I am  he  who  turns  in  the  disc.  I shine  forth 
from  the  horizon  as  the  gold  from  the  mine.  I float  through  the  Pillars  of  SHU  in  the  ether.  Without  a 
peer  among  the  Gods.  The  Breath  of  my 


3 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


mouth  is  as  a flame.  I light  upon  the  Earth  with  my  glory.  Eye  cannot  gaze  on  my  daring  beams  as  they 
reach  through  the  Heavens  and  lick  up  the  Nile  with  tongues  of  flame.  I am  strong  upon  Earth  with  the 
strength  of  RA.  I have  come  into  Harbour  as  Osiris  made  perfect.  Let  priestly  offerings  be  made  to  me  as 
one  in  the  train  of  the  ancient  of  Days.  I brood  as  the  Divine  Spirit.  I move  in  the  firmness  of  my 
Strength.  I undulate  as  the  Waves  that  vibrate  through  Eternity.  Osiris  has  been  claimed  with 
acclamation,  and  ordained  to  rule  among  the  Gods.  Enthroned  in  the  Domain  of  Horus  where  the  Spirit 
and  Body  are  united  in  the  presence  of  the  Ancient  of  Days.  Blotted  out  are  the  sins  of  his  body  in 
passion.  He  has  passed  the  Eternal  Gate,  and  has  received  the  New  Year  Feast  with  Incense,  at  the 
marriage  of  Earth  with  Heaven. 

"TUM  has  built  his  Bridal  Chamber.  RURURET  has  founded  his  shrine.  The  procession  is  completed. 
HORUS  has  purified,  SET  has  consecrated,  SHU  made  one  with  OSIRIS,  has  entered  his  heritage. 

"As  TUM  he  has  entered  the  Kingdom  to  completed  union  with  the  Invisible.  Thy  Bride,  O 
Osiris,  is  Isis,  who  mourned  thee  when  she  found  thee  slain.  In  Isis,  thou  art  born  again.  From  Nephthys 
is  thy  nourishment.  They  cleansed  thee  in  thy  Heavenly  Birth.  Youth  waits  upon  thee,  ardour  is  ready  at 
thy  hand.  And  their  arms  shall  uphold  thee  for  millions  of  years.  Initiates  surround  Thee  and  Thine 
enemies  are  cast  down.  The  Powers  of  Darkness  are  destroyed.  The  Companions  of  They  Joys  are  with 
Thee.  Thy  Victories  in  the  Battle  await  their  reward  in  the  Pillar.  The  Forces  of  Nature  obey  Thee.  Thy 
Power  is  exceeding  great.  The  Gods  curse  him  that  curseth  Thee.  Thine  Aspirations  are  fulfilled.  Thou 
art  Mistress  of  Splendour.  They  are  destroyed  who  barred  the  way.  The  f 25th  Chapter  is  concerned  with 
the  entry  of  an  Initiate  into  the  Hall  of  the  Two  Columns  of  Justice,  and  commenced  with  a most  beautiful 
and  symbolic  description  of  Death,  as  a journey  from  the  barren  wilderness  of  Earth,  to  the  Glorious  Land 
which  lies  beyond.  The  literal  translation  of  the  opening  lines  is  as  follows: 

"I  have  come  from  afar  to  look  upon  thy  beauties.  My  hands  salute  Thy  Name  of  Justice.  I have 
come  from  afar,  where  the  Acacia  Tree  grew  not.  Where  the  tree  thick  with  leaves  is  not  born.  Where 
there  com  not  beams  from  herb  or  grass.  I have  entered  the  Place  of  Mystery.  I have  communed  with 
Set.  Sleep  came  upon  me,  I was  rapped  therein,  bowing  down  before  the  hidden  things.  I was  ushered 
into  the  House  of  Osiris.  I saw  the  marvels  that  were  there.  The  Princes  of  the  Gates  in  their  Glory. 

The  illustrations  in  this  chapter  represent  the  Hall  of  Truth  as  seen  through  the  open  leaves  of  its 
door.  The  Hall  is  presided  over  by  a God  who  holds  his  right  hand  over  the  cage  of  a hawk,  and  his  left 
over  the  food  of  eternity.  On  each  side  of  the  God  is  a cornice  crowned  by  a row  of  alternate  feathers  and 
Uraei  symbolizing  justice  and  firey  power.  The  door  leaf  which  completes  the  right  hand  of  a stall  is 
called  "Posessor  of  Truth  controlling  the  Feet,"  while  that  on  the  left  is  "Possessor  of  strength,  binding  the 
male  and  female  animals." 

The  42  Judges  of  the  Dead  are  represented  as  seated  in  a long  row,  and  each  of  them  has  to  be 
named,  and  the  Sin  over  which  he  presided  has  been  denied.  This  chapter  describes  the 


4 


VOLUME  THREE 


introduction  of  the  initiate  into  the  Hall  of  Truth  by  Anubis,  who,  having  questioned  the  aspirant,  receives 
from  him  an  account  of  his  initiation,  and  is  satisfied  by  his  right  to  enter.  He  States  that  he  has  been 
taken  into  the  ante-chamber  of  the  Temple  and  there  stripped  and  blind-folded,  he  had  to  grope  for  the 
entrance  of  the  Hall,  and  having  found  it  he  was  reclothed  and  anointed  in  the  presence  of  the  Initiated. 

He  is  then  asked  for  the  Pass-words  and  demands  that  his  Soul  should  be  weighed  in  the  Great  Balance  of 
the  Hall  of  Truth,  whereupon  ANUBIS  again  interrogates  him  concerning  the  symbolism  of  the  door  of 
the  Hall,  and  his  answers  being  found  correct,  ANUBIS  says:  "Pass  on,  thou  knowest  it." 

Among  other  things  the  initiate  states  that  he  has  been  purified  four  times,  the  same  number  of  times  that 
the  Neophyte  is  purified  and  consecrated  in  the  ceremony  of  the  Neophyte.  He  then  makes  the  long 
Negative  Confession,  stating  to  each  Judge  in  turn  that  he  is  innocent  of  that  form  of  Sin  over  which  he 
judges.  Then  he  invokes  the  Judges  to  do  him  justice,  and  afterwards  describes  how  he  had  washed  in  the 
washing  place  of  the  South,  and  rested  in  the  North,  in  the  place  called  "Son  of  the  Deliverers"  and  he 
becomes  the  Dweller  under  the  Olive  Tree  of  Peace,  and  how  how  he  was  given  a tall  flame  of  fire  and  a 
sceptre  of  cloud,  and  made  a lake  of  it.  The  initiate  is  then  brought  to  the  actual  Pillars,  and  has  to  name 
them  and  their  parts  under  the  symbol  of  the  Scales  of  Balance.  He  also  has  to  name  the  Guardian  of  the 
Gateway  who  prevents  his  passage,  and  when  all  these  are  propitiated,  the  plea  of  the  Hall  itself  cries  out 
against  his  steps,  saying  "Because  I am  silent,  because  I am  pure,"  and  it  must  know  that  his  aspirations 
are  pure  enough  hand  high  enough  for  him  to  be  allowed  to  tread  upon  it.  He  is  then  allowed  to  announce 
to  Thoth  that  he  is  clean  from  all  evil,  and  has  overcome  the  influence  of  the  planets,  and  THOTH  says  to 
him: 

"Who  is  He  whose  Pylons  are  of  Flame,  whose  walls  of  Living  Uraei,  and  the  flames  of  whose 
House  are  streams  of  Water?"  and  the  Initiate  replies  "Osiris!" 

And  it  is  immediately  proclaimed:  "The  meat  shall  be  from  the  Infinite,  and  thy  drink  from  the  Infinite. 
Thou  art  able  to  go  forth  to  the  sepulchral  feasts  on  earth,  for  thou  has  overcome." 

Thus,  these  two  chapters,  which  are  represented  by  their  illustrations  upon  the  Pillars,  represent  the 
advance  and  purification  of  the  Soul  and  its  union  with  Osiris,  the  Redeemer,  in  the  Golden  Dawn  of  the 
Infinite  Light,  in  which  the  Soul  is  transfigured,  knows  all,  and  can  do  all,  for  it  is  made  One  with  the 
Eternal  God. 

KHABS  AM  PEKHT 
KONX  OM  PAX 
LIGHT  IN  EXTENSION! 


5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  PILLARS  III 
By 

G.H.  FRATER  S.R.M.D. 

The  Pillars  and  the  Meaning  of  the  Hierogyphics  Inscribed  on  them,  taken  from 
the  vignettes  of  the  17th,  and  25th,  Chapters  of  the  "PER-M-HRU"  or  Egyptian  Ritual  Of 
The  Dead. 

In  the  explanation  of  the  Symbols  of  the  Grade  of  Neophyte,  your  attention  has 
been  directed  to  the  general  mystical  meaning  of  the  juxtaposition  of  the  two  Pillars:  and 
therefore  I will  only  ask  you  to  notice  that  the  Hieroglyphics  of  the  one  are  painted  in  black 
upon  a white  ground,  and  those  of  the  other  in  the  same  colours  but  reversed;  the  better  to 
express  the  interchange  and  reconcilement  of  opposing  forces,  and  the  Eternal  Balance  of 
Light  and  Darkness  which  gives  form  to  the  Visible  Universe.  The  black  square  bases 
represent  Darkness  and  Matter  wherein  the  Spirit,  the  Ruach  Elohim  formulated  the 
Eternal  Pronunciation  of  the  Ineffable  Name,  that  Name  which  the  Rabbis  of  old  have 
said: 

"Rusheth  through  the  Universe;  that  Name  before  which  rolled  back  the  Darkness,  at 
the  Birth  of  the  Morning  of  Time."  The  flame-red  triangular  capitals  which  crown  the 
summit  of  the  Pillars,  represent  the  triune  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  of  Life,  the  "Three 
Mothers"  of  the  "Sepher  Yetzirah,”  the  three  Alchemical  Principles  of  Nature,  the 
Sulphur,  the  Mercury  and  the  Salt.  And  each  pillar  is  surmounted  by  its  own  Light-bearer 
though  veiled  from  the  Material  World. 

The  Hieroglyphical  figures  upon  the  Pillars  are  taken  from  the  vignettes  of  the  17th, 
and  125th,  chapters  of  the  "Ritual  of  the  Dead,"  the  Egyptian  "Per-M-Hru."  This  celebrated 
and  most  ancient  work  is  a collection  of  Mystical  Hymns  and  Addresses  in  the  form  of  a 
species  of  Ceremonial  Ritual  for  the  use  of  the  soul  after  death,  to  enable  it  to  unite  itself  to 
the  Body  of  Osiris  the  Redeemer:  and  thenceforth  in  the  Ritual  is  it  no  longer  called  the 
Soul,  but  it  is  called  "the  Osiris"  of  whom  it  is  a member; 

"I  am  the  Vine,  ye  are  the  Branches"  said  the  Christ  of  the  New  Testament:  "I  am  a 
member  of  the  Body  of  Osiris"  said  the  purified  and  justified  soul.  The  Soul,  the  Soul 
luminous  and  washed  from  Sin  in  the  Immortal  and  Uncreated  Light,  united  to  Osiris,  and 
justified  Son  of  God,  such  is  the  subject  of  the  great  Egyptian  Ritual;  purified  by  suffering, 
strengthened  by  opposition,  regenerate  through  Self-sacrifice.  Nor  is  the  "Ritual  of  the 
Dead"  a work  of  comparatively  recent  time;  for  the  great  Egyptologists  Birch  and  Bunsen 
assert  that  its  origin  is  anterior  to  Menes  and  belongs  probably  to  the  pre-Menite  Dynasty  of 
Abydos,  between  3100  and  4500  B.C.  and  it  implies  that  at  that  period  the  system  of 
Osirian  worship  and  mythology  was  already  in  actual  existence.  Of  all  the  chapters  in  the 
"Per-M-Hru,"  the  17th,  is  one  of  the  oldest  as  shewn  by  its  Gloss  and  Scholia,  and  it  is  the 


6 


VOLUME  THREE 


symbols  of  this  Chapter  and  the  125th,  which  form  the  designs  on  the  Pillars  before 
you;  at  the  base  of  each  of  which  rises  the  Lotus,  symbolic  of  the  New  Life,  regeneration 
and  metempsychosis.  In  the  Papyri  which  have  these  symbols  is  if  the  Abydos  Dynasty  be 
prior  to  Menes,  who  was  said  to  be  the  first  Human  King.  The  pre-Menite  Dynasties  are 
said  to  be  those  of  the  Gods,  the  Demi-Gods,  and  the  Menes,  the  hieroglyphical  text  of 
this  chapter,  a group  of  hieroglyphics  recurs  at  intervals,  the  literal  translation  of  which  is, 
"the  explanation.  After  these  groups  comes  a short  commentary  or  gloss  on  the  preceding 
and  more  ancient  text.  According  to  the  pre-cited  authorities  this  gloss  was  mixed  up  with 
the  text  as  early  as  2,250  B.C.  at  a period  long  anterior  to  the  era  of  Joseph  and  to  that  of 
the  Trojan  War;  and  the  circumstances  of  its  possessing  a written  commentary  even  at  this 
date  shows  the  much  greater  antiquity  of  the  actual  text.  The  especial  title  of  the  17th  chapter 
is  "The  Book  of  the  Egyptian  Faith,”  and  its  subject  is  a sort  of  Hymn  of  the  Osirified  soul, 
which  may  be  partially  and  succinctly  reproduced  as  follows: 


BLACK  PILLAR 


7 


VOLUME  THREE 


THE  WORDS  OF  THE  DEPARTED  SPIRIT  OSIRIS,  SON  OF  GOD 

"I  am  Toom,  the  Setting  Sun,  I am  the  only  being  in  the  firmament  of  Heaven. 

I am  Ra,  the  Rising  Sun,  I have  passed  from  the  gate  of  Death  unto  Life. 

The  Sun's  power  beginneth  again  after  he  hath  set;  he  riseth  again  (so  doth  the 
justified  Spirit  of  Man.) 

I am  the  Great  God  begotten  of  himself;  I can  never  be  turned  back  by  the 
Elementary  Powers;  I am  the  Morning,  1 know  the  Gate.  (I  ever  rise  again  unto  existence.  I 
know  the  pathway  through  death  unto  life.) 

(The  date  of  Menes  has  been  calculated  as  B.C.  5500.  Others  think  earlier.) 

The  Father  of  the  Spirit;  the  Eternal  Soul  of  the  Sun.  He  hath  examined  and  He 
hath  proved  me.  He  hath  found  that  I fought  on  Earth  the  battle  of  the  good  Gods,  as  He, 
my  Father,  Lord  of  the  Invisible  World  ordered  me  to  do. 

I know  the  Great  God  who  existeth  in  the  Invisible. 

I am  the  Great  Phoenix  which  is  in  Annu,  the  former  of  my  Life  and  my  Being  am 
I." 

The  symbols  on  the  Columns  beginning  at  the  top  of  the  one  with  the  Black  figures 
on  a white  ground  are  mystical  representations  of  the  various  paragraphs  of  the  17th 
chapter.  They  show  the  symbol  of  Toom  the  setting  sun;  the  past  and  the  future.  The 
Adoration  of  Toom  of  the  West.  The  Abode  of  the  West  shown  by  the  Jackal  of  Anubis  in 
Shrine  with  Isis  and  Nephthys  adoring  The  Adoration  of  Osiris,  the  Phoenix  or  Bennu. 

The  reformation  of  the  Departed  Spirit,  shewn  by  the  Soul  descending  to  the  Body  on 
the  bier,  in  the  form  of  a human  headed  bird,  when  of  dual  manifestation,  shown  by  the 
birds  on  either  side  of  the  prostrate  mummy.  So  the  purified  Soul  passes  ever  onward  and 
upward,  and  still  rises  the  mystical  hymn.  Purified,  the  Soul  reaches  the  pools  of  the  two 
Truths,  shewn  by  the  two  quadrangular  figures,  it  passeth  through  Amenti  the  Gate  of  the 
North,  and  through  the  Gate  of  Taser;  and  it  saith  to  the  Mystic  Guardians:  "Give  me  your 
strength,  for  I am  made  even  as  ye.”  Then  comes  the  Mystical  Eye  of  Osiris  representing  the 
Orb  of  the  Sun;  and  the  Cow  symbolical  of  the  Great  Water,  the  blue  firmament  of  Heaven. 
Next  is  the  Adoration  of  the  Lords  of  Truth  behind  the  Northern  Heaven:  "Hail  unto  ye,  ye 
Lords  of  Truth,  ye  Chiefs  behind  Osiris!  ye  followers  of  Her  whose  peace  is  sure."  When  the 
soul  arrives  at  the  Mystic  Pool  of  Persea  trees,  wherein  is  Horus  symbolised  by  the  Great 
Cat  who  slays  the  Evil  Serpent  Apophis.  Last  of  the  Symbols  of  the  17th  chapter  is  the 
Adoration  of  the  Life  of  the  Creator  in  His  bark,  and  the  uniting  of  the  purified  Soul  with 
its  Maker.  The  125th  chapter  is  called  "The  Hall  of  the  Two  Truths"  and  its  full  title  is  "The 
Book  of  Going  to  the  Hall  of  the  Two  Truths,  and  of  Separating  a person  from  his  Sins, 
when  he  has  been  made  to  see  the  Faces  of  the  Gods."  It  opens  with  a solemn  Adoration  of 
the  Lord  of  Truth,  and  the  Ceremony  of  passing  by  the  Forty-two  Assessors  of  the  Dead 
represented  by  seated  figures.  Then  comes  the  weighing  of  the  soul,  and  the  Mystical 
Meaning  of  various  parts  of  the  Hall,  the  naming  of  which  is  insisted  on  by  the  various 
Guardians,  and  is  similar  to  the  Mystic  Circumambulation  of  the  Neophyte  in  the  path  of 
Darkness  in  the  Grade  when  he  has  to  name  the  Guardians  of  the  Gates  of  East  and  West. 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  figures  on  the  pillar  represent  the  Soul  introduced  either  by  its  own  guide,  or  by 
the 

jackal-headed  Anubis,  the  Guide  in  general  of  the  Dead,  into  the  Hall  of  Truth. 

The  Soul  then  watches  the  weighing  of  its  actions  in  Earth-life,  against  a figure  of 

Truth, 

in  the  Mystical  Scales  of  Maat  and  Anubis. 

Thoth,  ibis-headed,  records  the  judgement;  and  the  Devourer  stands  ready  to  seize,  if 
the  soul  has  led  an  evil  life. 

Passing  through  this  ordeal,  the  soul  is  then  introduced  into  the  presence  of  Osiris 
by  Horus.  Osiris  sits  in  his  Shrine  upon  a throne,  with  the  Crook  and  Scourge,  symbols  of 
Mercy  and  Severity  in  his  hands;  behind  him  are  Isis  and  Nephthys,  the  Goddesses  of 
Nature  and  Perfection;  and  before  him  are  the  four  Genii  of  the  Dead  upon  the  Lotus 
Flower,  the  emblem  of  the  Metempsychosis.  Thus  the  whole  of  the  Symbols  upon  the 
pillars  represent  the  advance  and  purification  of  the  Soul,  and  its  uniting  with  Osiris  the 
Redeemer;  in  that  Golden  Dawn  of  an  Infinite  Light  wherein  the  soul  is  transfigured; 
knows  all  and  can  do  all;  for  it  hath  become  joined  unto  Eternal  Gods. 

KHABS  AM  PEKHT  - KONX  OM  PAX  - LIGHT  IN  EXTENSION. 

THE  PILLARS  IV 
By 

G.H.  FRATER  SUB  SPE 
THE  WHITE  PILLAR 

The  designs  on  this  Pillar  are  taken  from  the  Vignettes  to  the  17th  Chapter  of  the  Book 
of  the  Dead.  This  was  inadvertently  called  by  Lepsius  the  XVIth  chapter.  It  is  not,  however,  a 
chapter  at  all,  but  ornaments  or  illustrations  (called  Vignettes)  intended  to  accompany  the 
Hymn  to  the  Rising  Sun.  The  vignettes  are  slightly  different  in  different  papyri;  those  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani  are  the  best  on  the  whole;  those  on  the  pillars  are  selected  from  several 
examples.  The  designs  may  be  explained  as  follows:  The  first  figure  does  not  occur  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani,  and  varies  in  others.  It  is  variously  explained.  Probably  it  is  meant  for  an 
ideograph  of  the  Hymn.  The  soul,  figured  by  a bird,  beholding  the  Truth  (a  feather).  The 
two  figures  following  are  said  by  some  Egyptologists  to  be  the  deceased  and  his  wife  playing 
drafts  under  a canopy.  It  is  more  probable  however  that  his  initiator  or  guide  teaching  him 
the  ways  of  the  kingdom  of  souls,  by  means  of  a game.  He  is  moving  a piece,  he  wears  the 
Lotus  headdress,  and  she  has  the  crown  of  Nephthys.  Following  this  are  the  souls  of  the 
deceased  and  his  guide  as  two  human-headed  hawks  on  a pylon-shaped  building.  Note  that 
the  deceased,  being  united  to  Osiris,  is  called  in  the  Ritual  "Osiris"  or  "The  Osirian." 
(Compare  the  Christian  promise  "That  ye  may  be  one  with  ME." 


10 


VOLUME  THREE 


"Saith  Osiris,  after  he  hath  come  to  this  haven  of  rest,  it  is  good  for  a man  to  recite 
these  words,  while  he  is  yet  upon  earth.  The  deceased  is  next  shown  in  adoration  before  two 
lions  seated  back  to  back  and  supporting  the  horizon  with  the  sun's  disc.  The  Lion  on  the 
right  is  called  Sef  ("Yesterday  ) and  that  on  the  left  is  Tau  ("Tomorrow")  "Who  then  is 
this?  It  is  Tern,  the  Dweller  in  his  disc,  or  (as  others  say)  it  is  Ra,  in  his  rising,  in  the  Eastern 
horizon  of  heaven.  He  saith,  "1  am  yesterday,  1 know  tomorrow.  Yesterday  is  Osiris,  (the 
Deceased)  and  tomorrow  is  Ra  on  the  day  when  he  shall  destroy  the  enemies  of  Neb-er- 
tcher,  and  when  he  shall  establish  as  Prince  and  Ruler  his  son  Horus." 

The  next  figure,  which  is  not  in  all  of  the  papyri,  represents  a funeral  chest,  on  which 
is  the  figure  of  Anubis  the  jackal,  with  Isis  and  Nephthys  adoring,  and  the  head  of  the 
deceased  emerging  from  the  chest.  This  may  be  an  image  of  the  resurrection.  The  chest  is 
the  abode  of  the  West  of  the  setting  sun,  and  the  hymn  here  commemorates  the  victory  of 
Ra  over  death.  There  follows  the  deceased  in  adoration  before  the  God  Osiris  Himself, 
bearing  the  Crook  and  Scourge,  probably  hailing  him  as  the  god  of  the  Resurrection  and  so 
apparently  following  the  previous  symbol. 

The  next  figure  is  also  a resurrection  symbol,  the  Phoenix  or  Bennu  bird  who  is  said 
to  immolate  himself  once  in  a hundred  year,  and  from  his  ashes  emerges  the  new  Phoenix 
(compare  the  blossoming  of  the  aloe.)  The  Bennu  bird  is  represented  before  a table  of 
offerings.  Next  comes  the  mummy  of  the  deceased,  with  the  soul  in  the  form  of  a human- 
headed bird  hovering  over  and  watched  by  Isis  and  Nephthys.  The  bird  here  represents  the 
Ba  or  Bai,  or  spirit,  the  mind  or  mentality  of  the  deceased,  concentrated  or  projected.  The  Ka 
or  astral  form  is  usually  represented  by  a figure  of  the  deceased,  being  the  shade  or  ghost. 

Following  this  is  the  dual  form  of  the  Axe,  which  was  the  primeval  symbol  of  the 
one  God,  Ner,  of  whom  all  the  Gods  of  Egypt  were  forms;  dual  probably  to  symbolize  the 
Union  of  Osiris  with  the  all  Father  or  of  the  deceased  with  Osiris,  and  crowned  with  the 
royal  and  sacred  Uraeus.  Isis  and  Nephthys  are  in  the  form  of  a Hawk  as  all  are  on  that 
Astral  plane.  "Who  then  is  this?  I am  the  Bennu  bird  which  is  in  Annu,  and  1 am  the  keeper  of 
the  Volume  of  the  Book  of  things  which  are  and  of  things  which  shalt  be.  Who  then  is  this 
body?  It  is  Osiris,  or  (as  some  say)  his  dead  body;  his  soiled  garments.  The  things  that  are, 
and  the  things  that  shall  be  are  his  dead  body.  They  are  eternity  and  everlastingness. 
Eternity  is  the  day,  Everlastingness  is  the  night.  This  is  the  cutting  off  of  the  corruptible  in 
the  body  of  Osiris.  The  deceased  is  next  shown  as  again  in  adoration  before  the  God  of  a 
million  years.  In  his  right  hand  is  the  sacred  Ankh.  Behind  him  is  the  symbol  of  years.  He 
stretches  his  left  hand  over  the  pool  containing  the  eye  of  Horus.  The  soul  of  the  deceased 
now  comes  to  the  pools  of  the  two  Truths,  or  perhaps  rather  the  pools  of  the  dual 
manifestation  of  Truth  shewn  by  the  quadrangular  figures,  over  which  the  God, 
Uacherura,  or  the  Great  Green  Water  presides,  His  two  hands  being  extended  over  the  two 
pools,  that  under  his  right  hand,  being  the  pool  of  Natron,  and  that  under  the  left,  the  Pool  of 
Nitre. 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  above  is  Budge's  translation,  but  it  is  difficult  to  interpret. 

Natron  and  nitre  are  the  same  substance,  both  words  being  derived  from  the  Greek. 
The  word  natron  was  substituted  in  the  15th  century  for  the  older  form  nitrum.  There  are 
seven  great  Natron  Lakes  in  Egypt.  A solution  of  natron  was  used  in  embalming  and  the 
reference  is  probably  to  the  million  years  (or  ages)  long  duration  of  the  body,  prepared  in 
the  Great  Green  Lake  or  Natron  Lake. 

"The  Begetter  of  millions  of  years  is  the  name  of  one;  Great  Green  Lake  is  the  name  of 
the  other.  Now  as  concerning  the  Great  God  who  dwelleth  therein,  it  is  Ra  Himself." 

The  next  figure  is  a Pylon  with  doors  called  Restau,  i.e.  the  "Gate  of  the  Passages  of 
the  Tomb." 

"What  then  is  this?  It  is  Restau,  that  is  to  say  it  is  the  Underworld,  on  the  South  of 
Na-Arut-f  (this  world  is  probably  the  same  as  An-rut-f,  the  place  where  nothing  grows.) 
Now  the  gate  of  Tchesert  is  the  gate  of  the  Pillars  of  Shu,  the  Northern-Gate  of  the  Tuat 
(under  world)  or  (as  the  others  say)  it  is  the  two  leaves  of  the  arbor  through  which  the  God 
Tern  passeth  when  he  goeth  to  the  Eastern  horizon  of  heaven."  Next  comes  the  Utchat  or 
eye  of  Thoth,  facing  to  the  left  above  a Pylon.  "What  then  is  this?  It  is  the  right  eye  of  Ra, 
which  raged  against  Sel,  when  he  sent  it  forth.  Thoth  raised  up  the  hair, (i.e.  a cloud)  and 
brought  the  Eye,  alive  and  whole,  and  sound,  and  without  defect,  to  its  Lord."  The  next 
figure  is  that  of  the  Cow  Meh-urt,  the  eye  of  Ra,  with  disc  and  horns,  collar,  and  Menat, 
and  whip. 

"What  then  is  this?  I behold  Ra  who  was  born  yesterday  from  the  buttocks  of  the 
Goddess  Meh-urt.  His  strength  is  my  strength,  and  my  strength  is  his  strength.  It  is  the 
watery  abyss  of  heaven.  It  is  the  image  of  the  eye  of  Ra  in  the  morning  at  his  daily  birth. 
Meh-urt  is  the  eye  of  Ra.  Therefore  Osiris  (i.e.  the  deceased)  triumphant,  is  a great  one 
among  the  Gods,  who  are  in  the  train  of  Horus.  These  words  are  spoken  for  him  who  loveth 
his  Lord." 

The  next  figure  is  somewhat  obscure  in  all  the  vignettes.  The  variations  may  be  due  to 
the  insertion  of  local  symbols,  or  merely  to  the  fancy  of  the  artist.  There  is  clearly  a funeral 
chest,  bearing  the  image  of  Anubis,  which  is  called  the  district  of  Abtu;  (Abydos)  the  burial 
place  of  the  East.  The  head  emerging  therefrom  is  sometimes,  as  on  our  pillars,  that  of  the 
deceased,  sometimes  (as  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani)  it  is  the  head  of  Ra,  with  two  are,  and  hands, 
each  holding  the  Ankh,  an  emblem  of  life.  In  either  case  the  symbology  is  the  same.  It  is  the 
burial  and  resurrection,  whether  of  the  deceased,  or  of  Osiris  whose  nature  he  now  partakes 
of,  or  of  Ra  himself,  as  symbolised  by  the  Sun  at  sunset  and  at  sunrise  dying  and  rising 
again. 


This  figure  and  its  attendants  summarise  the  teaching.  Accordingly  right  and  left  of 
the  chest  are  the  four  Canopic  Gods,  whose  office  towards  the  mummy  is  to  guard  the  jars 
containing  the  intestines  of  the  deceased.  Beyond  these  to  right  and  left  are  two  watchers  or 
guides  bearing  the  Phoenix  headed  wand.  The  text  of  the  Ritual  here  alludes  to  seven  Khus, 


12 


VOLUME  THREE 


whom  Anubis  appointed  to  be  the  protectors  of  the  dead  body  of  Osiris,  and  seven 
Gods  whose  functions  is  not  clearly  indicated.  We  have  seven  God  forms  seated,  lion  forms 
with  the  deceased  in  adoration.  Into  the  complete  symbology  of  this  it  is  impossible  here 
to  enter.  The  meaning  of  the  duplicated  series  of  seven,  belongs  to  the  higher  grades  where 
it  will  be  fully  expounded  as  also  will  the  kneeling  figure  of  the  deceased  in  adoration  before 
the  lion-form  with  the  sacred  Ankh  or  sign  of  Life. 

In  the  next  figure  we  have  the  cat,  emblem  of  the  sun  or  of  Ra  himself  cutting  off  the 
head  of  the  serpent  Apep,  Apepi  or  Apophis  typical  of  darkness  under  the  Persea  tree  (or 
the  holy  tree)  said  by  some  to  be  the  Acacia,  a glyph  of  the  Rising  Sun.  Finally  we  have  the 
deceased  in  the  sacred  boat  guided  by  Thoth,  escorted  by  Ra  who  has  the  symbol  of  the  sun, 
and  Horus  who  bears  the  crowns  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  and  both  carry  the  Phoenix- 
headed wand  in  the  right  hand,  and  the  sacred  Ankh,  Crux  Ansata,  or  image  of  life  in  the 
left.  Over  his  head  is  the  Scarab,  symbol  of  the  Creator.  In  front  of  the  boat  is  the  rising 
Sun.  Thus  the  general  design  of  the  White  Pillar  is  a pictorial  synthesis  of  the  gradual 
freeing  of  the  soul  from  the  body,  left  to  be  mummied  and  its  union  with  Osiris,  Lord  and 
Judge  of  the  Dead  and  of  the  resurrection,  the  sun  in  his  rising.  The  hymn  to  the  Rising  Sun 
resumes  these  ideas. 

THE  BLACK  PILLAR 

This  needs  comparatively  little  explanation  beyond  what  is  contained  in  the 
official  lecture.  The  design  on  the  pillar  is  adapted  from  the  Vignette  to  the  125th  chapter 
of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  It  represents  the  deceased  passing  by  the  forty-two  assessors,  to  the 
Hall  of  Judgment,  where  the  soul  is  weighed,  previous  to  being  conducted  into  the  presence 
of  Osiris.  In  the  original  vignette  to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani,  which  is  reproduced  in  the 
coloured  frontispiece  to  Budge's  Book  of  the  Dead,  the  Assessors  are  represented  above  the 
text.  In  the  Black  Pillar  they  occupy  the  upper  rings  of  the  design  being  followed  by  the 
introduction  of  the  deceased  to  the  Hall  of  Judgment.  Note  that  both  in  Budge's 
frontispiece  and  in  the  design  on  the  Pillars  there  are  only  twelve  assessors  figured.  The 
reasons  of  the  selection  in  the  case  of  the  Black  Pillars  will  appear  in  the  higher  grades;  it 
cannot  be  given  to  the  Outer.  The  names  of  those  figured  are  Sa  and  Hu,  sitting  together, 
then  Hathor,  then  Horus,  then  Isis  and  Nephthys  (or  more  probably  the  twin  Maati  wearing 
the  head-dresses  of  Isis  and  Nephthys  because  inclining  towards  their  symbology)  then 
Nut,  Seb,  Tefnut,  Shu,  Temu,  and  Ra-Harmachis.  Any  student  who  is  familiar  with 
Egyptology,  considering  the  attributes  of  these  Gods,  and  comparing  them  with  the 
stations  at  which  the  Neophyte  is  halted  in  the  course  of  the  Neophyte  Ritual,  and  the 
words  there  spoken,  may  draw  some  conclusion  as  to  their  functions,  and  the  reason  for 
their  selection,  all  of  which  will  be  fully  expounded  in  the  higher  grades. 

There  follows  the  deceased  being  brought  into  the  Judgment  Hall  by  his  guide  (or  as 
Egyptologists  say  his  wife)  and  here  his  personality  is  divided  into  three  parts,  His  heart 
which  is  represented  as  a vase-shaped  vessel,  called  in  Egyptian  Ab,  the  Ka  or  shade  being 
called  the  reflex  of  the  human  form  of  the  deceased,  stands  by  waiting  the  decision  the  Bai 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


or  Bar,  the  mind  or  mentality,  is  represented  by  a Sphinx  like  form  above.  The 
Papyrus  of  Ani  adds  a human-headed  bird  on  a pylon  and  there  are  other  symbolisms  also 
which  will  occur  to  the  student  of  Egyptology.  On  the  Black  Pillar  a duplicated  form  of  the 
Maati  is  taken  to  represent  the  higher  aspirations  of  the  soul  of  the  deceased.  Notice  that  the 
guide  or  introducer  of  the  deceased  carries  a sistrum.  The  symbolism  of  this  will  be  shewn 
later.  The  soul  or  heart  is  weighed  against  a feather  symbolic  of  truth,  as  being  swayed  by  the 
least  breath,  recording  faithfully  all  that  transpires.  (In  some  of  the  Papyri  it  is  an  image  of 
the  Goddess  of  Truth  herself  with  feather  head-dress).  Anubis  with  mask  of  the  dog  or 
Jackal  brings  the  soul  to  the  Judgment  and  watches  the  tongue  of  the  balance.  Thoth,  Ibis 
headed  records  the  result.  The  devourer  waits  to  snatch  the  soul  of  the  evildoer  if 
condemned  or  found  wanting  in  the  balance.  Horus  then  conducts  the  soul,  being  now  the 
deceased  undivided  (or  re-united)  to  the  presence  of  Osiris,  himself  seated  on  a throne 
under  a canopy  bearing  the  rod  and  scourge  of  Mercy  and  Severity  and  the  Phoenix-headed 
wand,  and  crowned  with  the  crowns  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  and  mummied  (because  he 
is  the  god  of  the  Dead).  Before  him  on  a Lotus  are  the  four  children  of  Horus  the  Canopic 
gods.  Behind  him  are  Isis  and  Nephthys,  the  Goddesses  of  Nature.  The  Black  Pillar 
symbolizes  the  pathway  of  darkness,  the  Negative  Confession,  as  the  White  Pillar  represents 
the  Hymn  to  the  Rising  Sun,  the  Pathway  of  Light,  and  the  Positive  Confession.  Between 
the  two  is  the  straight  and  narrow  path  that  must  be  trodden  by  the  initiate.  Hence  in  every 
grade  and  at  every  advance  between  the  Pillars  is  the  pathway  and  when  the  higher  grades  are 
reached,  more  complete  knowledge  of  the  symbolic  designs  on  them  is  unfolded.  And  this 
shall  suffice  for  the  present. 

THE  GARDEN  OF  EDEN  BEFORE  THE  FALL 

This  diagram  is  described  in  the  Practicus  Ritual.  It  shows  in  a glyph  the  teaching  proper  to  the 
Practicus  on  entering  the  Sephirah  HOD  which  he  has  reached  by  the  Paths  of  SHIN  and  RESH  from 
MALKUTH  and  YESOD  respectively. 

At  the  summit  are  the  THREE  SUPERNAL  SEPHIROTH  summed  up  into  ONE — A1MA 
ELOHIM,  the  Mother  Supernal — The  Woman  of  the  Apocalypse  (Chap.  12)  clothed  with  the  SUN,  the 
MOON  under  her  feet,  and  on  her  head  the  Crown  of  Twelve  Stars. 

It  is  written  ‘So  the  Name  JEHOVAH  is  joined  to  the  Name  ELOHIM,  for  JEHOVAH  planted  a 
Garden  Eastward  in  Eden.’ 

From  the  Three  Supernals  follow  the  other  Sephiroth  of  THE  TREE  OF  UFE.  Below  the  TREE, 
proceeding  from  MALKUTH  is  THE  TREE  OF  KNOWLEDGE  of  GOOD  AND  of  EVIL  which  is 
between  the  Tree  of  Life  and  the  World  or  Assiah  or  Shells,  represented  by  the  Coiled  Up  DRAGON  with 
Seven  Heads  and  Ten  Horns — being  the  Seven  Infernal  Palaces  and  the  Ten  Averse  Sephiroth.  (These  are 
described  in  the  text  of  the  Rituals  but  are  not  read  to  the  Candidate  at  his  Grade.  When 


14 


VOLUME  THREE 


studying  this  diagram,  these  descriptions  should  be  looked  up,  but  they  are  not  required  for  the 

exam.) 

The  River  NAHER  flows  forth  from  the  Supernal  Eden  and  in  DAATH  it  is  divided  into  Four 
Heads: — 

PISON:  Fire — flowing  to  GEBURAH  where  there  is  Gold. 

GIHON:  Water — the  Waters  of  Mercy,  flowing  into  CHESED. 

HIDDIKEL:  Air— flowing  into  TIPHARETH. 

PHRATH  (Euphrates):  Earth  — flowing  into  MALKUTH. 

It  is  written  “In  DAATH  the  Depths  are  broken  up  and  the  Clouds  drop  down  dew.” 

The  word  Naher  has  the  meaning  ‘perennial  stream’ — ’never  failing  waters’  as  opposed  to  other 
words  meaning  Torrent  or  Brook. 

The  River  going  out  of  Eden  is  the  River  of  the  Apocalypse,  the  Waters  of  Life,  clear  as  crystal 
proceeding  from  the  Throne,  on  either  side  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  bearing  all  manner  of  Fruit. 

Thus  the  Rivers  form  a Cross  and  on  it  The  GREAT  ADAM,  the  SON  who  is  to  rule  the  Nations, 
was  extended  from  TIPHARETH  and  his  arms  stretch  out  to  GEBURAH  AND  GEDULAH,  and  in 
MALKUTH  is  EVE,  supporting  with  her  hands  the  TWO  PILLARS. 


THE  GARDEN  OF  EDEN  AFTER  THE  FALL 

This  diagram  is  described  in  the  Philosophus  Ritual.  It  shows  in  a glyph  the  teaching  proper  to  a 
Philosophus  on  entering  the  Sephirah  NETZACH  which  he  has  reached  by  the  Three  Paths  of  QOPH, 
TZADDI,  AND  PEH  from  the  SEPHIROTH— MALKUTH,  YESOD  and  HOD  respectively. 

The  Great  Goddess  EVE,  being  tempted  by  the  fruits  of  the  TREE  OF  KNOWLEDGE  whose 
branches  tend  upwards  to  the  seven  lower  Sephiroth,  but  also  downward  to  the  Kingdom  of  Shells, 
reached  down  to  them  and  the  two  pillars  were  left  unsupported. 

Then  the  Sephirotic  Tree  was  shattered.  She  fell  and  with  her  fell  the  Great  ADAM.  And  the 
Great  Red  Dragon  arose  with  his  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  EDEN  was  desolated — and  the  folds  of 
the  Dragon  enclosed  MALKUTH  and  linked  it  to  the  Kingdom  of  the  Shells. 

And  the  heads  of  the  Dragon  rose  into  the  seven  lower  Sephiroth,  even  up  to  DAATH  at  the  feet 
of  Alma  Elohim. 

Thus  were  the  four  Rivers  of  EDEN  desecrated  and  the  Dragon  Mouth  gave  forth  the  Infernal 
Waters  in  DAATH — and  this  is  LEVIATHAN,  The  Piercing  and  Crooked  Serpent. 

But  TETRAGRAMMATON  ELOHIM  placed  the  Four  Letters  YHVH  of  the  NAME  and  the 
Flaming  Sword  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  between  the  devastated  Garden  and  the  Supernal  Eden,  that  this 
should  not  be  involved  in  the  Fall  of  ADAM. 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


And  it  became  necessary  that  a Second  Adam  should  arise  to  restore  the  System,  and 
thus,  as  ADAM  had  been  spread  on  the  Cross  of  the  Four  Rivers,  so  the  Second  ADAM 
should  be  crucified  on  the  Infernal  Rivers  of  the  four  armed  Cross  of  DAATH,  yet  to  do 
this  He  must  descend  into  the  lowest,  even  MALKUTH  the  Earth,  and  be  born  of  her. 
(Psalm  74.  'Thou  breakest  the  Heads  of  Leviathan  in  pieces.') 

And  on  the  Dragon  Heads  were  the  names  of  the  eight  Kings  of  EDOM  and  on  his 
horns  the  names  of  the  Eleven  Dukes  of  EDOM,  for  DAATH  having  developed  in  the 
Dragon  a new  Head,  the  Seven  Headed  Dragon  with  Ten  Horns  became  Eight  Headed  and 
Eleven  Horned.  (Genesis,  36,  v31  to  43.  Chronicles  1,  v43  to  54.) 

The  Edomites  were  the  descendants  of  Esau  who  sold  his  birthright.  Their  Kings  came 
to  symbolise  unlawful  and  chaotic  forces. 

Don't  dismiss  these  Altar  Diagrams  too  readily.  They  are  really  very  profound.  They 
should  be  studied  and  meditated  upon  to  correlate  them  with  all  the  contents  of  one's 
psyche.  Perhaps  a few  words  quoted  from  What  You  Should  Know  About  The  Golden  Dawn, 
(Falcon  Press,  1983),  would  be  suggestive  in  this  connection. 

"In  two  Altar  diagrams  - one  called  the  Garden  of  Eden  shown  in  the  Practicus 
Grade,  and  the  other  called  The  Fall,  shown  in  the  Philosophus  Grade,  all  these  ideas  are 
expanded  and  synthesised.  They  should  be  carefully  studied  and  receive  long  meditation,  for 
in  them  are  many  clues  to  the  spiritual  and  psychological  problems  which  beset  the  traveller 
on  the  Path,  and  they  resume  the  entire  philosophy  of  Magic.  Many  hints,  moreover,  which 
may  be  found  useful  as  assisting  meditation  are  contained  in  The  'Curse'  from  a 
Philosophical  Point  of  View  in  the  second  volume  of  Blavatsky's  Secret  Doctrine  in 
connection  with  the  Prometheus  myth  and  the  awakening  of  Manas,  mind. 

The  first  depicts  a personified  representation  of  the  three  fundamental  principles  in 
Man.  Each  of  these  is  apparently  separate,  functioning  independently  on  its  own  plane 
without  cooperation  with,  because  unaware  of,  either  the  higher  or  the  lower.  Principally, 
it  represents  man  in  the  now  departed  morning  of  the  race,  in  the  primary  rounds  of 
evolutionary  effort  when  not  yet  had  self-consciousness  been  awakened  or  won  by  self- 
induced  and  self-devised  efforts,  and  when  peace  and  harmony  prevailed  both  within  and 
without  by  right  of  heritage  rather  than  through  personal  labour.  The  diagram  appears  in 
the  Water  grade  of  Practicus,  since  Water  is  a fitting  representation  of  this  placid  peace.  At 
the  summit  of  the  diagram  stands  the  Apocalyptic  woman  clothed  with  the  Sun  of  glory, 
crowned  with  the  twelve  stars,  and  the  moon  lying  at  her  feet.  Her  symbolism  pertains  to  the 
supernal  essence  of  mind,  representing  thus  the  type  and  symbol  of  the  glittering 
Augoeides,  the  Neschamah.  "It  is,"  remarks  Jung,  describing  an  analogous  conception  in 
Secret  Of  The  Golden  Flower,  "a  line  or  principle  of  life  that  strives  after  superhuman,  shining 
heights.”  At  the  base  of  the  tree  stands  Eve,  the  Nephesch,  who,  in  opposition  to  this  divine 
Genius,  stands  for  the  "dark,  earth-born,  feminine  principle  with  its  emotionality  and 
instinctiveness  reaching  far  back  into  the  depths  of  time,  and  into  the  roots  of 
physiological  continuity."  Between  the  two  stands  Adam,  supported  by  the 


16 


VOLUME  THREE 


fundamental  strength  of  Eve,  the  Ruach  or  Ego  not  yet  awakened  to  a realisation 
of  its  innate  power  and  possibility.  From  the  larger  point  of  view  he  represents  the  race  as  a 
whole  and  is  "the  personified  symbol  of  the  collective  Logos,  the  'Host,'  and  of  the  Lords 
of  Wisdom  or  the  Heavenly  Man,  who  incarnated  in  humanity."  Otherwise  he  represents 
the  individual  candidate  on  the  Path  just  prior  to  the  awakening  of  the  "sleeping  dogs" 
within  his  being. 

Beneath  these  three  figures  sleeps  a coiled  many  headed  dragon,  silent,  unawakened, 
still.  None  it  would  seem  is  aware  of  that  latent  power,  titanic  and  promethean,  coiled 
beneath,  the  active  magical  power  centred  in  man,  the  libido,  neutral,  neither  good  nor  evil  in 
itself. 

Very  similar  in  some  respects  to  the  foregoing  is  the  diagram  revealed  in  the 
Philosophus  grade.  As  the  peace  of  Eden  as  shown  during  the  Water  grade,  so  in  the  Grade 
of  Philosophus  the  power  of  Fire  is  shown  to  have  called  forth  catastrophe.  Formerly  coiled 
beneath  the  tree,  the  hydra-headed  Dragon  in  this  Diagram  has  usurped  its  proper  place, 
and  its  several  horned  heads  wind  their  way  up  into  the  very  structure  of  the  Tree  of  Life, 
even  unto  Daath.  Lured  downwards  by  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  (and  we  may  remember  in 
what  sense  the  Bible  speaks  of  the  verb  "to  know")  towards  the  "darkly  splendid  world 
wherein  continually  lieth  a faithless  depth,"  Eve,  the  lower  self,  ceases  to  give  support  to 
Adam;  she  has  yielded  to  the  awful  fascination  of  the  awakening  psyche.  Far  easier  is  it  to 
fall  than  to  climb  to  the  distant  heights.  Yet  the  Fall  is  catastrophic  only  from  one 
viewpoint.  The  awareness  of  the  rise  of  the  Dragon  endows  man  also  with  consciousness  of 
power,  and  power  is  life  and  progress.  The  Dragon  is  the  symbol  of  the  enemy  to  be 
overcome,  as  well  as,  when  eventually  conquered,  the  great  prize  to  be  won  at  the  end. 

The  Qabalistic  Sephirah  of  Daath  is  the  conjunction  of  Chokmah  and  Binah  on  the 
Tree  of  Life,  the  child  of  Wisdom  and  Understanding  thus  Knowledge.  It  refers  to  the 
symbolic  sphere  formed  within  or  above  the  Ruach  by  means  of  experience,  and  this 
assimilated  becomes  transmuted  into  intuition  or  faculty  of  mind.  But  fundamentally  it  is  the 
ascent  of  the  Dragon,  or,  if  you  wish,  the  obsession  of  the  personality  by  a welling  up  of 
the  unconscious  archetypes,  which  first  renders  Daath  a possibility;  it  is  the  Fall  which  is 
responsible  for  the  acquisition  of  self-knowledge.  Thus  "it  stands  proven,"  claims 
Blavatsky  "that  Satan,  or  the  Red  Fiery  Dragon,  the  'Lord  of  Phosphorus,’  and  Lucifer,  or 
'Light-bearer,1  is  in  us,  it  is  our  mind,  our  tempter  and  Redeemer,  our  intelligent  liberator 
and  saviour  from  pure  animalism."  In  the  evolutionary  scheme  the  Fall  occurs  through  a 
higher  type  of  intelligence  coming  into  close  contact  with  nascent  humanity,  thus 
stimulating  the  psyche  of  the  race  - or  so  the  magical  tradition  has  it.  The  recapitulation  of 
this  epoch  within  the  individual  sphere  of  consciousness  proceeds  through  the  technique  of 
initiation  whereby  the  Red  Dragon  is  stirred  into  activity  through  contact  with  the 
fructifying  powers  of  the  elements.  The  use  of  the  divine  prerogative  brought  about  by  the 
magic  of  experience,  the  awakening  of  Daath,  brings  disaster  at  first,  because  the  awakened 
psyche  is  imperfectly  understood  and  so  abused  for  personal  ends.  But  that  very  disaster 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


and  that  abuse  confers  the  consciousness  of  self.  Consequently,  the  realisation  of 
sorrow  as  it  impinges  on  the  personality  and  an  understanding  of  its  causes  must  inevitably 
constitute  the  first  impetus  to  perform  the  Great  Work,  even  as  it  comprises  the  motive  first  to 
seek  the  services  of  the  analytical  psychologist.  This  impetus  and  this  self-consciousness 
are  the  prime  implications  of  Daath.  Its  signification  is  a higher  type  of  consciousness,  the 
beginning  of  a spiritual  rebirth.  It  acts  as  a self-evolved  link  between  the  higher  Self  on  the 
one  hand  at  peace  in  its  Supernal  Eden,  and  the  human  soul  on  the  other,  bound  by  its  fall 
to  the  world  of  illusion  and  sense  and  matter.  But  until  that  self-consciousness  and  acquired 
knowledge  are  turned  to  noble  and  altruistic  ends,  sorrow  and  suffering  are  the  inevitable 
results.  Continually  will  the  Red  Dragon,  the  inverted  power  of  the  eros,  ravish  the  little 
kingdom  of  self  until  such  time  as  we  lift  ourselves  up  to  the  diviner  parts  of  our  human 
nature,  thus  conquering  the  foe  by  driving  it  back  to  its  proper  realm,  using  but  neither 
ignoring  nor  repressing  experience  and  its  fruits  to  transcend  our  own  personal  limitations. 

Let  me  quote  a few  especially  appropriate  lines  from  Jung  in  connection  with  this 
Fall,  when  the  fundamental  basis  of  the  Ruach  has  been  attracted  to  the  kingdom  of  shells, 
and  when  Malkuth  has  been  completely  cut  off  from  the  other  Sephiroth. 

"Consciousness  thus  torn  from  its  roots  and  no  longer  able  to  appeal  to  the  authority 
of  the  primordial  images,  possesses  a Promethean  freedom,  it  is  true,  but  it  also  partakes 
of  the  nature  of  a godless  hybris.  It  soars  above  the  earth,  even  above  mankind,  but  the  danger 
of  capsizing  is  there,  not  for  every  individual  to  be  sure,  but  collectively  for  the  weak 
members  of  such  a society,  who  again  Promethean-like,  are  bound  by  the  unconscious  to 
the  Caucasus."  It  will  not  do,  then,  for  the  Adept  to  be  cut  off  from  his  roots,  but  he  must 
unite  and  integrate  his  entire  Tree,  and  train  and  develop  the  titanic  forces  of  the 
unconscious  so  that  they  become  as  a powerful  but  docile  beast  whereon  he  may  ride.  (The 
diagram  discussed  in  the  next  paragraph  will  be  found  in  the  colour  plate  section.) 

The  Adeptus  Minor  grade  continues  the  theme  of  these  two  diagrams.  Escorted  into 
the  Vault,  the  Aspirant  is  shown  the  lid  of  the  Tomb  of  Osiris,  the  Pastos  wherein  is  buried 
our  Father  Christian  Rosenkreutz,  and  on  that  lid  is  a painting  which  brings  fulfilment  to 
the  narrative  of  the  preceding  diagrams.  It  is  divided  into  two  sections.  The  lower  half  of 
the  painting  depicts  a figure  of  Adam,  similar  to  his  presentation  in  the  Practicus  grade, 
though  here  the  heads  of  the  Dragon  are  falling  back  from  the  Tree,  showing  the  Justified 
One,  the  illuminated  adept,  by  his  immolation  and  self-sacrifice  rescuing  the  fallen  kingdom 
of  his  natural  self  from  the  clutches  of  an  outraged  eros.  But  above  this,  as  though  to  show 
the  true  nature  behind  the  deceptive  appearance  of  things,  is  illustrated  a noble  figure  of 
majesty  and  divinity,  described  in  the  Ritual  in  these  words.  "And  being  turned  I saw  seven 
golden  light-bearers,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Light-bearers,  one  like  unto  the  Ben  Adam, 
clothed  with  a garment  down  to  the  feet,  and  girt  with  a golden  girdle.  His  head  and  his  hair 
were  white  as  snow,  and  his  eyes  as  flaming  fire;  his  feet  like  unto  brass  as  if  they  burned  in  a 
furnace.  And  his  voice  like  the  sound  of  many  waters.  And  he  had  in  his  right  hand  seven 
stars,  and  out  of  his  mouth  went  the  Sword  of  Flame,  and  his  countenance  was  as  the  Sun  in 
his  strength." 


18 


VOLUME  THREE 


It  is  to  effect  this  redemption  of  the  personality,  to  regenerate  and  transmute  the 
enormous  power  of  the  Red  Dragon,  and  attempt  to  bring  the  individual  to  some 
realisation  of  his  potential  godhead,  that  is  the  object  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  ceremony.  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  I hold  that  the  Golden  Dawn  or  magical  technique  is  of  supreme  and 
inestimable  importance  to  mankind  at  large.  In  it  the  work  of  academic  psychology  may 
find  a logical  conclusion,  so  that  it  may  develop  further  its  own  particular  contribution  to 
modern  life  and  culture.  For  the  system  indicated  the  psychological  solution  of  the  anima 
problem.  "Arise!  Shine!  For  thy  light  is  come! 

ON  THE  GENERAL  GUIDANCE  AND  PURIFICATION  OF  THE  SOUL 

Learn  first,  0 Practicus  of  our  Ancient  Order,  that  true  Equilibrium  is  the  basis  of 
the  Soul.  If  thou  thyself  hast  not  a sure  foundation,  whereon  wilt  thou  stand  to  direct  the 
forces  of  Nature? 

Know  then  that  as  Man  is  born  into  this  world  amidst  the  darkness  of  Nature  and 
the  strife  of  contending  forces,  so  must  his  first  endeavour  be  to  seek  the  Light  through 
their  reconciliation.  Thus,  thou  who  hast  trial  and  trouble  of  this  life,  rejoice  because  of  them, 
for  in  them  is  strength,  and  by  their  means  is  a pathway  opened  unto  that  Light  Divine. 

How  should  it  be  otherwise,  0 man,  whose  life  is  but  a day  in  Eternity,  a drop  in 
the  Ocean  of  Time?  How,  if  thy  trials  were  not  many,  couldst  thou  purge  thy  soul  from 
the  dross  of  Earth? 

Is  it  but  now  that  the  higher  life  is  beset  with  dangers  and  difficulties;  hath  it  not  been 
ever  thus  with  the  Sages  and  Hierophants  of  the  past?  They  have  been  persecuted  and 
reviled,  they  have  been  tormented  of  men,  yet  through  this  has  their  glory  increased. 
Rejoice,  therefore,  0 Initiate,  for  the  greater  thy  trial,  the  brighter  thy  triumph.  When  men 
shall  revile  thee  and  speak  against  thee  falsely,  hath  not  the  Master  said  "Blessed  art  thou.” 
Yet,  O Practicus,  let  thy  victories  bring  thee  not  vanity,  for  with  increase  of  knowledge 
should  come  increase  of  wisdom.  He  who  knows  little,  thinketh  he  knows  much;  but  he 
who  knoweth  much  hath  learned  his  own  ignorance.  Seest  thou  a Man  wise  in  his  own 
conceit?  There  is  more  hope  of  a fool  than  of  him. 

Be  not  hasty  to  condemn  another's  sin.  How  knowest  thou  that  in  his  place  thou 
couldst  have  resisted  the  temptation?  And  even  were  it  so,  why  shouldst  thou  despise  one 
who  is  weaker  than  thyself?  Be  thou  well  sure  of  this,  that  in  slander  and  self-righteousness 
is  sin.  Pardon  therefore  the  sinner,  but  encourage  not  the  sin.  The  Master  condemned  not 
the  adulterous  woman,  but  neither  did  he  encourage  her  to  commit  the  sin. 

Thou  therefore  who  desirest  magical  gifts,  be  sure  that  thy  soul  is  firm  and  steadfast, 
for  it  is  by  flattering  thy  weakness  that  the  Evil  One  will  gain  power  over  thee.  Humble 
thyself  before  thy  God,  yet  fear  neither  man  nor  spirit.  Fear  is  failure  and  the  forerunner  of 
failure;  and  courage  is  the  beginning  of  virtue.  Therefore  fear  not  the  spirits,  but  be  firm 
and  courteous  with  them,  for  this  too  may  lead  thee  into  sin.  Command  and  banish  the  Evil 

A man  is  what  he  maketh  himself  within  the  limits  fixed  by  his  inherited  destiny;  he  is  a part  of 
mankind.  His  actions  affect  not  himself  only,  but  also  those  with  whom  he  is  brought  into  contact,  either 
for  good  or  for  evil. 

Neither  worship  nor  neglect  the  physical  body,  which  is  thy  temporary  connection  with  the  outer 
and  material  world.  Therefore  let  thy  mental  equilibrium  be  above  disturbances  by  material  events. 
Restrain  the  animal  passions  and  nourish  the  higher  aspirations;  the  emotions  are  purified  by  suffering. 

Do  good  unto  others  for  God’s  sake,  not  for  reward,  not  for  gratitude  from  them,  not  for 
sympathy.  If  thou  art  generous,  thou  wilt  not  long  for  thine  ears  to  be  tickled  by  expressions  of  gratitude; 
Remember  that  unbalanced  force  is  evil,  that  unbalanced  severity  is  but  cruelty  and  oppression,  but  that 
also  unbalanced  Mercy  is  but  weakness  which  would  allow  and  abet  evil. 

True  prayer  is  as  much  action  as  Word;  it  is  Will.  The  Gods  will  not  do  for  man  what  his  Higher 
Powers  can  do  for  himself,  if  he  cultivate  Will  and  Wisdom.  Remember  that  this  Earth  is  but  an  atom  in 
the  Universe,  and  thou  thyself  but  an  atom  thereon.  And  that  even  couldst  thou  become  the  God  of  this 

19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Earth  whereon  thou  crawlest  and  grovellest,  thou  wouldst  even  then  be  but  an  atom  and  one  among  many. 
Nevertheless,  have  the  greatest  self-respect,  and  to  that  end  sin  not  against  thyself.  The  sin  which  is 
unpardonable  is  knowingly  and  wilfully  to  reject  spiritual  truth,  but  every  sin  and  act  leaveth  its  effect. 

To  obtain  magical  Power,  learn  to  control  thought.  Admit  only  true  ideas  which  are  in  harmony 
with  the  end  desired,  and  not  every  stray  and  contradictory  idea  that  presents  itself.  Fixed  thought  is  a 
means  to  an  end;  therefore  pay  attention  to  the  power  of  silent  thought  and  meditation.  The  material  act  is 
but  the  outward  expression  of  the  thought,  and  therefore  it  bath  been  said  that  “the  thought  of  foolishness 
is  sin.”  Thought  therefore  is  the  commencement  of  action,  and  if  a chance  thought  can  produce  much 
effect,  what  cannot  fixed  thought  do?  Therefore,  as  has  been  already  said,  establish  thyself  firmly  in  the 
Equilibrium  of  Forces,  in  the  centre  of  the  cross  of  the  elements,  that  Cross  from  whose  centre  the 
creative  word  issued  in  the  birth  of  the  dawning  universe. 

As  it  was  said  unto  thee  in  the  Grade  of  Theoricus:  “Be  thou  therefore  prompt  and  active  as  the 
Sylphs,  but  avoid  frivolity  and  caprice.  Be  energetic  and  strong  like  the  Salamanders,  but  avoid  irritability 
and  ferocity.  Be  flexible  and  attentive  to  images  like  the  Undines,  but  avoid  idleness  and  changeability. 
Be  laborious  and  patient  like  the  Gnomes,  but  avoid  grossness  and  avarice.”  So  shalt  thou  gradually 
develop  the  powers  of  thy  Soul  and  fit  thyself  to  command  the  spirits  of  the  elements. 

For  wert  thou  to  summon  the  Gnomes  to  pander  to  thy  avarice,  thou  wouldst  no  longer  command 
them,  but  they  would  command  thee.  Wouldst  thou  abuse  the  pure  creatures  of  God’s  creation  to  fill  thy 
coffers  and  to  satisfy  thy  lust  for  Gold?  Wouldst  thou  defile  the 


20 


VOLUME  THREE 


Spirits  of  driving  Fire  to  serve  thy  wrath  and  hatred?  Wouldst  thou  violate  the  purity  of  the  Souls 
of  the  Water  to  pander  to  thy  lust  and  debauchery?  Wouldst  thou  force  the  Spirits  of  the  evening  breeze  to 
minister  to  thy  folly  and  caprice? 

Know  that  with  such  desires  thou  canst  but  attract  the  evil  and  not  the  good,  and  in  that  can  the 
evil  will  have  power  over  thee. 

In  true  religion  there  is  no  sect.  Therefore  take  heed  that  thou  blaspheme  not  the  name  by  which 
another  knoweth  his  God  for  if  thou  doest  this  thing  in  Jupiter,  thou  wilt  blaspheme  YHVH;  and  in  Osiris 
YEHESHUAH. 

“Ask  of  God  and  ye  shall  have  Seek  and  ye  shall  find.  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.” 


SHEM  HA-MEPHORESCH 
THE  72  FOLD  NAME 


This  refers  to  the  Seventy  Two  Names  of  the  Expounded  Name  YHVH.. 

Four  is  the  number  of  the  letters  of  the  Tetragrammaton.  Four  is  also  the  number  of  the  letters  of 
the  name  ADNI  which  is  its  representative  and  key.  The  latter  name  is  bound  with  the  former  and  united 
thereto,  thus  IAHDVNHY  forming  a name  of  8 letters.  8X3,  the  number  of  the  Supernal  Triad,  yields 
the  24  thrones  of  the  Elders  of  the  Apocalypse,  each  of  whom  wears  on  his  head  a golden  crown  of  three 
rays,  each  ray  of  which  is  a name,  each  name  an  Absolute  Idea  and  Ruling  Power  of  the  great  name 
YHVH  Tetragrammaton. 

The  number  24  of  the  thrones  multiplied  by  the  3 rays  of  the  crown  which  equals  72,  the  name  of 
God  of  72  letters,  which  is  thus  mystically  shown  in  the  name  YHVH,  as  under:  (Or  as  the  book  of 
Revelation  says:  “When  the  living  creatures  (the  four  Kerubim  the  Letters  of  the  Name)  give  glory  to 
Him,  etc.  the  four  and  twenty  elders  fall  down  before  Him  and  cast 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


their  crowns  before  the  Throne,  etc.”  (that  is  the  Crowns,  which  each  bear  3 of  the  72  Names,  and 
these  72  names  are  written  on  the  leaves  of  the  Tree  of  Life  which  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.) 

These  are  also  the  72  names  of  the  ladder  of  Jacob  on  which  the  Angels  of  God  ascended  and 
descended.  It  will  presently  be  shown  how  the  72  Angelic  names  are  formed  from  the  72  Names  of  the 
Deity,  and  also  how  their  signification  is  to  be  found.  The  72  Names  of  the  Deity  are  thus  obtained.  The 
19th,  20th,  and  21st  verses  of  the  XIV  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  Exodus  each  consist  of  72  letters. 

(The  English  translation  is:)  19th  verse:  “And  the  Angel  of  the  Elohim,  that  went  before  the  camp 
of  Israel,  removed  and  went  behind  them;  and  the  pillar  of  cloud  removed  from  before  them  and  stood 
behind  them.” 

20th  verse:  “And  it  came  between  the  camp  of  the  Egyptians  and  the  camp  of  Israel;  and  it  was  a 
cloud  and  darkness  (to  the  first)  but  it  gave  light  by  night  (to  these);  and  the  one  came  not  near  unto  the 
other  all  the  night.” 

21st  verse:  “And  Moses  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  sea,  and  the  Lord  drove  back  the  sea  with 
a strong  east  wind  all  that  night  and  made  the  sea  dry  land,  and  the  waters  divided.” 

These  three  verses  are  now  to  be  written  at  length  one  above  the  other,  the  first  from  right  to  left, 
and  the  second  from  left  to  right,  and  the  third  from  right  to  left;  and  as  they  contain  72  letters,  there  will 
be  72  columns  of  three  letters  each.  Then  each  column  will  give  a word  of  three  letters,  and  there  will  be 
72  names  of  three  letters  each,  which  are  the  Shem  ha  Mephoresch  or  72  Names  of  the  Deity,  expounding 
the  Powers  of  the  name  YHVH. 

From  these  names  72  Names  of  Angels  are  formed  by  the  addition  of,  in  some  cases,  the  suffice 
YH  which  signifies  Mercy  and  Beneficence,  or  in  others  of  the  suffice  AL  which  signifies  Severity  and 
Judgment.  Or  as  it  is  said:  “And  the  Name  is  in  Him,  etc.” 

These  72  Angels  rule  over  the  72  Quinances  or  sets  of  50  of  the  Zodiac,  and  therefore  each 
decanate  or  set  of  100  of  a Sign  has  2 Quinances,  and  each  sign  has  3 decanates,  which  are  again  allotted 
to  the  Planets  in  regular  order.  This  is  the  formation  as  given  above  (each  Angel’s  name  containing  5 
letters  and  each  name  of  Deity  3.). 

These  then  are  the  Schem  ha-Mephoresch  or  72  Angels  bearing  the  Name  of  God,  classed  into 
nine  sets  of  8,  each  answering  to  the  nine  choirs  of  Angels,  and  also  divided  into  4 great  divisions  of  18 
each,  each  division  under  the  Presidency  of  one  of  the  four  letters  of  the  Name  YHVH. 

They  are  further  classed  as  belonging  to  the  decanates  of  the  Zodiac  as  follows:  2 Quinances  to 
each  decanate.  The  first  division  of  3 Signs  is  under  the  Presidency  of  Y,  the  letter  of  Fire.  The  second 
Division  of  3 signs,  headed  by  the  Watery  sign  Cancer,  is  under  the  Presidency  of  H the  Letter  of  Water. 
The  third  division  of  3 Signs  headed  by  the  Airy  Sign  Libra  is  under  the  Presidency  of  VAU,  the  letter  of 
Air.  And  the  4th  division  of  3 signs  headed  by  the  Earthy  Sign  Capricorn  is  under  the  Presidency  of  HEH 
final,  the  letter  of  Earth. 

But  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  most  powerful  rule  of  Y of  Tetragrammaton  is  over  the 
Fiery  Triplicity;  that  of  H over  the  Watery  Triplicity;  that  of  Vau  over  the  Airy 


22 


VOLUME  THREE 


Triplicity;  and  that  of  H final  over  the  Earthy  Triplicity. 

In  the  22nd  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John  it  is  said  that  “The  Tree  of  Life  which  bare 
Twelve  manner  of  fruits  and  yielded  her  fruit  every  month,  and  the  leaves  of  the  Tree  were  for  the  healing 
of  the  Nations.  And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse;  but  the  Throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in 
it. ’’This  is  exemplified  in  the  drawing  taken  from  the  3-8  Altar  Diagram.  The  “TwelveManner  of  fruits 
yielded  every  month”  answer  to  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  and  the  Twelve  Tribes  of  the  Sons  of  Jacob.  Also 
to  the  twelve  apostles.  The  healing  leaves  are  those  of  Schem  ha-Mephoresch  or  the  divided  Name  of 
Zauir  Anpin,  the  Microprosopus,  the  Christ,  the  Lamb  of  Elohim,  whose  Throne  is  in  the  Tree,  from 
which  Throne  issues  the  River  of  the  Waters  of  Life. 

The  Seventy  two  leaves  of  the  Tree  of  Life  are  Zauir  Anpin  or  Microprosopus.  Now  the  Twelve 
Sons  of  Jacob  go  down  into  Egypt,  that  is  the  Kingdom,  Malkuth,  which  has  been  destroyed  in  the  Fall, 
and  cut  from  the  Sephirotic  Tree  by  the  intersecting  folds  of  the  great  Dragon  who  then  becomes  its  Ruler 
as  shown  in  the  great  Altar  Diagram  of  the  4-7  grade.  “Behold,  I am  against  thee,  Pharoah,  King  of  Egypt, 
the  great  dragon  thai  lieth  in  the  midst  of  the  Rivers.”  And  the  first  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  who  goeth  down 
is  Joseph  whose  two  Tribes,  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  balance  each  other  in  Chesed  and  Geburah.  That  is 
to  say,  that  there  first  comes  down  into  the  desolated  Earth  the  combined  power  of  Mercy  and  Severity. 
And  Ephraim,  the  Kerubic  sign  of  the  Ox,  is  the  natural  ruler  of  Earth  in  Malkuth,  under  the  power  of  H 
final  of  the  Holy  Name,  the  Bride,  Eve,  and  the  Queen.  And  the  Schem  ha-Mephoresch,  the  72,  are  found 
in  the  number  of  the  family  of  Jacob’s  sons  is  70;  and  Jacob  and  Joseph  equals  72.  But  the  then  ruling 
Pharoah,  corresponds  more  to  Hadar  amongst  the  Edomite  Kings,  as  representing  one  of  not  so  evil  a 
tendency.  Yet  as  the  Apocalyptic  symbol  of  the  Lamb  and  the  Airy  Sign  which  leads  off  the  Schem  ha- 
Mephoresch  is  Chesed;  one  opposed  to  the  evil  symbol  of  the  Dragon,  so  is  every  shepherd  an 
abomination  to  the  Egyptians,  who  yet  are  friendly  with  the  Ox  symbol,  the  Kerubic  Ruler  of  Earth,  and 
therefore  is  it  symbolically  said  by  the  Children  of  Israel  that  their  business  has  been  about  cattle  and  not 
about  sheep. 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


But  the  name  YHVH,  the  Son,  the  Microprosopus  is  not  therein  established  till 
the  Ten  Sephiroth  have  sent  forth  their  Judgment  upon  the  land  of  Egypt,  i.e.,  the  Ten 
Plagues.  And  therefore  it  is  only  when  YHVH  interposes  between  Egypt  and  Israel  that 
the  verses  occur  in  Exodus  which  show  forth  the  Schem  ha-Mephoresch.  There  are 
also  other  ways  of  making  sets  of  72  names  out  of  these  verses,  Exodus  xiv,  v.  19,  20 
and  21,  e.g.  by  writing  them  all  from  right  to  left,  and  so  on,  and  also  by  permutation 
of  the  letters  by  any  rule  of  Temurah.  The  meanings  of  these  are  then  to  be  found  as 
herein  after  shown  for  the  regular  Schem  ha-Mephoresch. 

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  all  the  letters  of  the  Alphabet  except  Gimel  are 
employed  in  the  Schem  ha-M  ephoresch.  This  letter  Gimel  whose  numerical  value  is 
3,  is  therefore  the  key  of  their  construction,  they  being  grouped  together  in  words  of 
three  letters  each.  Furthermore,  there  are  360°  in  the  Zodiac,  and  this  divided  by  5 
gives  72°  which  is  the  interval  between  the  points  of  a regular  pentagram  inscribed 
within  a great  circle.  Also  the  number  72  equals  6 x 12  which  equals  72  cubes  or 
Hexagrams,  so  that  each  Hexagram  will  represent  by  its  Angles  the  6 Quinancies  of  a 
Sign,  the  Sign  itself  being  written  in  the  centre,  e.g.  in  any  order  that  may  be  required. 

The  meaning  of  these  72  names  of  God,  of  the  Angels  of  the  Schem  ha- 
Mephoresch  are  then  collected  in  the  following  manner  from  those  72  verses  taken 
from  different  Psalms,  in  each  of  which  the  name  YHVH  appears,  save  in  the  case  of 
the  70th,  YBM: 

Here  follow  in  detail  the  Psalms  mentioned,  showing  the  method  of  extracting 
the  angelic  Names.  (The  important  point  here  is  the  significance  of  the  meaning  of 
each  Name,  a meaning  which  occurs  in  no  other  place  in  these  documents.) 

THE  72  NAMES  AND  THEIR  MEANINGS 

1.  VAHAVIAH  is  God  the  Exalter. 

2.  YELAYEL  is  Strength. 

3.  SAITEL  is  Refuge,  Fortress  and  Confidence. 

4.  OLM1AH  is  Concealed,  Strong. 

5.  MAHASHIAH  is  Seeking  safety  from  Trouble. 

6.  LELAHEL  is  Praiseworthy,  declaring  His  works. 

7.  AKAIAH  is  long  suffering. 

8.  KEHETHE1,  is  Adorable. 

9.  HAZAYEL  is  Merciful. 

10.  ALD1AH  is  Profitable. 

11.  LAV1AH  is  to  be  exalted. 

12.  HIHAAYAH  is  Refuge. 

13.  YEZAHEL  is  Rejoicing  over  all  things. 

14.  MEBAHEL  is  Guardian,  Preserver. 

15.  HARAYEL  is  Aid. 

16.  HOQMIAH  is  Raise  up,  Praying  day  and  night. 


24 


VOLUME  THREE 


17.  LAV1AH  is  Wonderful. 

18.  KELIAL  is  Worthy  to  be  invoked. 

19.  LIVOYAH  is  Hastening  to  hear. 

20.  PHEHILYAH  is  Redeemer,  Liberator. 

21.  NELOKHIEL  is  Thou  alone. 

22.  Y EY  AY  I EL  is  Thy  right  hand. 

23.  MELOHEL  is  Turning  away  evil. 

24.  CHAHAV1AH  is  Goodness  in  Himself. 

25.  NITHAHIAH  is  Wide  in  extent,  the  enlarger,  wonderful. 

26.  HAAYOH  is  Heaven  in  secret. 

27.  YIRTHIEL  is  Deliverer. 

28.  SAHYOH  is  Taker  away  of  evils. 

29.  REYAYEL  is  Expectation. 

30.  EVAMEL  is  Patient. 

31.  LEKABEL  is  Teacher,  instructor. 

32.  VESHIR1AH  is  Upright. 

33.  YECHAVAH  is  Knower  of  all  things. 

34.  LEHACHIAH  is  clement,  merciful. 

35.  KEVEQ1AH  is  To  be  rejoiced  in. 

36.  MENDIAL  is  Honourable. 

37.  ANIEL  is  Lord  of  Virtues. 

38.  CHAAMIAH  is  The  hope  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

39.  REHAAIEI,  is  Swift  to  condone. 

40.  YEYEZIEL  is  Making  joyful. 

41.  HEHIHEL  is  Triune. 

42.  MICHAEL  is  Who  is  like  unto  Him. 

43.  VAVALIAH  is  King  and  Ruler. 

44.  YELAHIAH  is  Abiding  for  ever. 

45.  SAI.IAH  is  Mover  of  all  things. 

46.  AARIEL  is  Revealer. 

47.  AASLAYOH  is  Just  Judge. 

48.  M I H AL  is  Sending  forth  as  a Father. 

49.  VEHOOEL  is  Great  and  lofty. 

50.  DENEYEL  is  Merciful  Judge. 

51.  HECHASHYAH  is  Secret  and  Impenetrable. 

52.  AAMAMIAH  is  Covered  in  darkness. 

53.  NANAEL  is  Caster  down  of  the  proud. 

54.  NITHAEL  is  Celestial  King. 

55.  MIBAHAIAH  is  Eternal. 

56.  POOYAEL  is  Supporting  all  things. 

57.  NEMAMIAH  is  lovable. 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


58.  YEYEELEL  is  Hearer  of  cries. 

59.  HEROCHIEL  is  Permeating  all  things. 

60.  MITZRAEL  is  Raising  up  the  oppressed. 

61.  VEMIBAEL  is  The  Name  which  is  over  all. 

62.  YAHOHEL  is  The  Supreme  ends,  or  essence. 

63.  AANEVAL  is  Rejoicing. 

64.  MACHAYEL  is  Vivifying. 

65.  DAMABAYAH  is  Fountain  of  wisdom. 

66.  MENQEL  is  Nourishing  all. 

67.  AAYOEL  is  Delights  of  the  sons  of  men. 

68.  CHABOOYAH  is  Most  liberal  giver. 

69.  RAHAEL  is  Beholding  all. 

70.  YABOMAYAH  is  Producing  by  His  word. 

71.  HAHAYEL  is  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

72.  MEVAMAYAH  is  End  of  the  Universe. 

The  78th  Psalm:  "Give  ear,  o my  people"  etc.  has  also  72  verses  which  again 
refer  to  the  Schem  ha-Mephoresch.  As  before  shewn,  the  Quinancies  of  the  Zodiac 
ruled  by  these  72  names  of  Angels  are  classed  in  pairs  in  the  36  decanates  or  phases 
of  10°  in  each  Sign.  These  signs  and  decanates  have  again  their  ruling  angels  and 
intelligences. 

THE  MAGICAL  IMAGES  OF  THE  DECANS 
To  each  decanate  certain  magical  images  and  characteristics  are  allotted,  as 
follows: 


ARIES 

I st  Decan.  Mars.  Therein  ascendeth  a man  tall,  dark,  powerful  and  restless, 
clothed  in  a white  tunic  and  scarlet  mantle,  having  keen  and  flame-colored  eyes.  And 
in  his  hand  a sharp  sword.  It  is  a decan  of  boldness,  fierceness,  resolution  and 
shamelessness. 

2nd  Decan  of  Aries  is  of  the  Sun,  and  therein  ascendeth  a woman  clothed  in 
green  robes,  with  one  leg  uncovered  from  the  knee  to  the  ankle.  This  is  a decan  of 
pride,  nobility,  wealth  and  rule. 

3rd  Decan  of  Aries  is  of  Venus,  and  therein  ascendeth  a restless  man,  clothed 
in  scarlet  robes  having  golden  bracelets  on  his  hands  and  arms.  It  is  a decan  of 
subtlety,  beauty,  etc. 

TAURUS 

In  the  first  decan  of  Taurus  which  is  of  Mercury,  ascendeth  a woman  with  long 
beautiful  hair,  clothed  in  flame-colored  robes.  It  is  a decan  of  ploughing,  sowing, 
building,  and  earthy  wisdom. 


26 


VOLUME  THREE 


In  the  2nd  Decan  of  Taurus,  which  is  of  Luna,  ascendeth  a man  like  the 
preceding  figure,  having  feet  cloven  like  an  ox- hoof.  It  is  a decan  of  power,  nobility, 
rule  over  the  people. 

In  the  3rd  Decan  of  Taurus,  which  is  of  Saturn,  ascendeth  a man  of  swarthy 
complexion  having  large  white  teeth  projecting  from  his  mouth,  a body  like  that  of  an 
elephant  with  long  legs.  And  there  arise  with  him  a horse  and  a stag  and  a calf.  It  is  a 
decan  of  misery,  slavery,  necessity,  madness  and  baseness. 

GEMINI 

In  the  1st  Decan  of  Gemini  which  is  of  Jupiter,  there  ascendeth  a beautiful  woman,  and 
with  her  two  horses.  It  is  a decan  of  writing,  calculations,  giving  and  receiving  money,  and  of 
wisdom  in  unprofitable  things. 

In  the  2nd  Decan  of  Gemini  which  is  of  Mars,  ariseth  an  eagle-headed  man, 
wearing  a steel  helmet  surmounted  by  a crown,  and  having  a bow  and  arrows  in  his 
hand.  It  is  a decan  of  burden,  pressure,  labor,  subtlety,  dishonesty. 

In  the  3rd  Decan  of  Gemini  which  is  of  Sol,  ariseth  a man  clothed  in  a coat  of 
mail  with  two  arrows  and  quiver.  It  is  a decan  of  disdain,  mirth  and  jollity  and  of  many 
unprofitable  words. 

CANCER 

In  the  1st  Decan  of  Cancer  which  is  of  Venus,  ascendeth  a man  having  a 
distorted  face,  and  hands,  and  his  body  is  like  that  of  a horse  having  white  feet  with 
garland  of  leaves  around  his  body.  A decan  of  dominion,  science,  love,  mirth,  subtlety 
and  magistracy. 

In  the  2nd  Decan  of  Cancer  which  is  of  Mercury,  ascendeth  a woman  beautiful 
of  countenance,  wearing  on  her  head  a green  myrtle  wreath,  holding  in  her  hands  a 
lyre,  and  she  singeth  of  love  and  of  gladness.  A decan  of  pleasure,  mirth,  abundance 
and  plenty. 

In  the  3rd  Decan  of  Cancer  which  is  of  Luna,  there  ascendeth  a swift-footed 
person  holding  a viper  in  his  hand,  and  having  dogs  running  before  him.  It  is  a decan 
of  running,  hunting,  pursuing,  acquiring  goods  by  war  and  of  contention  among  men. 

LEO 

In  the  first  decan  of  Leo  which  is  of  Saturn,  there  ascendeth  a man  in  sordid 
raiment,  and  with  him  ascendeth  a noble  man  on  horeseback  accompanied  by  bears 
and  dogs.  A decan  of  boldness,  liberality,  victory,  cruelty,  lust  and  violence. 

In  the  2nd  Decan  of  Leo  which  is  of  Jupiter,  there  ascendeth  a man  covered 
with  a white  myrtle  wreath  and  holding  a bow  in  his  hand.  It  is  a decan  of  love, 
pleasure,  society  and  avoiding  of  quarrels  and  carefulness  in  parting  with  goods. 

In  the  3rd  Decan  of  Leo  which  is  of  Mars  there  ascendeth  a dark  and  swarthy 
man,  hairy,  holding  in  one  hand  a drawn  sword  and  in  the  other  a shield.  It  is  a decan 
of  quarrelling,  ignorance,  pretended  knowledge,  wrangling,  victory  over  the  low  and 
base,  and  of  drawing  swords. 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VIRGO 

In  the  first  decan  of  Virgo  which  is  of  Sol,  there  ariseth  a Virgin  clothed  in  linen, 
holding  an  apple  or  a pomegranate  in  her  hand.  A decan  of  sowing,  ploughing, 
planting  herbs,  colonization  and  of  storing  money  and  food. 

In  the  2nd  decan  of  Virgo  which  is  of  Venus,  there  ariseth  a man,  tall,  fair  and 
large,  and  with  him  a woman  holding  in  her  hand  a black  oil  jar.  It  is  a decan  of  gain, 
covetousness,  taking  of  goods  and  rising  by  care  and  treasuring  up. 

In  the  3rd  decan  of  Virgo  which  is  of  Mercury,  ascendeth  an  old  man  leaning  on 
a staff  and  wrapped  in  a mantle.  It  is  a decan  of  old  age,  slothfulness,  loss  and 
depopulation. 

LIBRA 

I n the  first  decan  of  Libra  which  is  of  Luna,  ariseth  a dark  man  having  in  his 
right  hand  a spear  and  a laurel  branch,  and  in  his  left  a book.  It  is  a decan  of  justice, 
aid,  truth,  and  helping  the  poor. 

In  the  2nd  Decan  of  Libra  which  is  of  Saturn,  there  ariseth  a man  dark  and  of 
unpleasant  face.  It  is  a "face"  of  ill-deeds  yet  of  singing  and  mirth  and  gluttony, 
sodomy  and  following  of  evil  pleasures. 

I n the  3rd  decan  of  Libra  which  is  of  Jupiter,  there  ariseth  a man  riding  upon 
an  ass  with  a wolf  going  before  him.  A decan  of  quietness,  ease,  plenty,  good  life  and 
dance. 

SCORPIO 

In  the  1st  decan  of  Scorpio  which  is  of  Mars,  there  ascendeth  a man  holding  in 
his  right  hand  a lance,  and  in  his  left  a human  head.  A decan  of  strife,  sadness, 
treachery,  deceit,  destruction  and  ill-will. 

In  the  2nd  Decan  of  Scorpio  which  is  of  Sol,  there  ascendeth  a man  riding  upon 
a camel  holding  a scorpion  in  his  hand.  A decan  of  affronts,  detection,  strife,  stirring 
up  of  quarrels,  science  and  detection. 

In  the  3rd  decan  of  Scorpio  which  is  of  Venus,  there  ascendeth  a horse  and  a 
wolf.  A decan  of  war,  drunkenness,  fornication,  wealth,  pride  and  of  rage  and  violence 
against  women. 

SAGITTARIUS 

In  the  1st  decan  of  Sagittarius  which  is  of  Mercury  there  ascendeth  a man  with 
three  bodies,  one  red,  one  white,  and  one  black.  It  is  a decan  of  boldness,  freedom, 
welfare,  liberality,  and  of  fields  and  gardens. 

In  the  2nd  decan  of  Sagittarius  which  is  of  Luna,  there  ascendeth  a man 
leading  cows,  having  before  him  an  ape  and  a bear.  It  is  a decan  of  fear,  lamentation, 
grief,  anxiety,  and  disturbance. 


28 


VOLUME  THREE 


I n the  3rd  decan  of  Sagittarius  which  is  of  Saturn,  there  ascendeth  a man 
holding  another  by  the  hair  and  slaying  him.  It  is  a decan  of  ill-will,  levity,  envy, 
obstinacy  and  swiftness  in  all  evil  things,  and  of  deceitful  acts. 

CAPRICORN 

In  the  1st  decan  of  Capricorn,  which  is  of  Jupiter,  there  ascendeth  a man 
holding  in  his  right  hand  an  arrow  or  javelin,  and  in  his  left  a lapwing.  It  is  a decan  of 
wandering  travail,  labor  and  joy,  alternate  gain  and  loss,  weakness  and  necessity. 

In  the  2nd  decan  of  Capricorn  which  is  of  Mars,  there  ascendeth  a man  with  an 
ape  running  before  him.  It  is  a decan  of  ever  seeking  what  cannot  be  known  and  of 
what  cannot  be  attained  to. 

In  the  3rd  decan  of  Capricorn  which  is  of  Sol,  there  ascendeth  a man  holding  a 
book  which  he  opens  and  shuts.  It  is  a decan  of  covetousness,  suspicion,  careful 
ordering  of  matters,  but  with  discontent. 

AQUARIUS 

In  the  first  decan  of  Aquarius  which  is  of  Venus,  there  ascendeth  a man  with 
bowed  head  and  a bag  in  his  hand.  It  is  a decan  of  poverty,  anxiety,  grieving  after  gain, 
and  never  resting  from  labor,  loss  and  violence. 

In  the  2nd  decan  of  Aquarius  which  is  of  Mercury,  there  ariseth  a man  arrayed 
like  a king  looking  with  pride  and  conceit  on  all  around  him.  It  is  a decan  of  beauty, 
dominance,  conceit,  good  manners  and  self-esteem,  yet  notwithstanding  modest. 

In  the  3rd  decan  of  Aquarius  which  is  of  Luria  ascendeth  a man  with  a small 
head  clothed  like  a woman,  having  an  old  man  with  him.  It  is  a decan  of  abundance 
and  compliments,  detection  and  affronts. 

PISCES 

In  the  1st  decan  of  Pisces  which  is  of  Saturn  there  ariseth  a man  with  two 
bodies  but  joining  their  heads  together.  It  is  a decan  of  many  thoughts,  of  anxiety,  of 
journeying  from  place  to  place,  of  misery,  of  seeking  riches  and  food. 

In  the  2nd  decan  of  Pisces  which  is  of  Jupiter,  there  ascendeth  a grave  man 
pointing  to  the  sky.  It  is  a decan  of  self-praise,  of  high  mind,  and  of  seeking  after  great 
and  high  aims. 

In  the  3rd  decan  of  Pisces  which  is  of  Mars,  there  ascendeth  a man  of  grace  and 
thoughtful  countenance,  carrying  a bird  in  his  hand  and  before  him  a woman  and  an 
ass.  It  is  a decan  of  pleasure,  fornication,  of  quietness,  and  of  peacemaking. 

The  images  of  the  decans  are  differently  given  by  other  writers,  but  the 
signification  is  similar.  Also  every  degree  has  its  allotted  emblem  and  significance.  (The 
Order  did  not  list  these,  but  some  modem  writers  have  accomplished  this.  It  is 
suggested  that  the  interested 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


student  consult  Sabian  Symbols  by  Marc  Edmunc  Jones.  He  deals 
extensively  with  this  subject.) 

The  following  note  shows  still  further  the  connection  between  the  YHVH  and 
the  Shem  ha-Mephoresch. 


Let  the  Tetragrammaton,  as  in  this  diagram,  be  written  a triangle  apex 
upwards,  so  that  its  component  letters  form  a triangle  in  themselves  by  increasing 
each  descending  line  beyond  the  space  occupied  by  the  line  above  it.  Above  will  then 
be  a single  line,  below  it  like  two  Hehs,  the  three  Vaus,  then  four  final  Hehs.  Thus  we 
constitute  a triangle  of  ten  letters  answering  to  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  the  uppermost 
Yod  answering  to  Kether,  the  two  Hehs  to  Chokmah  and  Binah,  the  three  Vaus  to 
Chesed,  Geburah  and  Tiphareth,  and  the  four  final  Hehs  to  Netzach,  Hod,  Yesod 
and  Malkuth. 

Now  if  we  invert  the  Triangle  and  write  it  in  descending  ratio,  four  Yods,  three 
Hehs,  two  Vaus,  and  one  final  Heh,  we  shall  find  that  the  total  number  will  be  72, 
that  of  Schem  ha-Mephoresch. 


But  the  best  of  the  forms  is  that  when  it  is  written  by  Yod,  Heh,  etc.  Thus: 

Yod  is  10  and  equals  Atziluth  Yod  Heh  is  15  and  equals  Briah 
Yod  Heh  Vau  is  21  and  equals  Yetzirah. 


30 


VOLUME  THREE 


Whence  we  discover  why  the  Yetziratic  distribution  of  the  numbers  there  answering 
to  the  hexad  of  Height,  Depth,  East,  West,  North  and  South  - are  sealed  with  the 
Permutation  of  Yod  Heh  Vau  and  not  of  Tetragrammaton. 

Furthermore  21  is  the  number  of  EHEIEH.  YHVH  is  26  which  is  Assiah.  The  sum  of 
all  these  numbers  thus  are: 

10+15+21+26  is  72,  the  number  of  Schem  ha-Mephoresch. 


HODOS  CHAMELIONIS 
CONCERNING  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE 

This  is  the  Book  of  the  Path  of  the  Chameleon  - the  knowledge  of  the  colours  of  the  forces  which 
lie  beyond  the  physical  universe.  Study  thou  well  that  saying  of  Hermes  ‘that  which  is  below  is  like  that 
which  is  above,’  for  if  that  which  is  below  is  conformed  according  to  the  Law  of  the  Concealed  One  Great 
is  his  Name  - be  thou  well  assured  that  the  closer  thou  adherest  unto  the  Law  of  the  Universe  in  thy 
working,  by  so  much  the  more  is  thy  Magical  working  just  and  true. 

Recall  what  was  said  unto  thee  in  the  Ritual  of  the  Paths  of  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepti. 
‘Therefore,  by  the  straight  and  narrow  path  of  Samekh,  let  the  Philosophus  advance  like  the  arrow  from 
the  Bow  of  Qesheth.  Now  Qesheth  the  Bow  is  the  Rainbow  of  Promise  stretched  above  the  earth,  whose 
name  is  formed  from  the  letters  of  the  Paths  leading  from  Malkuth.  If  then  it  be  by  the  Path  of  Samekh 
that  the  Philosophus  should  advance  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Adept,  turning  aside  neither  unto  the  right 
hand  nor  unto  the  left,  whereon  are  the  evil  and  threatening  symbols  of  Death  and  the  Devil,  he  must  have 
a perfect  and  absolute  knowledge  of  the  Bow,  ere  he  can  follow  the  Path  of  the  Arrow.  But  the  Bow  is  of 
brilliant  and  perfect  colour,  whose  analysis  and  synthesis  yield  others  of  the  same  scale,  and  hence  is  this 
book  entitled  “The  Book  of  the  Path  of  the  Chameleon”  - that  Path,  namely  which  ascendeth  alone 
through  the  force  of  Qesheth,  the  Bow. 

And  if  thy  knowledge  and  application  of  the  outer  knowledge,  which  thou  hast  already  learned, 
be  faulty  and  incorrect  how  wilt  thou  be  able  to  keep  thyself  from  turning  aside  unto  thy  hurt?  Therefore, 
learn  not  knowledge  by  rate  only  as  an  unreasoning  child,  but  meditate,  search  out  and  compare,  and  to 
the  end,  see  that  thou  think  but  little  of  thyself  for  only  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted.  Magical 
knowledge  is  not  given  unto  thee  to  tickle  thy  vanity  and  conceit,  but  that  by  its  means,  thou  mayest 
purify  and  equilibriate  thy  spiritual  nature  and  honour  the  Vast  and  Concealed  One. 

This  is  the  explanation  of  the  first  diagram  of  the  Paths  - the  Sephiroth  being  in  the  feminine  scale 
and  the  Paths  in  the  masculine  or  King’s  scale.  It  is  the  Key  of  the  Forces  which  lie  in  Qesheth  the  Bow. 
Treasure  it  in  thy  heart  and  mark  it  well,  seeing  that  therein  is  the  key  or  nature.  Meditate  on  it  and  reveal 
it  not  unto  the  profane,  for  many  and  great  are  its  mysteries. 

There  are  four  scales  of  colour  which  correspond  to  the  Four  Worlds.  They  are: 

King  Scale  Atziluth  Wands  Yod  Fire 


31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Queen  Scale 

Briah 

Cups 

Heh 

Water 

Knight  Scale 

Yetzirah 

Swords 

Vau 

Air 

Knave  Scale 

Assiah 

Pentacles 

Heh 

Earth 

The  colours  differ  according  to  the  World  or  aspect  of  the  Great  Name  they  represent: 

Thus  Samekh  in: 


King  Scale 

Deep 

Blue 

Queen  Scale 

Yellow 

Knight  Scale 

Green 

Knave  Scale 

Grey 

Blue 

Tiphareth  in: 

King  Scale 

Rose 

Queen  Scale 

Gold 

Knight  Scale 

Pink 

Knave  Scale 

Tawny  Yellow 

The  TREE  OF  LIFE  for  the  use  of  an  Adeptus  Minor  is  compounded  of  the  first  two  scales.  The 
SEPHIROTH  are  in  the  feminine,  passive,  or  Queen  Scale.  The  PATHS  are  in  the  masculine,  active,  or 
King  Scale.  It  thus  represents  the  forces  of  ATZILUTH  in  the  PATHS  uniting  the  SEPHIROTH  as 
reflected  in  the  Briatic  World,  one  of  the  possible  arrangements  of  the  powers  inherent  in  YOD  HE  of  the 
GREAT  NAME. 

First  are  the  Feminine  colours  of  the  Sephiroth,  the  Queen’s  Scale.  In  Kether  is  the  Divine  White 
Brilliance,  the  scintillation  and  corruscation  of  the  Divine  Glory  that  Light  which  lighteth  the  universe  - 
that  Light  which  surpasseth  the  glory  of  the  Sun  and  besi4e  which  the  light  of  mortals  is  but  darkness,  and 
concerning  which  it  is  not  fitting  that  we 

32 


VOLUME  THREE 


should  speak  more  fully.  And  the  Sphere  of  its  Operation  is  called  Rashith  ha-Gilgalim,  the  beginning  of 
whirling  (or  whirls,  or  whorls),  the  Primum  Mobile  or  First  Mover,  which  bestoweth  the  gift  of  life  in  all 
things  and  filleth  the  whole  Universe.  And  Eheieh  is  the  Name  of  the  Divine  Essence  in  Kether.  Its 
Archangel  is  the  Prince  of  Countenances  Metatron  or  Metraton,  He  who  bringeth  others  before  the  face  of 
God.  The  Name  of  its  Order  of  Angels  is  called  Chaioth  ha-Qadesh,  the  Holy  Living  Creatures,  which  are 
also  called  the  Order  of  Seraphim. 

In  Chokmah  is  a cloud-like  grey  which  containeth  various  colours  and  is  mixed  with  them,  like  a 
transparent  pearl-hued  mist,  yet  radiating  withal,  as  if  behind  it  there  were  a brilliant  glory.  And  the 
Sphere  of  its  influence  is  in  Masloth,  the  Starry  Heavens,  wherein  it  disposeth  the  forms  of  things.  Yah  is 
the  Divine  Ideal  Wisdom,  and  its  Archangel  is  Ratziel,  the  Prince  or  Princes  of  the  knowledge  of  hidden 
and  concealed  things,  and  the  name  of  its  Order  of  Angels  is  Auphanim,  the  Wheels  or  the  Whirling 
Forces  which  are  also  called  the  Order  of  Kerubim. 

In  Binah  is  a thick  darkness  which  yet  veileth  the  Divine  Glory  in  which  all  colours  are  hidden, 
wherein  is  mystery  and  depth  and  silence,  and  yet,  it  is  the  habitation  of  the  Supernal  Light.  Thus  is  the 
Supernal  Triad  completed.  And  the  Sphere  of  its  Operation  is  Shabbathai,  or  rest,  and  it  giveth  forms  and 
similitudes  unto  chaotic  matter  and  it  ruleth  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  planet  Saturn.  lehovah  Elohim  is 
the  perfection  of  Creation  and  the  Life  of  the  World  to  Come.  Its  Archangel  is  Tzaphqiel,  the  Prince  of 
the  Spiritual  Strife  against  Evil,  and  the  Name  of  the  Order  of  Angels  is  Aralim,  the  Strong  and  Mighty 
Ones  who  are  also  called  the  Order  of  Thrones.  The  Angel  Yophiel  is  also  referred  unto  Binah. 

In  Chokmah  is  the  Radix  of  blue  and  thence  is  there  a blue  colour  pure  and  primitive,  and 
glistening  with  a spiritual  Light  which  is  reflected  unto  Chesed.  And  the  Sphere  of  its  Operation  is  called 
Tzedek  or  Justice  and  it  fashioneth  the  images  of  material  things,  bestowing  peace  and  mercy;  and  it 
ruleth  the  sphere  of  the  action  of  the  planet  Jupiter.  A1  is  the  title  of  a God  strong  and  mighty,  ruling  in 
Glory,  Magnificence  and  Grace.  The  Archangel  of  Chesed  is  Tzadkiel,  the  prince  of  Mercy  and 
Beneficence,  and  the  Name  of  the  Order  of  Angels  is  Chashmalim  Brilliant  Ones,  who  are  also  called  the 
Order  of  Dominions  or  Dominations.  The  Sephirah  Chesed  is  also  called  Gedulah  or  Magnificence  and 
Glory. 

In  Binah  is  the  Radix  of  Red,  and  therein  is  there  a red  colour,  pure  and  scintillating  and  flashing 
with  flame  which  is  reflected  unto  Geburah.  The  Sphere  of  its  Operation  is  called  Madim  or  violent 
rushing  Force  and  it  bringeth  fortitude,  and  war  and  strength  and  slaughter,  as  it  were,  the  flaming  Sword 
of  an  avenging  God.  It  ruleth  the  Sphere  of  Action  of  the  Planet  Mars.  Elohim  Gibor  is  the  Elohim, 
Mighty  and  Terrible,  judging  and  avenging  evil,  ruling  in  wrath  and  terror  and  storm,  and  at  whose  steps 
are  lightning  and  flame.  Its  Archangel  is  Kamael  the  Prince  of  Strength  and  Courage,  and  the  Name  of  the 
Order  of  Angels  is  Seraphim  the  Flaming  Ones  who  are  also  called  the  Order  of  Powers.  The  Sephirah 
Chesed  is  also  called  Gedulah  or  Magnificence  and  Glory,  and  the  Sephirah  Geburah  is  also  called 
Pachad  Terror  and  Fear. 

In  Kether  is  the  Radix  of  a Golden  Glory  and  thence  is  there  a pure,  primitive  and 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


sparkling,  gleaming  golden  yellow  which  is  reflected  unto  Tiphareth.  Thus  is  the  first  reflected  Triad 
completed.  The  Sphere  of  its  operation  is  that  of  Shemesh,  the  Solar  Light,  and  bestoweth  Life,  Light  and 
Brilliancy  in  metallic  matter,  and  it  ruleth  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  Sun.  Yhvh  Eloah  va-Daath  is  a God 
of  Knowledge  and  Wisdom,  ruling  over  the  Light  of  the  Universe;  and  its  Archangel  is  Raphael,  the 
Prince  of  Brightness,  Beauty  and  Life.  The  Name  of  the  Order  of  Angels  is  Melechim  or  Malakim,  that  is 
Kings  or  Angelic  Kings,  who  are  also  called  the  Order  of  Virtues,  Angels  and  Rulers.  The  Angels  Peniel 
and  Pelial  are  also  referred  unto  this  Sephirah.  It  especially  rules  the  Mineral  world. 

The  beams  of  Chesed  and  of  Tiphareth  meet  in  Netzach  and  thence  in  Netzach  arises  a green, 
pure,  brilliant,  liquid,  and  gleaming  like  an  emerald.  The  Sphere  of  its  operations  is  that  of  Nogah  or 
External  Splendour,  producing  zeal,  love,  harmony,  and  it  ruleth  the  Sphere  of  Action  of  the  Planet  Venus 
and  the  nature  of  the  Vegetable  World.  Jehovah  Tzabaoth  is  a God  of  Hosts  and  of  Armies,  of  Triumph 
and  of  Victory,  ruling  the  Universe  in  Justice  and  Eternity.  Its  Archangel  Hanial  is  the  Prince  of  Love  and 
Harmony,  and  the  Name  of  the  Order  of  Angels  is  Elohim  or  gods  who  are  also  called  the  Order  of 
Principalities.  The  Angel  Cerviel  is  also  referred  unto  this  Sephirah. 

The  beams  of  Geburah  and  Tiphareth  meet  in  Hod  and  thence  arises  in  Hod  a brilliant  pure  and 
flashing  orange  tawny.  The  Sphere  of  its  Operation  is  that  of  Kokab,  the  stellar  light,  bestowing  elegance, 
swiftness,  scientific  knowledge  and  art,  and  constancy  of  speech,  and  it  ruleth  the  sphere  of  the  action  of 
the  planet  Mercury.  Elohim  Tzabaoth  is  also  a God  of  Hosts  and  of  Armies,  of  Mercy  and  of  Agreement, 
of  Praise  and  Honour,  ruling  the  Universe  in  Wisdom  and  Harmony.  Its  Archangel  is  Michael,  the  Prince 
of  Splendour  and  of  Wisdom,  and  the  Name  of  Order  of  Angels  is  Beni  Elohim,  or  Sons  of  the  Gods,  who 
are  also  called  the  Order  of  Archangels. 

The  beams  of  Chesed  and  Geburah  meet  in  Yesod  and  thence  ariseth  in  Yesod  a brilliant  deep 
violet-purple  or  puce,  and  thus  is  the  third  Triad  completed.  The  sphere  of  its  operation  is  that  of  Levanah, 
the  Lunar  beam,  bestowing  change,  increase  and  decrease  upon  created  things  and  it  ruleth  the  Sphere  of 
Action  of  the  Moon  and  the  nature  of  mankind.  Shaddai  is  a God  who  sheddeth  benefits,  Omnipotent  and 
Satisfying,  and  A1  Chai  is  the  God  of  Life,  the  Living  One.  Its  Archangel  is  Gabriel  the  Prince  of  Change 
and  Alteration.  The  name  of  the  Order  of  Angels  is  Kerubim  or  Kerubic  ones  who  are  also  called  the 
Order  of  Angels. 

From  the  rays  of  this  Triad  there  appear  three  colours  in  Malkuth  together  with  a fourth  which  is 
their  synthesis.  Thus  from  the  orange  tawny  of  Hod  and  the  green  nature  of  Netzach,  there  goeth  forth  a 
certain  greenish  ‘citrine’  colour,  yet  pure  and  translucent  withal.  From  the  orange  tawny  of  Hod  mingled 
with  the  puce  of  Yesod  there  goeth  forth  a certain  red  russet  brown,  ‘russet’yet  gleaming  with  a hidden 
fire.  From  the  green  of  Netzach  and  the  puce  of  Yesod  there  goeth  forth  a certain  other  darkening  green 
‘Olive’  yet  rich  and  glowing  withal.  The  synthesis  of  all  these  is  a blackness  which  bordereth  upon  the 
Qlippoth. 

Thus  are  the  colours  of  the  Sephiroth  completed  in  their  feminine  or  Rainbow  scale. 

Moreover,  though  the  Tree  of  Life  operates  through  all  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  yet  it  is  referred  in  a 
special  manner  to  Tiphareth.  Also,  though  the  branches  of  the  Tree  of 


34 


VOLUME  THREE 


Knowledge  of  Good  and  Evil  stretch  into  the  seven  lower  Sephiroth  and  downwards  into  the 
Kingdom  of  Shells,  yet  it  is  referred  especially  unto  Malkuth.  Similarly  with  Netzach  and  Hod,  the  right 
and  left  columns  of  the  Sephiroth  are  referred  respectively  thereto. 

In  Malkuth,  Adonai  ha-Aretz  is  God,  the  Lord  and  King,  ruling  over  the  Kingdom  and  Empire 
which  is  the  Visible  Universe. 

Cholem  Yesodoth  the  Breaker  of  Foundations,  is  the  Name  of  the  Sphere  of  the  Elements  from 
which  all  things  are  formed,  and  its  Archangels  are  three:  Metatron,  the  Prince  of  Countenance  reflected 
from  Kether,  and  Sandalphon,  the  Prince  of  Prayer  (feminine),  and  Nephesch  ha-Messiah,  the  Soul  of  the 
Reconciler  for  the  Earth.  The  Order  of  Angels  is  Ashim  or  Flames  of  Fire,  as  it  is  written  ‘Who  maketh 
his  Angels  as  Ashim  Spirits  and  his  Ministers  as  a flaming  Fire,’  and  these  are  also  called  the  Order  of 
blessed  Souls,  or  of  the  Souls  of  the  Just  made  Perfect. 

The  Three  Archangels  attributed  to  Malkuth  with  reference  to  Christian  symbolism  in  regard  to 
Our  Father,  Our  Lady,  and  Our  Lord.  The  following  tables  consists  of  a classification  of  the  scales  of 
colour  in  each  of  the  Four  Worlds.  The  first  ten  refer  to  the  Sephiroth,  and  the  remaining  twenty-two  refer 
to  the  Paths. 


Yod-Fire  Heh-Water  Vau-Air 

Heh  (1)  Earth 

King  Scale 

Queen  Scale 

Knight 

Knave 

Atziluth  Briah 

Yetzirah 

Assiah 

Wands 

Cups 

Swords 

Pentacles 

1.  Brilliance 

White  brilliance 

White  brilliance 

White  flecked  gold 

2.  Soft  blue 

Grey 

Bluish  mother  of  pearl 

White  flecked  red,  blue,  yellow 

3.  Crimson 

Black 

Dark  brown 

Grey  flecked  red,  blue,  yellow 

4.  Deep  violet 

Blue 

Deep  Purple 

Deep  azure  flecked  yellow 

5.  Orange 

Scarlet-red 

Bright  Scarlet 

Red  flecked  black 

6.  Clear  pink  rose 

Yellow  (gold) 

Rich  salmon 

Gold  amber 

7.  Amber 

Emerald 

Bright  yellow-green 

Olive  flecked  gold 

8.  Violet-purple 

Orange 

Red  russet 

Yellow-brown  flecked  white 

9.  Indigo 

Violet 

Very  dark  purple 

Citrine  flecked  azure 

10.  Yellow 

Citrine,  olive,  russet,  black 

4 colours  flecked  gold  Black  rayed  yellow 

11.  Bright-pale  yellow 

Sky-blue 

Blue-emerald  green 

Emerald  flecked  gold 

12.  Yellow 

Purple 

Grey 

Indigo-rayed  violet 

13.  Blue 

Silver 

Cold  pale  blue 

Silver  rayed  sky-blue 

14.  Emerald  green 

Sky  Blue 

Early  spring  greenBright  rose  or  cerise  rayed  pale  yellow 

15.  Scarlet 

Red 

Brilliant  flame 

Glowing  red 

16.  Red  orange 

Deep  indigo 

Deep  warm  olive 

Rich  brown 

17.  Orange 

Pale  mauve 

New  yellow 

Reddish  grey  inclined  to  mauve 

18.  Amber 

Maroon 

Rich  bright  russet 

Dark  greenish-brown 

19.  Greenish-yellow 

Deep  purple 

Grey 

Reddish-amber 

20.  Yellowish-green 

Slate  grey 

Green  grey 

Plum  colour 

21.  Violet 

Blue 

Rich  purple 

Bright  blue  rayed  yellow 

35 


THE 

COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

22.  Emerald-green 

Blue 

Deep  blue  green 

Pale  green 

23.  Deep  blue 

Sea-green 

Deep  olive  green 

white  flaked  purple,  mother  - pearl 

24.  Green-blue 

Dull  brown 

Very  dark  brown 

Livid  indigo  brown-black-beetle 

25.  Blue  Yellow 

Green 

Dark  vivid-blue 

26.  Indigo 

Black 

Blue  black 

Cold-dark-grey  near  black 

27.  Scarlet 

Red 

Venetian  red 

Bright  red  rayed  azure  or  emerald 

28.  Violet 

Sky  blue 

Bluish  mauve 

White  tinged  purple 

29.  Ultra  violet  crimson 

Buff  flecked  silver-white  Light  translucent  pink-brown  Stone  colour 

30.  Orange 

Gold  yellow 

Rich  amber 

Amber  rayed  red 

31.  Glowing  scarlet-orange 

Vermillion 

Scarlet  flecked  gold 

vermilion  flecked  crimson  emerald 

32.  Indigo  Black 

Blue  black 

Black  rayed  blue 

31.  *Cjtrjne,  olive,  russet,  black  Amber 

Dark  brown 

Black  and  yellow 

32.  *White,  merging  grey 

Deep  purple 

7 prism  colours  violet  outer  white, 

red,  yellow,  blue,  black  outer  * 

Note:  these  represent  the  fact  that  a dogish  in  Shin  and  Tau  produce  a second  sound.  Daath,  a “false” 
Sephirah  stationed  in  the  abyss  has  lavender  in  the  King  scale,  grey  white  in  Queen,  pure  violet  in  Knight, 
and  grey  flecked  gold  in  Knave. 


THE  MICROCOSM  - MAN 

Thou  shalt  know  that  the  whole  Sphere  of  Sensation  which  surroundeth  the  whole  physical  body 
of  a man  is  called  “The  Magical  Mirror  of  the  Universe.”  For  therein  are  represented  all  the  occult  forces 
of  the  Universe  projected  as  on  a sphere,  convex  to  the  outer,  but  concave  to  man.  This  sphere 
surroundeth  the  physical  body  of  a man  as  the  Celestial  Heavens  do  the  body  of  a Star  or  a Planet,  having 
their  forces  mirrored  in  its  atmosphere.  Therefore  its  allotment  or  organization  is  the  copy  of  that  Greater 
World  or  Macrocosm.  In  this  “Magical  Mirror  of  the  Universe,”  therefore,  are  the  Ten  Sephiroth 
projected  in  the  form  of  the  Tree  of  Life  as  in  a solid  sphere.  (See  the  diagram  in  the  colour  section  on  the 
Tree  of  Life  in  a solid  sphere.)  A man’s  physical  body  is  within  the  Ten  Sephiroth  projected  in  a sphere. 
The  divisions  and  parts  of  the  body  are  formed  from  the  Sephiroth  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  thus: 

KETHER 

Kether  is  above  the  Crown  of  the  Head,  and  represents  a crown  which  indeed  is  powerful,  but 
requires  one  worthy  to  wear  it.  In  the  crown  of  the  head  is  placed  the  faculty  of  Neschamah,  which  is  the 
power  of  Aspiration  unto  that  which  is  beyond.  This  power  Neschamah  is  especially  attributed  unto  the 
Supernal  Triad  in  Assiah,  of  which  there  are  three  manifestations  which  are  included  in  the  general 
concept,  Neschamah.  From  Chokmah  and  Binah  are  formed  the  sides  of  the  brain  and  .head.  Therein  exist 
the  intellectual  faculties  of  Wisdom  and  Understanding,  shining  into  and  illuminating  their  inferior,  the 
Ruach.  They  are  the  mansions  of  the  practical  administration  of  the  intellect, 


36 


VOLUME  THREE 


whose  physical  shewing  forth  is  by  reflection  in  Ruach.  In  the  Magical  Mirror  of  the  Universe,  or 
the  Sphere  of  Sensation,  Man  is  placed  between  four  pillars  of  the  Tree  of  Life  as  projected  in  a sphere. 
These  keep  their  place  and  MOVE  NOT,  but  the  Man  himself  places  in  his  Sphere  of  Sensation  that  point 
of  the  Zodiac  which  ascended  at  the  moment  of  his  birth  and  conception  (for  the  same  degree  of  the 
Zodiac  ascendeth  at  both,  otherwise  the  birth  could  not  take  place).  That  is  to  say  that  at  those  times  the 
same  degree  of  the  Zodiac  is  ascending  in  the  East  of  the  Heavens  of  the  Star  whereon  he  is  incarnated. 
Thus  doth  he  remain  during  that  incarnation  facing  that  particular  point  in  his  sphere  of  sensation.  That  is 
to  say,  this  sphere  DOTH  NOT  REVOLVE  about  the  physical  body. 

CHESED  AND  GEBURAH 

From  Chesed  and  Geburah  are  formed  the  arms.  Therein  exist  the  faculties  of  operative  action, 
wherefore  at  their  extremities  are  the  symbols  of  the  Four  Elements  and  the  Spirit,  thus: 

Thumb  - Spirit 
3rd  Finger  - Fire 
Index  Finger  - Water 
Little  Finger  - Air 
Second  Finger  - Earth 

The  arms  are  the  manifestors  of  the  executive  power  of  the  Ruach,  and  therein  are  the  faculties  of 
touch  strongly  expressed. 

From  TIPHARETH  is  formed  the  trunk  of  the  body,  free  from  the  members,  and  therein  as  in  a 
receptacle  of  influences  are  situated  the  vital  organs.  The  blood  is  Spirit  mingled  with  and  governing  the 
watery  principle.  The  lungs  are  the  receptacles  of  Air  which  tempereth  the  blood  as  the  wind  doth  the 
waves  of  the  sea,  the  mephitic  impurities  of  the  blood  in  its  traversal  of  the  body  requiring  the  dispersing 
force  of  the  Air,  even  as  the  sea,  under  a calm,  doth  putrify  and  become  mephitic.  The  heart  is  the  great 
centre  of  the  action  of  Fire,  lending  its  terrible  energy  as  an  impulse  unto  the  others.  Thence  cometh  from 
the  fiery  nature  the  red  colour  of  the  blood.  The  part  above  the  heart  is  the  chief  abode  of  the  Ruach,  as 
there  receiving  and  concentrating  the  other  expression  of  its  Sephiroth.  This  part  is  the  central  citadel  of 
the  body  and  is  the  particular  abode  of  the  lower  and  more  physical  will.  The  higher  will  is  in  the  Kether 
of  the  body.  For  the  higher  will  to  manifest,  it  must  be  reflected  into  the  lower  will  be  NESCHAMAH. 
This  lower  will  is  potent  around  the  heart  and  is  seated  like  the  King  of  the  body  upon  its  throne.  The 
concentration  of  the  other  faculties  of  the  Ruach  in  and  under  the  presidency  of  the  Will,  at  the  same  time 
reflecting  the  administrative  governance  of  CHOKMAH  and  BINAH,  is  what  is  called  the  human 
consciousness.  That  is,  a reflection  of  the  two  creative  Sephiroth  under  the  presidency  of  the  Four 
Elements,  or  the  reflection  of  Aima  and  Abba  as  the  parents  of  the  human  Jehovah.  But  the  human 
Neschamah  exists  only  when  the  higher  Will  is  reflected 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


by  the  agency  of  aspiration  from  Kether  into  the  lower  body,  and  when  the  flaming  letter  SHIN  is 
placed  like  a crown  on  the  head  of  Microprosopus.  Thus  only  doth  the  human  will  become  the  receptacle 
of  the  higher  Will  and  the  action  of  Neschamah  is  the  link  therewith.  The  lower  will  is  the  human 
Jehovah,  an  angry  and  jealous  God,  the  Shaker  of  the  Elements,  the  manifestor  in  the  life  of  the  body.  But 
illuminated  by  the  higher  Will,  he  becometh  YEHESHUAH,  no  longer  angry  and  jealous,  but  the  self- 
sacrificer  and  the  Atoning  and  Reconciling  One. 

This  as  regards  the  action  of  the  more  physical  man.  Unto  this  Ruach  also  are  presented  the 
reflections  of  the  Macrocosmic  Universe  in  the  Sphere  of  Sensation.  They  surround  the  Ruach  which,  in 
the  natural  man,  feeleth  them  but  vaguely  and  comprehendeth  them  not.  The  faculties  of  the  Earth  are 
shown  forth  in  the  organs  which  digest  and  putrify,  casting  forth  the  impurities,  even  as  the  Earth  is 
placed  above  the  Qlippoth.  Thou  wilt  say,  then,  that  the  Ruach  cannot  be  the  reasoning  mind,  seeing  that 
it  reflecteth  its  reason  from  Chokmah  and  Binah,  but  it  is  the  executive  faculty  which  reasoneth,  which 
worketh  and  combineth  the  faculties  reflected  into  it.  The  reasoning  mind,  therefore,  is  that  which  useth 
and  combineth  the  Principia  of  Chokmah  and  Binah  so  that  the  parts  of  Chokmah  and  Binah  which  touch 
the  Ruach  are  the  initiators  of  the  reasoning  power.  The  reason  itself  is  a process  and  but  a simulacrum  of 
the  action  of  the  higher  Wisdom  and  Understanding.  For  the  Air  is  not  the  Light,  only  the  translator  of  the 
Light.  Yet  without  the  Air,  the  operations  of  the  Light  could  not  so  well  be  carried  out.  The  word  Ruach, 
Spirit,  also  meaneth  Air.  It  is  like  a thing  that  goeth  out  thou  knowest  not  whither,  and  cometh  in  thou 
knowest  not  whence.  ‘The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not 
tell  whence  it  cometh  nor  whither  it  goeth.  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit. ’This  Air,  the  Ruach, 
permeateth  the  whole  physical  body  but  its  concentrated  influence  is  about  the  the  heart.  Yet,  were  it  not 
for  the  boundary  force  of  Chokmah  and  Binah  above,  of  the  sphere  of  sensation  surrounding  it,  and  of 
Malkuth  below,  the  Ruach  could  not  concentrate  under  the  presidency  of  the  Name,  and  the  life  of  the 
body  would  cease.  Thus  far  concerning  the  Ruach  as  a whole,  that  is,  the  action  of  the  Will  in  Tiphareth. 

NETZACH  AND  HOD 

From  Netzach  and  Hod  are  formed  the  thighs  and  legs,  and  they  terminate  in  the  symbols  of  five, 
as  do  the  arms;  but  they  are  not  so  moveable,  owing  to  the  effect  of  Malkuth.  In  them  are  placed  the 
faculties  of  support  and  firmness  and  balance;  and  they  show  the  more  physical  qualities  of  the  Ruach.  In 
them  is  the  sustaining  force  of  the  Ruach.  They  are  the  affirmation  of  the  Pillars  of  the  Sephiroth,  as 
answering  to  the  Passive,  the  arms  more  answering  to  the  two  pillars  which  are  Active.  They  are  the 
columns  of  the  Human  Temple. 

From  YESOD  are  formed  the  generative  and  excretory  organs,  and  therein  is  the  seat  of  the  lower 
desires,  as  bearing  more  on  the  double  nature  of,  on  the  one  hand,  the  rejection  of 


38 


VOLUME  THREE 


the  Qlippoth,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  simulacrum  of  the  vital  forces  in  Tiphareth.  It  is  the 
special  seat  of  the  automatic  consciousness.  That  is,  not  the  Will,  but  the  simulacrum  of  the  Will  in 
Tiphareth.  Yesod  is  the  lowest  of  the  Sephiroth  of  the  Ruach,  and  representeth  “Fundamental  Action.”  It 
therefore  governeth  generation.  In  Yesod  is  therefore  the  automatic  consciousness  or  simulacrum  of  the 
Will.  This  automatic  consciousness  is  to  the  Nephesch  what  the  Daath  action  is  to  the  Ruach.  Thus, 
therefore,  there  being  a simulacrum  or  reflection  of  the  heart  and  vital  organs  in  the  parts  governed  by 
Yesod,  if  the  consciousness  of  the  Tiphareth  be  given  unto  this  wholly,  it  shall  pave  the  way  for  disease 
and  death.  For  this  will  be  a withdrawing  of  the  vital  forces  of  the  Name,  which  are  in  the  citadel  of 
Tiphareth,  to  locate  them  in  Yesod,  which  is  a more  easily  attacked  position.  For  the  automatic 
consciousness  is  the  translator  of  the  Ruach  unto  the  Nephesch. 

MALKUTH 

From  Malkuth  is  formed  the  whole  physical  body  under  the  command  and  presidency  of 
Nephesch.  The  Nephesch  is  the  subtle  body  of  refined  astral  Light  upon  which,  as  on  an  invisible  pattern, 
the  physical  body  is  extended.  The  physical  body  is  permeated  throughout  by  rays  of  the  Ruach,  of  which 
it  is  the  material  completion.  The  Nephesch  shineth  through  the  Material  body  and  formeth  the  Magical 
Mirror  or  Sphere  of  Sensation.  This  Magical  Mirror  or  Sphere  of  Sensation  is  an  imitation  or  copy  of  the 
Sphere  of  the  Universe.  The  space  between  the  physical  body  and  the  boundary  of  the  sphere  of  Sensation 
is  occupied  by  the  ether  of  the  astral  world;  that  is  to  say,  the  container  or  recipient  of  the  Astral  Rays  of 
the  Macrocosm.  The  Nephesch  is  divided  into  its  seven  Palaces,  combining  the  Sephirotic  influences  in 
their  most  material  forms.  That  is,  the  world  of  passions  dominated  by  the  Ruach,  or  by  the  world  which 
is  beyond.  That  is,  its  Sephiroth  are  passionate,  expressing  a passionate  dominion.  Thus,  its  three 
Supernal  Sephiroth,  Kether,  Chokmah  and  Binah,  are  united  in  a sense  of  feeling  and  comprehending 
impressions.  Its  Chesed  is  expressed  by  laxity  of  action.  Its  Geburah  by  violence  of  action.  Its  Tiphareth 
is  expressed  by  more  or  less  sensual  contemplation  of  beauty,  and  love  of  vital  sensation.  Its  Hod  and 
Netzach,  by  physical  well-being  and  health.  Its  Yesod,  by  physical  desires  and  gratifications.  Its  Malkuth, 
by  absolute  increase  and  domination  of  matter  in  the  material  body.  The  Nephesch  is  the  real,  the  actual 
body,  of  which  the  material  body  is  only  the  result  through  the  action  of  Ruach,  which  by  the  aid  of  the 
Nephesch,  formeth  the  material  body  by  the  rays  of  Ruach,  which  do  not  ordinarily  proceed  beyond  the 
limits  of  the  physical  body.  That  is  to  say,  in  the  ordinary  man  the  rays  of  Ruach  rarely  penetrate  into  the 
sphere  of  Sensation.  Shining  through  infinite  worlds,  and  darting  its  rays  through  the  confines  of  space,  in 
this  Sphere  of  Sensation  is  a faculty  placed  even  as  a light  is  placed  in  an  aperture  of  the  upper  part  of  the 
Ruach  wherein  act  the  rays  from  Chokmah  and  Binah  which  govern  the  reason,  Daath. 

This  faculty  can  be  thrown  downwards  into  the  Ruach,  and  thence  can  radiate  into  the  Nephesch. 
It  consists  of  seven  manifestations  answering  to  the  Hexagram,  and  is  like  the 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Soul  of  Microprosopus  or  the  Elohim  of  the  Human  YHVH.  Therefore  in  the  head,  which  is  its 
natural  and  chief  seat,  are  formed  the  seven  apertures  of  the  head.  This  is  the  Spiritual  consciousness  as 
distinct  from  the  Human  consciousness.  It  is  manifested  in  7 as  just  said  or  in  8 if  Daath  be  included.  The 
Father  is  the  Sun  (Chokmah).  The  Mother  is  the  Moon  (Binah).  The  Wind  beareth  it  in  his  bosom 
(Ruach).  Its  Nurse  is  the  Earth  (Nephesch).  The  power  is  manifested  when  it  can  vibrated  through  the 
Earth. 

The  following  is  the  true  attribution  of  the  seven  apertures  of  the  head: 

The  right  ear  is  Saturn. 

The  left  ear  is  Jupiter. 

The  right  eye  is  the  Sun. 

The  left  eye  is  the  Moon. 

The  mouth  is  Mercury. 

The  right  nostril  is  Mars. 

The  left  nostril  is  Venus. 

These  latter  represent  here  the  sonoriferous  sense.  The  right  and  left  eye  the  luminous  sense,  as 
the  Sun  and  Moon  are  the  luminaries  of  the  Macrocosm.  The  right  and  left  nostrils  through  which  the 
breath  passes,  giving  strength  to  the  physical  body,  are  under  Mars  and  Venus.  The  mouth  is  under 
Mercury,  the  messenger  and  the  Speaker. 

This  spiritual  consciousness  is  a focus  of  the  action  of  Neschamah.  The  lower  will  power  should 
control  the  descent  of  this  spiritual  consciousnes  into  the  Ruach,  and  thence  into  the  Nephesch,  for  the 
consciousness  must  descend  into  the  Nephesch  before  the  images  of  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  can  be 
perceived.  For  it  is  only  the  rays  of  this  consciousness  permeating  the  Ruach  that  can  take  cognisance 
thereof.  This  faculty  of  the  spiritual  consciousness  is  the  seat  of  Thought.  Thought  is  a Light  proceeding 
from  the  radiation  of  this  spiritual  consciousness,  traversing  the  Ruach  as  Light  traverseth  Air,  and 
encountering  thereafter  the  symbols  reflected  in  the  sphere  of  Sensation,  or  magical  mirror  of  the 
Universe.  These  symbols  are  by  its  radiation  (i.e.  that  of  the  Thought)  reflected  again  into  the  Spiritual 
Consciousness  where  they  are  subjected  unto  the  action  of  the  Reasoning  Mind  and  of  the  Lower  Will. 
That  is,  in  the  ordinary  natural  man  when  awake,  the  thought  acteth  through  the  Ruach,  subject  when 
there  to  the  action  of  the  Lower  Will,  and  submitted  to  the  reasoning  power  derived  as  aforesaid  from 
Chokmah  and  Binah.  But  in  the  ordinary  man  when  sleeping,  and  in  the  madman,  the  idiot,  and  the 
drunkard,  the  process  is  not  quite  the  same. 

In  the  sleeping  man,  the  concentration  of  the  Ruach  in  his  heart  during  the  waking  time  hath 
produced  a weakening  of  the  action  of  the  Ruach  in  its  subsidiary  Sephiroth  in  the  Physical  Body.  To 
preserve  the  salutary  conjunction  of  the  Ruach  with  the  Nephesch  in  the  physical  body  whose  limits  are 
fixed  by  the  Sephiroth  of  the  Ruach  it  is  necessary  to  weaken  the  concentration  in  Tiphareth  to  repair  the 
strain  which  is  produced  by  the  concentration  of  the  Ruach  therein  during  the  waking  state.  This  reflux  of 
the  Ruach  into  its  subsidiary  Sephiroth  produceth  naturally  a weakening  of  the  Lower  Will;  and  the 
Ruach,  therefore, 


40 


VOLUME  THREE 


doth  not  reflect  so  clearly  the  Reasoning  Faculty.  Wherefore,  the  thought  of  the  spiritual 
consciousness  reflecteth  the  image  in  a confused  series,  which  are  only  partially  realised  by  the  lower 
will.  This  is  as  regards  the  ordinary  natural  man  in  sleep.  In  the  madman,  as  considered  apart  from 
obsession,  thought-obsession  is  frequently  the  accompaniment  of  mania,  and  still  more  frequently  its 
cause  the  thought  and  lower  will  are  very  strongly  exercised  to  the  detriment  of  the  reasoning  faculty. 

That  is,  that  there  is  an  alliance  between  the  two  former  which  overpowereth  the  action  of  Chokmah  and 
Binah  in  the  latter.  Monomania  is  shewn  in  the  consideration  of  only  one  certain  symbol  which  is  too 
attractive  to  the  Will.  A chain  of  thought  is  therefore  simply  a graduated  vibration  arising  from  the  contact 
of  a ray  of  thought  with  a symbol. 

If  controlled  by  the  reasoning  power  and  licensed  by  the  Will,  such  vibrations  will  be  balanced 
and  of  equal  length.  But  if  uncontrolled  by  the  lower  Will  and  the  Reason,  they  will  be  unbalanced  and 
inharmonious.  That  is,  of  uneven  length.  In  the  case  of  the  drunkard,  the  equilibrium  of  the  Sphere  of 
Sensation  and  consequently  of  the  Nephesch,  is  disturbed.  In  consequence  the  thought  rays  are  shaken  at 
each  vibration,  so  that  the  sphere  of  sensation  of  the  Nephesch  is  caused  to  rock  and  waver  at  the 
extremities  of  the  Physical  Body  where  the  Ruach  action  is  bounded.  The  thought  therefore  is  dazzled  by 
the  symbols  of  the  Sphere  of  Sensation,  in  the  same  way  as  the  eyes  can  be  dazzled  in  front  of  a mirror  if 
the  latter  be  shaken  or  waved.  The  sensation  therefore  then  conveyed  by  the  thoughts  is  that  of  the  Sphere 
of  Sensation  oscillating  and  almost  revolving  about  the  physical  body,  bringing  giddiness,  sickness, 
vertigo  and  the  loss  of  idea  of  place  and  position.  Nearly  the  same  may  be  said  of  Seasickness,  and  the 
action  of  certain  drugs.  Restoration  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  after  this  naturally 
produceth  a slackening  of  the  concentration  of  the  Ruach  in  Tiphareth,  whence  sleep  is  an  absolute 
necessity  to  the  drunkard.  This  is  so  imperative  that  he  cannot  fight  against  the  need.  If  he  does  so,  or  if 
this  condition  be  constantly  repeated,  the  thought  rays  are  launched  through  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  so 
irregularly  and  so  violently  that  they  pass  its  boundary  without  either  the  lower  Will  or  the  Reasoning 
Power  or  even  the  Thought  itself  consenting  thereto;  and  the  latter  is  therefore  without  the  protection  of 
the  will. 

Thence  arise  the  conditions  of  delirium  tremors,  and  an  opening  is  made  in  the  Sphere  of 
Sensation  which  is  unguarded,  and  through  which  hostile  influences  may  enter.  But  this  latter  cometh 
under  the  head  of  obsession.  All  thought  action  in  the  spiritual  consciousness  originateth  in  radiation,  and 
radiation  is  as  inseparable  from  the  spiritual  consciousness  as  it  is  from  Light.  This  Spiritual 
Consciousness  is  the  focus  of  the  action  of  Neschamah.  The  spiritual  consciousness  is,  in  its  turn,  the 
Throne  or  Vehicle  of  the  Life  of  the  Spirit  which  is  Chiah;  and  these  combined  form  the  Chariot  of  that 
Higher  Will  which  is  in  Kether.  Also  it  is  the  peculiaE  faculty  of  Neschamah  to  aspire  unto  that  which  is 
beyond.  The  Higher  Will  manifests  itself  through  Yechidah.  The  Chiah  is  the  real  Life  Principle,  as 
distinct  from  the  more  illusionary  life  of  the  Physical  Body. 

The  Shining  Flame  of  the  Divine  Fire,  the  Kether  of  the  Body,  is  the  Real  Self  of  the  Incarnation. 
Yet  but  few  of  the  sons  of  men  know  it  or  feel  its  presence.  Still  less  do  they 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


believe  in  or  comprehend  those  Higher  Potencies,  Angelic,  Archangelic  or  Divine,  of  which  the 
manifestation  directly  touching  Yechidah  is  the  Higher  Genius.  This  Yechidah  in  the  ordinary  man  can 
but  rarely  act  through  the  spiritual  consciousness,  seeing  that  for  it  to  do  so  the  King  of  the  Physical 
Body,  that  is  the  Lower  Will,  must  rise  from  his  Throne  to  acknowledge  his  superior.  That  is  the  reason 
why,  in  some  cases,  in  sleep  only  doth  the  Higher  Will  manifest  itself  by  dream  unto  the  ordinary  man.  In 
other  cases  it  may  be  manifested;  at  times  through  the  sincere  practice  of  religious  rites,  or  in  cases  where 
the  opportunity  for  self-sacrifice  occurreth.  In  all  these  cases  the  Lower  Will  hath  for  a moment 
recognised  a higher  form  of  itself,  and  the  YHVH  of  the  man  hath  reflected  from  the  Eternal  Lord  of  the 
Higher  Life.  This  Yechidah  is  the  only  part  of  the  man  which  can  truly  say,  EHEIEH,  I am.  This  is  then 
but  the  Kether  of  the  Assiah  of  the  Microcosm,  that  is,  it  is  the  highest  part  of  man  as  Man.  It  is  that 
which  toucheth,  or  is  the  manifestation  of  a higher  and  greater  range  of  Being.  This  Yechidah  is  at  the 
same  time  the  Higher  Human  Self  and  the  Lower  Genius,  the  God  of  the  Man,  the  Atziluth  of  his  Assiah, 
even  as  Chiah  and  Neschamah  form  his  Briah,  and  Ruach  his  Yetzirah.  This  is  the  Higher  Will  and  the 
Divine  Consciousness,  as  Daath  is  the  Spiritual  Consciousness,  Tiphareth  the  Human  Consciousness,  and 
Yesod  the  Automatic  Consciousness. 

It  is  the  Divine  Consciousness  because  it  is  the  only  part  of  man  which  can  touch  the  All  potent 
forces.  Behind  Yechidah  are  Angelic  and  Archangelic  Forces  of  which  Yechidah  is  the  manifestor.  It  is 
therefore  the  Lower  Genius  or  Viceroy  of  the  Higher  Genius  which  is  beyond,  an  Angel  Mighty  and 
Terrible.  This  Great  Angel  is  the  Higher  Genius,  beyond  which  are  the  Archangelic  and  Divine.  Recall 
the  Tiphareth  clause  of  an  Adeptus  Minor:  “I  further  solemnly  promise  and  swear  that  with  the  divine 
permission  I will  from  this  day  forward  apply  myself  unto  the  Great  Work  which  is  so  to  purify  and  exalt 
my  spiritual  nature,  that  with  the  Divine  Aid  I may  at  length  attain  to  be  more  than  Human,  and  thus 
gradually  raise  and  unite  myself  to  my  Higher  and  Divine  Genius,  and  that  in  this  event,  I will  not  abuse 
the  great  power  entrusted  unto  me.”  Note  that  this  clause  answereth  unto  Tiphareth,  seeing  that  it  is  the 
Lower  Will  that  must  apply  itself  unto  this  work,  because  it  is  the  King  of  the  Physical  Man. 

All  the  Shining  Ones  (whom  we  call  Angels)  are  microcosms  of  the  Macrocosm  Yetzirah,  even  as 
Man  is  the  microcosm  of  the  Macrocosm  of  Assiah.  All  Archangelic  forms  are  microcosms  of  the 
Macrocosm  of  Briah,  and  the  Gods  of  the  Sephiroth  are  consequently  the  Microcosms  of  the  Macrocosm 
of  Atziluth.  Therefore  apply  this  perfecting  of  the  Spiritual  Nature  as  the  preparation  of  the  Pathway  for 
Shining  Light,  the  Light  Divine.  The  evil  persona  of  a man  is  in  the  Sphere  of  the  Qlippoth,  and  the  devils 
are  the  Microcosms  of  the  Macrocosm  of  the  Qlippoth.  This  evil  persona  hath  its  parts  and  divisions,  and 
of  it  the  part  which  toucheth  the  Malkuth  of  the  Nephesch  is  its  Kether.  Tremble  therefore  at  the  evil 
forces  which  be  in  thy  own  evil  persona.  And  as  above  the  Kether  of  a Man  are  his  Angelic  and  other 
forms,  so  below  the  Malkuth  of  the  Evil  Persona  are  awful  forms,  dangerous  even  to  express  or  think  of. 


42 


VOLUME  THREE 


TASK  UNDERTAKEN  BY  THE  ADEPTUS  MINOR 

This,  then,  is  the  task  to  be  undertaken  by  the  Adeptus  Minor.  To  expel  from  the 
Sephiroth  of  the  Nephesch  the  usurpation  by  the  evil  Sephiroth;  to  balance  the  action  of  the 
Sephiroth  of  the  Ruach  in  those  of  the  Nephesch.  To  prevent  the  Lower  Will  and  Human 
Consciousness  from  falling  into  and  usurping  the  place  of  the  Automatic  Consciousness.  To 
render  the  King  of  the  Body,  the  Lower  Will,  obedient  to  and  anxious  to  execute  the  commands 
of  the  Higher  Will,  that  he  be  neither  a usurper  of  the  faculties  of  the  Higher,  nor  a sensual 
despot,  but  an  Initiated  Ruler,  and  an  annointed  King,  the  Viceroy  and  representative  of  the 
Higher  Will,  because  inspired  thereby,  in  his  Kingdom  which  is  man.  Then  shall  it  happen  that 
the  Higher  Will,  i.e.,  the  Lower  Genius,  shall  descend  into  the  Royal  Habitation,  so  that  the 
Higher  Will  and  the  Lower  Will  shall  be  as  one,  and  the  Higher  Genius  shall  descend  into  the 
Kether  of  the  Man,  bringing  with  him  the  tremendous  illumination  of  his  Angelic  Nature.  And 
the  Man  shall  become  what  is  said  of  Enoch.  “And  Chanokh  made  himself  to  walk  with  God, 
and  he  was  not,  for  God  took  him.”  (Genesis,  V.v.  24.)  Then  also  this  shalt  thou  know,  that  the 
Nephesch  of  the  Man  shall  become  as  the  Genius  of  the  Evil  Persona,  so  that  the  evil  persona 
itself  shall  be  as  the  power  of  the  Divine  in  the  Qlippoth,  as  it  is  said:  “Whither  shall  I go  from 
thy  Spirit,  or  whither  from  thy  Presence  shall  I flee?  If  I ascend  up  to  Heaven,  thou  art  there.  If  I 
make  my  bed  in  Hell,  behold  thou  art  there.”  (Ps.  cxxxix.) 

Therefore  even  the  Evil  Persona  is  not  so  evil  when  it  fulfilleth  its  work.  For  it  is  the 
beginner  of  a dim  reflection  of  the  Light  unto  the  Qlippoth,  and  this  is  what  is  hidden  in  the 
saying  that  “Typhon  is  the  brother  of  Osiris.”  Hear  thou,  then,  a mystery  of  the  knowledge  of 
evil.  The  Ritual  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  saith  that  even  the  “Evil  helpeth  forward  the  Good.”  When 
the  evil  Sephiroth  are  expelled  from  the  Nephesch  into  the  evil  Persona,  they  are,  in  a sense, 
equilibriated  therein.  The  evil  persona  can  be  rendered  as  a great  and  strong,  yet  trained,  animal 
whereupon  the  man  rideth,  and  it  then  becometh  a strength  unto  his  physical  base  of  action.  This 
Mystery  shalt  thou  keep  from  the  knowledge  of  the  First  Order,  and  still  more  from  that  of  the 
Outer  World,  that  is  as  a formula,  seeing  that  is  a dangerous  secret.  Now  then  shalt  thou  begin  to 
understand  the  saying  “He  descended  into  Hell,”  and  also  to  comprehend  in  part  this  strength, 
and  thus  begin  to  understand  the  necessity  of  evil  unto  the  material  creation.  Wherefore,  also, 
revile  not  overmuch  the  evil  forces,  for  they  have  also  a place  and  a duty,  and  in  this  consisteth 
their  right  to  be.  But  check  their  usurpation,  and  cast  them  down  unto  their  plane.  Unto  this  end, 
curse  them  by  the  mighty  names  if  need  be,  but  thou  shalt  not  revile  them  for  their  condition,  for 
thus  also  shalt  thou  be  led  into  error.  There  is  also  a great  mystery  that  the  Adeptus  Minor  must 
know.  How  the  spiritual  consciousness  can  act  around  and  beyond  the  sphere  of  Sensation. 

“Thought”  is  a mighty  force  when  projected  with  all  the  strength  of  the  lower  Will  under 
the  guidance  of  the  reasoning  faculty  and  illuminated  by  the  Higher  Will.  Therefore,  it  is  that,  in 
thy  occult  working,  thou  art  advised  to  invoke  the  divine  and  Angelic  Names,  so 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


that  thy  Lower  Will  may  willingly  receive  the  influx  of  the  Higher  Will,  which  is  also  the  Lower 
Genius  behind  which  are  the  all-potent  forces. 

This,  therefore,  is  the  magical  manner  of  operation  of  the  Initiate  when  “skrying”  in  the  spirit 
vision.  Through  his  own  arcane  wisdom,  he  knows  the  disposition  and  correspondences  of  the  Forces  of 
the  Macrocosmos.  Selecting  not  many,  but  one  symbol,  and  that  balanced  and  with  its  correlatives,  then 
sendeth  he  a thought-ray  from  his  Spiritual  Consciousness,  illuminated  by  his  Higher  Will,  directly  unto 
the  part  of  his  Sphere  of  Sensation  which  is  consonant  with  the  symbol  employed.  There,  as  in  a mirror, 
doth  he  perceive  its  properties  as  reflected  from  the  Macrocosmos,  shining  forth  into  the  Infinite  Abyss  of 
the  Heavens. 

Thence  can  he  follow  the  ray  of  reflection  therefrom,  and  while  concentrating  his  united 
consciousness  at  that  point  of  his  sphere  of  sensation,  can  receive  the  direct  reflection  of  the  ray  from  the 
Macroscosmos.  Thus  receiving  the  direct  ray  as  then  reflected  into  his  Thought,  he  can  unite  himself  with 
the  ray  of  his  Thought  so  as  to  make  one  continuous  ray  from  the  corresponding  point  of  the 
Macrocosmos  unto  the  centre  of  his  consciousness.  If,  instead  of  concentrating  at  the  actual  point  of  the 
sphere  of  Sensation  he  shall  retain  the  thought-ray  only  touching  the  sphere  of  sensation  at  that  point,  he 
shall,  it  is  true,  perceive  the  reflection  of  the  Macrocosmic  Ray  answering  to  that  symbol  in  the  sphere  of 
his  Consciousness.  But  he  shall  receive  this  reflection  tinctured  much  by  his  own  nature,  and  therefore  to 
an  extent  untrue,  because  his  united  conciousnesses  have  not  been  able  to  focus  along  the  thought-ray  at 
the  circumference  of  the  Sphere  of  sensation.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  there  are  so  many  and 
multifarious  errors  in  untrained  spirit  visions.  For  the  untrained  seer,  even  supposing  him  free  from  the 
delusions  of  obsession,  doth  not  know  or  understand  how  to  unite  his  consciousnesses  and  the  harmonies 
between  his  own  sphere  of  sensation,  and  the  universe,  the  Macrocosmos.  Therefore  is  it  so  necessary  that 
the  Adeptus  Minor  should  correctly  understand  the  principia  and  axiomata  of  our  secret  knowledge, 
which  are  contained  in  our  Rituals  and  Lectures. 

OF  TRAVELING  IN  THE  SPIRIT  VISION 

The  symbol,  place,  direction,  or  Plane  being  known  whereon  it  is  desired  to  act,  a 
thought-ray  as  before  is  sent  unto  the  corresponding  part  of  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  of  the 
Nephesch.  The  Thought-Ray  is  sent  like  an  arrow  from  the  bow,  right  through  the 
circumference  of  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  direct  unto  the  place  desired.  Arrived  there,  a 
sphere  of  astral  Light  is  formed  by  the  agency  of  the  Lower  Will,  illuminated  by  the  Higher 
Will,  and  acting  through  the  spiritual  consciousness  by  reflection  along  the  Thought-Ray. 
This  sphere  of  Astral  Light  is  partly  drawn  from  the  surrounding  atmosphere.  The  sphere 
being  formed,  a simulacrum  of  the  person  of  the  Skryer  is  reflected  into  it  along  the 
thought-ray,  and  this  united  consciousness  is  then  projected  therein. 

This  Sphere  is  then  a duplicate,  by  reflection,  of  the  Sphere  of  Sensation.  As  it  is 
said,  "Believe  thyself  to  be  in  a place  and  thou  art  there."  In  this  Astral  Projection,  however, 
a certain  part  of  the  consciousness  must  remain  in  the  body  to  protect  the  Thought-Ray 


44 


VOLUME  THREE 


beyond  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  (as  well  as  the  Sphere  itself  at  that  point  of  departure 
of  the  Thought-Ray)  from  attack  by  any  hostile  force,  so  that  the  consciousness  in  this 
projection  is  not  quite  so  strong  as  the  consciousness  when  concentrated  in  the  natural 
body  in  ordinary  life.  The  return  taketh  place  with  a reversal  of  this  process,  and  save  to 
persons  whose  Nephesch  and  physical  body  are  exceptionally  strong  and  healthy,  the 
whole  operation  of  skrying  and  traveling  in  the  Spirit  Vision  is  of  course  fatiguing.  Also 
there  is  another  mode  of  astral  projection  which  can  be  used  by  the  more  practised  and 
advanced  Adept.  This  consisteth  in  forming  first  a sphere  from  his  own  Sphere  of  Sensation, 
casting  his  reflection  therein,  and  then  projecting  this  whole  sphere  to  the  desired  place,  as 
in  the  previous  method.  But  this  is  not  easy  to  be  done  by  any  but  the  practised  operator.  Thus 
far,  regarding  Skrying  and  Travelling  in  the  Spirit  Vision. 

CONCERNING  THE  MICROCOSMS 
OF  THE  MACROCOSM 

As  thou  well  knowest  there  be  many  and  numberless  other  inhabitants  of  the 
Macrocosmos  besides  Man,  Angels,  and  Devils.  The  animals  are  microcosms  in  a sense,  yet 
not  so  complete  as  man.  In  them  are  many  and  great  mysteries.  They  also  have  their 
magical  mirror  or  sphere  of  sensation.  But  its  polarisation  is  usually  of  horizontal  rather 
than  perpendicular  type,  and  this  is  owing  to  the  Sephiroth  not  being  shewn  therein.  This 
Sphere,  then,  is  not  bounded  by  the  Sephirothic  columns,  but  they  are  especially  governed 
by  the  Stellar  System  without  the  Sephiroth.  They  are  therefore  ruled  by  the  Paths,  rather 
than  by  the  Sephiroth,  and  are  consequently  classed  each  under  an  Element  or  a Planet, 
and  a Sign.  Thus  each  followeth  a formula  which  may  be  translated  into  letters,  and  these 
again  form  a vibratory  name.  As  it  is  written:  "And  Adam  gave  names  unto  all  the  cattle 
and  to  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every  beast  of  the  field. "(Gen.  II,  v.  20.)  Yet  they  are  ruled 
by  the  name  YHVH,  though  classed  rather  by  one  or  more  of  its  letters. 

Thus,  Fish,  etc.,  are  under  the  influence  of  Water.  Birds  are  under  the  influence  of 
Air.  Quadrupeds  are  under  the  influence  of  Fire.  Creeping  things  and  insects  are  under 
the  influence  of  Earth. 

There  are  some  which  partake  of  two  elements,  but  in  them  one  element  is  usually 
chief,  and  besides  the  Elements,  each  is  under  a Planet  and  a Sign. 

The  vegetable  kingdom  is  again  under  a somewhat  different  Law.  These  are  under  a 
Planet  and  a Sign,  a planet  first  differentiated  by  a Sign.  The  Mineral  Kingdom  is  under  the 
Signs  only.  Vegetables  have  a Sphere  of  Sensation,  but  corresponding  only  to  the  Planets 
and  Zodiacal  Signs.  The  Minerals  have  also  a Sphere  which  correspondeth  unto  the  Signs 
only,  but  the  metals  are  under  the  Planets  only,  and  therein  is  the  difference  between  them 
and  the  Minerals,  wherefore  also  are  they  stronger.  Shining  Stones  are  especially  under  the 
Light;  and  they  are,  as  it  were,  centres  for  the  action  thereof  in  the  darkness  of  matter,  as  it  is 
said:  "My  light  is  concealed  in  all  that  shineth."  This  passage  is  it  is  believed  from  the 
Zend-Avesta.  They  are  therefore  under  the  rule  of  the  three  active  elements  with  an  earthy 
base.  Shining  through  all  things  as  a whole,  are  the  rays  of  the  Macrocosmos.  Besides  these 


45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


classes  of  life  there  be  multitudinous  existences  representing  Forces  of  the 
Macrocosm,  each  with  its  own  microcosm.  Such  are  Elemental  Spirits,  Planetary  Spirits, 
Olympic  Spirits,  Fays,  Arch-Fays,  Genii,  and  many  other  potencies  which  cannot  be 
classed  under  these  forms. 

Thus  the  Macrocosmic  Universe  is  one  vast  and  infinite  sphere  containing  so  many 
and  diverse  infinite  microcosmic  forms,  of  which  the  perfect  knowledge  is  only  known  unto 
the  advanced  Adept.  Also  it  shall  here  suffice  to  say  that  thou  shalt  make  a distinction 
between  the  Four-handed  race  (the  quadrumana,  apes  and  monkeys)  which  be  midway 
between  Man  and  Beast  and  other  animals.  For  they  be  neither  the  one  or  the  other,  but 
are  the  fallen  and  debased  result  of  a most  ancient  magical  effect  to  formulate  a material 
and  immediate  link  between  the  human  and  animal  microcosms.  This  is  elsewhere  treated 
of,  and  it  shall  here  be  sufficient  to  say  that  they  are  not  an  ascent,  from  the  beast  unto  the 
Man,  but  mistaken  magical  fall  from  a man  unto  a beast.  Anciently  they  were  a terrible 
power  upon  this  planet,  as  then  having  more  of  the  man  than  of  the  animal,  whereas  now 
they  have  more  of  the  animal  than  of  Man. 

The  ancient  traditions  of  their  primal  conditions  are  preserved  unto  this  day  in  the 
legends  of  ogres  and,  in  certain  records,  cannibalism  and  its  rites.  Regarding  the  beasts, 
they  are,  for  the  most  part,  easily  obsessed,  and  they  have  not  the  spiritual  responsibility  of 
the  man.  Their  nature  is  not  evil,  but,  following  a natural  law,  seeing  that  man  is  head  of  the 
Assiatic  creation,  so  the  animal  is  higher  than  the  vegetables  or  mineral.  Also  bear  thou  well  in 
mind  that  the  race  of  the  transformers  are  given  unto  cruelty.  Such  are  above  all  the  race  of 
creeping  things.  As  Man  hath  his  Ruach  which  is  upright  in  the  Tree  of  Life,  so  hath  the 
beast  his  Ruach  which  is  horizontal;  as  it  is  said:  "The  Ruach  of  a man  which  goeth  upwards 
(i.e.  directeth  itself  upwards),  and  the  Ruach  of  the  beast  which  goeth  downwards  (or 
crosswise)  in  the  Earth."  The  Neschamah  in  the  Beast  is  not.  The  beast  consisteth  of  a 
Ruach  and  a Nephesch  with  a rudimentary  Daath  or  Spiritual  Consciousness.  This  Daath 
ever  seeketh  that  which  is  beyond  it  and  thence  are  beasts  not  responsible,  but  are 
submitted  unto  obsession  and  herein  is  a great  mystery. 

Man,  therefore,  is  placed  at  the  head  of  the  beasts.  Woe,  woe,  unto  him  if  he 
teacheth  their  elementary  Daath  cruelty  and  injustice  instead  of  mercy  and  justice.  For  the 
Man  is  a God  unto  the  beast,  and  the  aspiration  of  the  Beast  is  toward  the  Man,  and  great  is 
the  office  of  the  Beast,  for  he  prepareth  the  foundation  for  the  man.  Man  is  responsible  for 
creation,  and  since  he  was  originally  placed  in  creation  to  be  its  Lord,  as  he  is,  so  will  the 
creation  follow  him.  And  thus  it  is  possible  for  the  Genius  of  a Nation  to  change  the  climate 
of  a country,  and  the  nature  of  the  beasts  therein.  Men  fell  from  primal  estate,  and  then  they 
who  were  formless  became  imaged  in  form,  deformed.  And  this  is  a mystery  of  the  Demonic 
Plane  which  entereth  not  into  this  section.  The  Elemental  Spirits  and  other  of  their  kind  are 
an  organisation  not  quite  so  complete  as  man.  In  spiritual  consciousness  more  keen,  and  yet 
in  some  ways  his  spiritual  superior  though  organically  his  inferior.  They  are  the  formers 


46 


VOLUME  THREE 


of  the  primal  Man,  that  is  the  Elementary  Man,  and  they  have  other  and  greater  offices,  for  in 
them  are  many  worlds  and  ranks  and  spheres.  They  are  as  the  younger  man  (i.e.  child)  and  towards 
them  also  is  Man  responsible,  and  he  hath  wrought  them  much  injustice. 

OF  OBSESSION,  TRANCE,  DEATH 

Obsession  always  entereth  through  a cutting  off  of  the  Higher  from  the  Lower  Will,  and  it  is 
ordinarily  first  induced  by  a Thought-Ray  of  the  Spiritual  consciousness  (whence  one  danger  of  evil 
thoughts)  ill-governed,  penetrating  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  and  admitting  another  potency,  either 
human  embodied,  or  human  disembodied,  elemental  or  demonic.  The  first  action  of  such  a force  is  to 
flatter  the  lower  will,  until  he  shall  have  established  firmly  an  entrance  into  the  Sphere  of  Sensation, 
and  thus  shall  cause  a strain  on  the  Nephesch  which  shall  render  the  Ruach  less  concentrated.  As 
soon  as  the  Ruach  is  sufficiently  dispersed  to  repair  the  strain  on  the  physical  body,  the  lower  will  is 
weakened,  and  is  soon  seized  upon  and  bound  by  the  invader.  Whence  arise  the  sensations  of  chill  and 
drowsiness  which  are  the  usual  forerunners  of  obsession. 

Now  to  yield  the  force  necessary  to  overpower  the  lower  will  from  any  chance  of 
communication  with  the  higher  the  obsessing  idea  proceeds  by  seizing  upon  the  Daath,  and  this 
consequently  is  the  great  point  of  attack,  especially  the  part  in  the  physical  body  which  is  at  the  back  of 
the  head  about  the  junction  with  the  Spine.  Now  unless  the  lower  Will  shall  voluntarily  endeavour  to 
restore  the  connection,  it  is  impossible  for  the  Higher  Will  to  intervene,  seeing  that  the  Lower  Will  is 
King  of  the  Physical  Body.  Remember  that  no  obsessing  force  can  overpower  the  lower  will,  if  that 
shall  bravely  and  in  spite  of  all  opposition  aspire  unto  the  Higher  Will.  Trance  may  arise  from  the 
action  of  obsession,  or  from  the  action  of  the  Higher  Will,  therefore  its  aspects  are  varied.  Death 
superveneth  in  the  natural  man,  when  the  mental  action  of  the  Ruach  and  the  Nephesch  is  definitely  and 
thoroughly  interrupted  in  the  physical  body. 

In  the  Adept  death  can  only  supervene  when  the  Higher  Will  consenteth  thereto,  and  herein  is 
implied  the  whole  Mystery  of  the  Elixir  of  Life. 

ON  THE  WORK  TO  BE  UNDERTAKEN 
BETWEEN 

PORTAL  AND  ADEPTUS  MINOR 
The  work  comes  under  six  headings  as  follows: 

1.  A Thesis  on  the  Rituals. 

2.  A meditation  on  the  crosses  which  have  been  used  as  admission  badges  in  the  Grades.  This  is  a 
preparation  for  the  meditation  which  precedes  the  Adeptus  Minor  Grade  and  should  be  applied  for  when 
you  have  been  a Portal  Member  for  seven  months. 

3.  A complete  diagram  of  The  Tree  of  Life. 

4.  The  practice  of  control  of  the  Aura. 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


5.  The  placing  of  The  Tree  of  Life  in  the  Aura. 

6.  Tattwas  --  Astrology  --  Divination. 

One.  THE  THESIS.  Read  the  rituals.  Build  them  up  in  imagination.  Compare  the 
Opening  and  Closing  in  the  various  Grades.  Note  the  general  underlying  scheme  for  each 
Elemental  Grade  --  and  note  where  the  differences  occur.  Follow  the  careers  of  the  various 
Officers.  Note  at  what  Grade  an  Officer  disappears. 

Make  a precis  of  each  Ritual  so  that  the  general  scheme  becomes  apparent.  This  is  of 
the  greatest  assistance  when  you  are  called  on  to  take  Office  because  you  will  not  then  need 
to  follow  everything  in  the  Ritual  but  need  only  turn  to  the  page  where  your  Office  is 
mentioned  and  when  you  have  no  more  to  say,  you  can  turn  to  the  Closing  and  put  the 
Ritual  aside  till  required  for  that.  Ability  to  do  this  and  to  move  correctly  in  the  Temple 
adds  greatly  to  the  harmony  and  repose  of  the  whole  Ceremony. 

Note  the  positions  of  the  various  officers  --  what  geometrical  shapes  they  make 
among  themselves  from  time  to  time  as  they  take  up  their  places  in  the  Temple.  It  may  be  a 
triangle,  a cross,  a pentagram,  etc. 

Read  the  speeches  carefully,  and  read  them  sometimes  aloud  so  that  you  get  familiar 
with  the  sound  of  your  own  voice  in  saying  the  words.  Note  that  some  speeches  are  designed 
to  create  atmosphere  by  their  archaic  form  and  should  be  read  rhythmically  and  sonorously, 
while  others  are  informative  and  should  be  read  in  such  a way  as  to  make  their  points  clear. 

Examples  of  archaic  passages  are  challenges  of  Gods:  'Thou  canst  not  pass  the  Gate 
of  the  Western  Heaven  unless  thou  canst  tell  me  my  Name.'  And  the  speeches  of  the  Kabiri  in 
the  Grades  of  Practicus  and  Philosophus.  Information  is  given  in  speeches  about  Tarot 
Keys  and  diagrams. 

Note  the  technique  for  traversing  the  various  Paths  --  the  words,  and  the  badges  with 
which  the  Path  is  entered,  the  length  of  the  circumambulation  and  the  special  symbolism 
described  therein. 

Let  all  these  things  soak  into  your  mind,  make  notes  as  ideas  occur  to  you  and 
presently  your  personal  reaction  to  the  Grades  will  crystallise  out  and  you  will  be  able  to 
write  your  thesis. 

Two.  Make  a list  and  drawings  of  the  crosses  which  have  been  given  you  as 
Admission  Badges  throughout  the  Grades,  from  the  Swastika  of  the  Zelator  to  the  Five- 
squared  cross  which  you  put  on  as  you  stood  at  the  Altar  at  the  second  point  of  the  Portal 
Grade.  Read  what  is  said  of  them  in  the  Rituals  and  knowledge  lectures,  and  make  notes 
about  them. 

Three.  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE.  This  should  be  done  large  in  order  that  the  writing 
and  symbols  should  be  clear.  It  is  essential  to  show  the  Deity  Names,  Names  of  Archangels 
and  Angels  in  Hebrew  in  the  Sephiroth,  and  to  number  the  Paths  and  give  their  attributions. 
Apart  from  this,  the  Tree  should  be  your  personal  synthesis  of  the  Order  symbolism  as  it 
applies  to  the  Tree  of  Life.  Colours  may  be  used. 


48 


VOLUME  THREE 


Four.  CONTROL  OF  THE  AURA.  If  you  are  not  already  familiar  with  the  parts  of 
your  own  body  such  as  nervous  system,  respiratory  system,  digestive  system,  get  some 
simple  text-book  such  as  is  used  in  ambulance  work,  or  attend  a course  of  first-aid  lectures 
so  that,  before  starting  to  work  on  your  subtle  body,  you  may  know  something  about  your 
physical  body. 

Your  physical  body  is  interpenetrated  by  a subtle  body  or  aura  which  also 
surrounds  the  physical  body  like  an  egg  of  light.  You  should  now  begin  to  practise 
controlling  this  aura  or  Sphere  of  Sensation.  This  means  that  you  must  first  try  to  get 
your  emotional  reactions  under  conscious  control.  Instead  of  automatically  liking  this, 
disliking  that,  you  must  try  to  understand  the  mechanism  which  underlies  these  feelings. 

To  assist  you  in  this,  the  study  of  psychology  is  recommended.  There  are  many  books  on 
the  subject,  of  which  the  following  are  easy  to  understand  and  clearly  stated. 

Psychoanalysis  for  Normal  People  by  Geraldine  Coster. 

You  are  in  Charge  by  Janette  Rainwater. 

The  Function  of  the  Orgasm  by  Wilhelm  Reich. 

Two  Essays  on  Analytical  Psychology  by  C.G.  Jung. 

Exploring  the  Unconscious  by  Georg  Groddeck. 

The  Image  and  Appearance  of  the  Human  Body  by  Paul  Schilder. 

Varieties  of  Religious  Experience  by  William  James. 

Having  built  up  some  idea  of  the  mechanism  of  your  mental  processes,  you  should 
now  try  to  make  yourself  negative  or  positive  at  will  towards  people  or  ideas.  If  you  are 
likely  to  meet  someone  who  always  makes  you  argumentative  and  irritable,  decide  that 
your  aura  is  closed  to  their  power  of  irritating  you  and  that  your  mind  will  not  be  disturbed 
by  what  they  say.  It  is  good  sometimes  to  listen  to  views  with  which  you  disagree  to  learn 
not  to  make  any  verbal  response,  and  to  keep  your  feelings  in  abeyance.  (N.B.  But 
remember  this  is  a technique  only.  There  are  in  fact  times  to  speak  and  times  to  remain 
silent.  It  is  imperative  to  avoid  transforming  techniques  into  compulsions  I.R.).  In  this 
way  you  come  to  learn  how  much  of  your  disagreement  is  due  to  prejudice  or  personal 
factors,  and  how  much  to  your  regard  for  abstract  truth. 

Again,  sometimes  practise  opening  your  aura  to  people  or  ideas  in  an  endeavour 
to  see  things  from  another's  point  of  view. 

The  practice  of  deep  breathing  is  also  of  help  in  establishing  poise  and  in 
controlling  nervousness.  It  is  good  to  expand  the  chest  to  its  fullest  extent  and  then  to 
expand  the  diaphragm  below  the  ribs  as  well  and  then  to  let  the  breath  out  slowly  and 
steadily  on  a vowel  sound  such  as  ah  or  'O'.  (N.B.  Consult  in  this  connection  Undoing 
Yourself  with  Energized Meditation  by  Christopher  Hyatt,  Falcon  Press,  1982.  I.R.) 

If  you  are  nervous,  you  will  find  that  your  breathing  is  shallow  and  that  your 
muscles  are  tense.  You  tend  to  clench  your  hands  and  tighten  up  the  abdominal  muscles. 
To  cure  this,  take  a deep  breath  to  full  capacity,  hold  it  while  tensing  and  relaxing 
alternately  the  abdominal  muscles.  Do  this  (i.e.  the  tensing  and  relaxing  of  the  muscles) 
three  times  and 


49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


then  relax  completely  into  a chair.  Allow  all  your  muscles  to  go  limp  and  let  your 
breath  out  to  the  last  gasp.  Do  the  whole  process  three  times,  if  necessary.  It  is  designed  to 
stimulate  the  solar  plexus  which  is  the  heart  of  the  nervous  system  which  governs 
emotion. 

Another  good  exercise  is  to  say  the  Deity  Names  aloud.  Take  a deep  breath  and  say 
them  softly,  smoothly  and  slowly,  imagining  the  while  that  your  voice  travels  out  to  the 
confines  of  the  Universe.  This  can  be  done  in  conjunction  with  the  Pentagram  Ritual. 

Five.  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE  IN  THE  AURA.  In  the  aura  which  interpenetrates  and 
surrounds  our  physical  bodies,  we  are  to  build  up  a replica  of  the  Tree  of  Life.  The  Pillar  of 
Severity  is  on  our  right  side,  the  Pillar  of  Mercy  on  our  left,  and  the  Pillar  of  Benificence  in 
the  middle. 

It  is  best  to  build  up  the  middle  Pillar  first.  To  do  this  stand  up  and  raise  yourself  in 
imagination  to  your  KETHER  --  a brilliant  light  above  your  head.  Imagine  this  light 
descending  to  DAATH,  at  the  nape  of  your  neck,  and  thence  to  TIPHARETH  in  your  heart 
where  it  glows  like  sunlight  and  whence  it  radiates  into  the  other  Sephiroth.  From 
TIPHARETH  the  light  goes  to  YESOD  in  the  region  of  the  hips,  and  thence  to 
MALKUTH  in  which  your  feet  are  planted.  Having  made  a clear  image  of  the  Middle 
Pillar,  you  can  then  establish  the  other  Sephiroth  by  vibrating  the  Deity  Names.  This  can  be 
done  as  an  alternative  to  the  Pentagram  Ritual  as  a preparation  for  meditation. 


50 


VOLUME  THREE 


1.  Imagine  yourself  standing  in  the  Temple,  facing  West.  The  Black  Pillar  of 
Severity  will  be  on  your  right  --  the  White  Pillar  of  Mercy  on  your  left.  You  will  make  the 
Middle  Pillar  as  you  stand  between  them. 

2.  Imagine  now  that  the  Black  Pillar  is  reflected  in  your  right  side  --  the  White 
Pillar  in  your  left. 

3.  Take  a deep  breath  and  raise  your  consciousness  to  your  KETHER  above 
your  head  and  vibrate  the  Name  EHEIEH  --  which  means  I AM.  Imagine  the  Light 
flowing  down  through  DAATH  (at  the  nape  of  your  neck)  to  TIPHARETH. 

4.  In  the  same  manner,  establish  YESOD  in  the  name  SHADDAI  EL  CHAT, 
and  MALKUTH  in  the  Name  ADONAI  HA-ARETZ. 

5.  Make  the  Qabalistic  Cross  to  indicate  that  you  have  called  down  the  Light 
of  your  KETHER  and  balanced  it  in  your  aura.  Then  let  your  imagination  dwell  on  the  aura 
and  see  it  oval  and  clear,  pulsating  with  the  glow  from  TIPHARETH. 

If  you  are  called  to  see  anyone  who  is  ill,  who  is  depressed,  or  who  has  a depressing 
effect  on  you,  you  should  do  this  exercise  beforehand.  In  the  case  of  the  person  who  has  a 
depressing  effect  on  you,  you  may  also  imagine  that  your  aura  is  hardened  at  the  edge  so 
that  they  are  unable  to  penetrate  it,  and  so  deplete  you  of  vitality  (which  is  generally  what 
such  sensations  mean). 

In  all  these  practices  it  is  well  to  remember  that  'Strength  is  in  Silence. '(N.B.  The 
original  documents  of  the  Order,  dating  as  far  back  as  1895  and  maybe  earlier,  do  not 
provide  us  with  a single  clue  as  to  the  origins  of  what  has  come  to  be  known  as  the 
middle  pillar  technique.  It  seems  to  be,  as  far  as  I can  discover,  a specific  development  of 
the  Stella  Matutina,  in  which  case  Dr.  R.  Felkin  was  its  originator.  This  might  explain  why 
there  is  no  trace  whatsoever  of  its  usage  in  the  technical  writings  of  Aleister  Crowley, 
who  has  certainly  made  good  use  of  most  of  the  Order  techniques,  and  who  would  surely 
have  used  this  had  it  been  available. 

However,  even  in  the  Stella  Matutina  it  was  described  merely  in  larval  form  --  that  is 
to  say,  it  remained  largely  undeveloped.  It  was  briefly  stated  in  the  paper  describing  the 
work  to  be  done  between  the  Portal  Grade  and  the  Adeptus  Minor  grade.  There  are 
enormous  possibilities  inherent  in  the  method.  I was  lucky  enough  to  have  stumbled  on  to  a 
practical  approach  which  I think  exploited  more  fully  some  of  the  potentialities  suggested 
in  the  original  Felkin  paper. 

In  a book  entitled  Foundations  of  Practical  Magic,  I recently  included  an  older  essay 
entitled  The  Art  of  True  Healing.  This  was  once  produced  as  a small  book  by  Helios 
Publishing  Service  In  England. 

It  describes  the  method  which  over  the  years  I have  found  preeminently  useful. 
Whoever  developed  the  basic  technique,  whether  Felkin  or  some  other,  produced  a 
fundamental  method  of  aiding  personal  and  spiritual  growth.  If  you  talk  about  them,  save  to 
your  Chief,  or  if  you  try  to  analyse  their  effects,  you  will  not  benefit  by  them.  Try  them  with 
simple  faith  and  in  silence  for  a year  before  rationalising  them.  I.R.) 

It  is  better  at  first  to  keep  your  aura  to  yourself,  rather  than  to  try  to  flow  out 
towards 


51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


others.  Unless  you  are  particularly  vital  and  well-balanced,  you  will  only  waste 
energy.  So-called  modes  of  healing  and  of  'doing  good  to  others'  should  be  eschewed  for  a 
time.  Such  methods  have  a technique  of  their  own  and  require  trained  and  balanced  minds 
and  bodies  to  carry  them  out.  Get  yourself  right  first  before  you  attempt  to  interfere  with 
others  in  any  way  but  the  ordinary  ways  of  kindly  decent  society. 

When  you  have  practised  the  exercise  of  the  Middle  Pillar  for  some  time  and  can 
visualise  it  easily,  you  can  establish  the  other  Sephiroth. 

Six.  TATWAS-ASTROLOGY-DIVINATION.  The  Tatwas  are  designed  to  assist 
you  in  your  researches  into  the  Soul  of  Nature.  They  are  at  first  done  with  a senior  member, 
and  later  can  be  done  alone  or  with  a companion  of  your  own  Grade.  They  should  never 
be  allowed  to  become  uncontrolled  day-dreams.  The  method  taught  should  be  strictly 
adhered  to  — a definite  time,  preferably  in  the  morning  being  set  aside  — and  they  should  not 
be  attempted  when  you  are  feeling  tired  or  when  your  mind  is  too  occupied  with  other 
things  to  let  you  'get  away.'  They  should  not  be  done  too  frequently  --  once  in  three  weeks  or  a 
month  is  enough,  once  a week  if  time  and  circumstances  permit.  Notes  of  the  pictures  and 
symbols  seen  should  be  kept  together  in  a book. 

ASTROLOGY.  This  should  be  done  as  time  permits.  The  subject  is  vast  and  highly 
technical,  and  can  be  studied  fully  through  the  various  schools  and  correspondence  classes  if 
you  are  interested  in  it.  From  the  Order  Lecture,  you  should  be  able  to  set  up  a true  birth 
horoscope  for  any  place  and  any  time.  You  can  practise  setting  up  horoscopes  for  the  cases 
given  in  a book  The  Circle  Book  of  Charts  and  see  whether  you  can  tell  what  was 
remarkable  about  the  horoscope.  You  should  attempt  the  reading  of  a horoscope  for 
someone  you  know  and  then  get  the  data  for  someone  about  whom  you  know  nothing,  and 
see  whether  you  can  give  a reading  which  satisfies  their  friends. 

The  Order  requires  only  that  you  should  be  able  to  set  up  an  accurate  horoscope  and 
that  you  should  know  how  to  work  out  the  aspects  and  how  to  make  a simple  assessement  of 
the  good  and  bad  factors  in  a horary  figure.  If  Astrology  interests  you  further,  it  is  a very 
fascinating  field  of  research. 

DIVINATION.  You  may  try  to  develop  your  intuition  by  the  use  of  horary  and 
natal  astrology,  geomancy,  and  the  reading  of  the  Tarot  Cards  by  the  method  given  in  the 
small  book  by  Mr.  A.E.  Waite. 

You  are  advised  to  attempt  only  questions  in  which  you  are  not  emotionally  involved 
because  methods  of  divination  can  be  a fruitful  source  of  self-deception  to  those  who  are 
psychic  but  not  self-knowing.  If  you  are  given  to  having  intuitions  you  must  learn  to  say  not 
only  'I  was  right  about  that1  but  also  'I  was  quite  wrong  about  that,'  and  if  you  advertise 
only  successes  (as  is  usual)  at  the  bar  of  your  own  conscience,  learn  to  assess  them  honestly. 

The  interval  of  time  between  PORTAL  and  grade  of  Adeptus  Minor  should  be  given 
to  the  study  of  the  whole  make-up  of  yourself.  All  these  methods  are  designed  to  assist  you 
to  get  as  far  as  you  can  along  the  road  to  self-knowledge. 


52 


VOLUME  THREE 


You  are  to  realise  the  different  layers  of  your  being  --  some  of  which  you  have  been 
led  through  symbolically  in  the  Outer  Grades  --'Which  in  one  sense  quitteth  not 
MALKUTH'  the  Kingdom  of  yourself. 

This  line  of  thought,  coupled  with  the  study  of  the  Rituals,  may  lead  you  to  realise  what 
it  was  you  gathered  together  in  the  first  point  of  the  Portal  Ritual,  and  what  it  is  you  are 
trying  to  perfect  to  lay  on  the  Altar  of  the  Spirit. 

We  are  told  in  the  Portal  that  the  nine  months'  wait  which  must  intervene  before 
the  Portal  is  again  opened  for  the  Aspirant  has  a correspondence  to  the  nine  months  of 
gestation  before  birth.  As  the  unborn  child,  stage  by  stage,  grows  through  the  ancestral 
history  of  the  race  so  the  Candidate  in  the  Portal  by  a single  circumambulation  for  each, 
recalls  his  past  Grades  and,  at  the  end  of  the  first  point  regards  their  symbols  upon  the  Altar  as 
parts  of  his  body,  and  contemplates  them  as  coming  together  in  one  place  --  the  unity  of  his 
person. 

In  the  second  point,  he  sacrifices  his  name  --  symbol  of  his  idea  of  himself  in  order 
that  the  idea  of  a new  self  and  a new  consciousness  may  be  attained. 

This  has  a correspondence  in  the  birth  of  a child.  It  emerges  from  the  membranes 
and  placenta  which  hitherto  have  been  its  body  and  source  of  life  and  finds  itself  not  'dead' 
after  the  dread  change,  but  translated  to  a larger  consciousness. 

Thus  the  Portal  foreshadows  the  kind  of  change  and  development  necessary  for 
understanding  the  symbolism  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  grade. 

We  do  not  know  what  consciousness  the  unborn  child  has  --  how  far  it  has  gone  in 
its  development  --  through  what  agency  it  unfolds  the  potencies  of  its  tiny  seed  and  draws  to 
itself  the  necessary  materials  for  growth.  The  miracle  happens  --  and  gives  us  courage  to 
believe  that  a similar  miracle  is  even  now  enacting  whereby  a body  will  be  ready  for  us  when 
this,  which  seems  so  real  to  us,  shall  share  the  same  fate  as  the  placenta  and  membranes 
which  'die'  at  our  birth. 

But  tradition,  as  embodied  in  our  Order  and  shown  somewhat  less  directly  in  the 
revealed  religions,  teaches  that  this  development  can  be  assisted  by  conscious  effort 
indeed,  that  there  comes  a time  when  this  effort  must  be  made  through  the  body  and  mind 
we  are  now  endowed  with.  And  realising  that  we  are  indeed  in  a Path  of  Darkness  groping  for 
Light,  we  must  feel  our  way  to  an  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  light  --  the  reason  for 
death. 

To  those  who  feel  the  call  to  make  this  effort,  comes  the  Order  with  a series  of 
pictures,  symbolic  of  the  growth  of  the  soul  to  new  life.  The  meditations  given  with  each 
Grade  are  designed  to  lead  the  mind  towards  ideas  which  will  assist  in  self-knowledge  -- 
universal,  impersonal  ideas  which  each  must  find  in  his  own  way  --  'the  secrets  which  cannot 
be  told  save  to  those  who  know  them  already.’ 

The  Aspirant  is  led  to  look  backwards.  First  he  must  acknowledge  his  debt  to 
evolution  through  which  has  been  perfected  the  instrument  wherein  his  mind  works  and 
gathers 


53 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


material.  Then,  through  meditation,  he  is  led  to  see  himself  as  not  only  self-conscious  — 
as  one  who  receives  impressions  — one  who  criticises  and  watches  — one  whose  will  is 
interfered  with  --  one  who  is  misunderstood  --  one  to  whom  others  are  'persons'  or  masks 
(from  Latin  persona,  a mask)  — but,  standing  outside  himself,  he  now  becomes  one  who 
endeavours  to  sense  how  his  mask  appears  to  others  --  sees  himself  as  part  of  the  consciousness 
of  others,  as  one  who  impresses,  one  who  is  criticised  and  watched,  one  who  interferes  with  the 
will  of  others,  one  who  misunderstands. 

He  may  recall  periods  in  his  life  when  his  convictions  were  sure,  his  judgments  harsh  and 
unjust,  his  actions  shameful,  and  view  himself  in  that  picture  dispassionately  as  an  entity 
operative  in  the  give  and  take  of  Life,  something  growing  and  as  outside  the  category  of  blame 
as  is  the  bitterness  of  unripe  fruit. 

As  the  knowledge  of  his  place  and  relative  importance  in  the  Universe  matures,  he  will 
attain  strength  to  be  honest  with  himself  --  ashamed  of  nothing  he  finds  in  his  mind  --  one 
watching  the  antics  of  his  personality  with  tolerant  amusement  — yet  always  learning. 

He  will  reflect  on  words,  and  the  power  of  words.  He  will  catch  himself  weaving  them 
twisting  their  meaning  --  deceiving  himself  and  others  with  them.  He  will  catch  himself  under 
obsession  to  them  --  he  will  see  how  they  fix  and  make  possible  the  recall  of  events  and 
emotions,  and  with  this  knowledge  he  will  become  aware  of  how  his  words  affect  other  people. 

As  he  begins  to  realise  the  tremendous  miracle  of  words,  the  magic  both  good  and  evil 
of  human  communion  by  words,  he  will  begin  to  grasp  why  the  Order  reiterates  the  importance 
of  silence.  The  true  Magician  must  understand  his  tools  and,  in  periods  of  silence,  he  must 
contemplate  words  as  one  of  them. 

As  he  thus  traverses  the  long  road  to  dispassionate  self-knowledge,  and  no  longer  has  to 
waste  energy  in  doing  battle  for  and  indulging  wounded  feelings  in  defence  of  a totally  false  idea 
of  himself,  he  is  led  to  meditate  on  the  varied  symbols  of  the  cross,  and  from  this  to 
contemplate  the  Crucified  One,  revealed  to  the  West  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  (However  be 
cautious  not  to  associate  the  ideas  of  Jesus  with  the  political-religions  which  have  evolved  from  his 
teachings.  I.R.). 

This  life  and  the  sayings  of  Jesus  given  in  the  Meditations  should  be  studied  and  pictured 
in  the  mind. 

The  mind  must  be  taught  to  die  to  useless  churnings  over  past  things  and  vain 
apprehensions  about  future  things.  This  is  difficult,  for  human  phantasies  die  hard,  but  once  the 
effort  is  made,  however  transient  the  result,  it  becomes  easier  with  time  to  replace  wasteful 
thoughts  with  those  that  cluster  round  a powerful  symbol  of  eternal  truth. 

As  the  time  for  the  Adeptus  Minor  Ceremony  approaches,  the  Aspirant  should  withdraw 
as  far  as  may  be  from  externals  that  these  symbols  may  work  in  his  mind. 

He  will  find  them  waiting  on  the  threshold  of  his  mind  ready  to  tell  their  story  as  he 
walks  about  or  is  occupied  in  mechanical  tasks.  Once  a place  has  been  made  for  them  no  time' 
is  required  to  develop  them.  They  grow  in  the  waste  places. 


54 


VOLUME  THREE 


Definite  times  too  should  be  set  aside  for  Meditation  wherein  ideas  may  be  formulated 
as  far  as  possible. 

Before  going  to  sleep,  the  Aspirant  should  do  the  Pentagram  Ritual  and  impress  on  his 
mind  that  he  must  recall  on  waking  any  teaching  that  has  been  given  him  in  dream  or  vision. 
This  may  be  assisted  on  waking,  if  he  calls  before  his  mind  the  Sun  rising,  thinly  veiled  in 
clouds. 

This  should  be  done  at  least  the  week  preceding  the  Grade. 

The  Ceremony  will  be  a true  initiation  for  the  Aspirant  only  in  so  far  as  he  has 
prepared  himself  to  receive  it. 

Like  a word,  it  is  a symbol,  the  communication  of  whose  essence  depends  on  the 
understanding  and  experience  of  the  recipient. 

(N.B.  There  is  no  trace  of  the  contents  of  this  most  important  paper  in  the  earlier 
Order  documents.  It  is  obviously  therefore  written  by  someone  in  the  Stella  Matutina.  I 
sometimes  get  weary  of  the  constant  criticism  leveled  against  the  Stella  Matutina;  I think 
they  are  wholly  unjust  as  this  paper  demonstrates.  It  reveals  a profound  working  knowledge 
of  psychological  principles  which  the  reader  would  do  well  to  make  an  intrinsic  part  of  his 
mental  equipment.  In  addition  the  writer  was  well  aware  of  the  problems  of  identification, 
projection,  consideration  and  ego-mania  as  how  they  interfere  with  the  process  of 
enlightenment.  I.R.) 

THE  TREE  OF  LIFE  IN  THE  AURA 
By 

V.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 

This  notion  is  first  laid  down  in  the  Portal  paper  in  a very  broad  simple  outline.  The 
text  related  to  it  does  not  appear  to  promise  very  much  at  first.  Moreover  it  is  surrounded  by 
a mass  of  material  on  other  Order  topics,  none  of  which  seem  to  stress  the  relative 
importance  of  the  method.  In  a word,  it  does  not  seem  to  promise  a great  deal.  However 
some  little  attention  and  study  of  its  principles  soon  convinces  one  that  there  is  more  to  it 
than  at  first  meets  the  eye.  All  sorts  of  hints  are  scattered  throughout  the  Order  documents 
that  add  significant  clues  as  to  how  this  rudimentary  outline  can  be  elaborated  into  a 
magnificent  workable  schema.  First  of  all,  there  is  the  Hierophant's  speech  in  the  Neophyte 
Ritual  "all  powers  can  be  awakened  and  re-awakened  by  names  and  images"  which  is  one  of 
the  fundamentals  of  all  the  Order  work,  and  of  course  especially  applicable  to  this  method. 
Then  there  is  the  theory  of  the  Tree  of  Life  projected  into  a solid  sphere  producing  not  three 
Pillars  but  four  surrounding  an  axis  of  a Middle  Pillar.  In  Z-3,  the  ceremonial 
circumambulation  in  the  Temple  is  applied  to  the  Aura  in  terms  of  the  circulation  of  energy 
within  the  sphere  of  sensation,  which  first  gave  me  the  idea  of  the  three  types  of  circulation 
which  came  to  be  an  integral  idea  of  my  development  of  this  method.  Then  of  course,  there 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


is  the  description  of  the  rhythmic  breathing  process  in  the  same  Portal  paper  which 
is  the  preliminary  basis  for  the  whole  method.  All  of  these  ideas,  plus  some  others 
scattered  throughout  other  Order  documents  helped  to  provide  meaningful  data  which 
elaborate  the  simple  schema  there  described  into  the  one  that  1 and  many  others  have 
found  so  profoundly  useful. 

In  the  form  so  elaborated,  it  is  really  quite  easy  to  employ  - in  fact  far  easier  to  do  than 
to  describe.  As  with  all  other  Order  techniques  little  attempt  will  be  made  to  describe  its 
results  and  effects.  The  main  thing  is  to  work  it  and  use  it  often,  daily  if  possible  in  order  to 
become  fully  aware  of  what  the  method  can  do. 

The  first  step  lies  in  the  adoption  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Order  as  a whole,  the 
conscious  realization  of  the  vast  spiritual  reservoir  in  which  we  live  and  move  and  have  our 
being.  Repeated  intellectual  effort  to  make  this  part  and  parcel  of  one's  mental  outlook 
upon  life  automatically  breaks  down  or  dissolves  something  of  the  rigid  character 
armoring  that  restricts  both  our  physical  and  psychological  activities.  With  this  gradual 
softening  of  the  armor  a new  and  superior  spiritual  attitude  may  develop  so  that  one's 
entire  viewpoint  undergoes  a radical  change  for  the  better. 

The  second  step  relates  to  the  practice  of  regulated  breathing.  It  is  really  a simple 
process.  We  contemplate  the  fact  that  all  living  processes  are  rhythmical,  so  that  at  various 
times  during  the  day  we  let  the  breath  flow  in  while  mentally  counting  very  slowly  - one, 
two,  three,  four.  Then  we  exhale  counting  the  same  beat.  It  is  fundamental  and  important 
that  the  initial  rhythm,  whether  it  be  a four  or  a ten  beat  rhythm  or  any  other  convenient 
one,  should  be  maintained  for  some  minutes.  It  is  the  very  rhythm  which  accounts  for  the 
easy  absorption  of  vitality  from  without  and  the  acceleration  of  the  divine  power  within. 

Cultivate  techniques  of  relaxation  to  aid  this  process.  These  can  be  learned  readily  from 
a host  of  good  books  (The  Lazy  Man's  Guide  to  Relaxation  By  Israel  Regardie,  Falcon 
Press,  1983)  on  this  subject  which  are  readily  available  at  any  good  bookstore.  The 
conjunction  of  relaxation  techniques  with  the  practice  of  the  rhythmic  breath  will  go  far  in 
the  process  of  mobilizing  one's  energies.  One  of  the  indices  of  the  success  of  this  process  is 
that  in  a few  minutes  the  whole  body  is  vibrating  in  unison  with  the  rhythm  of  the  breath. 
Every  cell  appears  to  vibrate  sympathetically,  and  the  whole  system  comes  to  feel  as  if  it 
were  an  inexhaustible  storage  battery  of  power.  The  sensation  most  commonly  felt  is  that 
the  diaphragm  is  rippling  and  buzzing. 

Once  this  has  been  experienced,  then  one  can  refer  to  the  chart  depicted  in  the 
Portal  paper,  paying  particular  attention  to  the  Sephiroth  on  the  Middle  Pillar  - Kether, 
Daath,  Tiphareth,  Yesod  and  Malkuth.  We  can  call  these  Sephiroth  or  psychospiritual 
centers  or  even  use  the  Hindu  equivalent,  the  chakras.  For  convenience  sake,  we  may  name 
them  after  the  elements  so  commonly  used  in  the  Order  system.  Kether  we  may  name  Spirit, 
Daath  Air,  the  succeeding  ones  being  named  Fire,  Water  and  Earth. 

It  is  axiomatic  to  the  Order  system  that  there  are  two  principal  means  whereby  we 
may  become  aware  of  these  centers  to  awaken  them  from  their  dormant  state  into  actively 


56 


VOLUME  THREE 


functioning  chakras  - thought,  colour  and  sound.  We  must  concentrate  upon  these 
Sephiroth  in  the  aura  one  by  one  and  at  the  same  time  vibrate  the  divine  names  appropriate 
thereto.  Each  center  is  to  be  imagined  as  having  a specific  colour  and  shape.  The 
combination  of  these  three  agencies  gradually  stirs  the  Sephirotic  centers  into  vigorous 
activity.  Slowly  they  become  stimulated  into  functioning  each  according  to  its  own  nature, 
pouring  forth  a stream  of  spiritual  energy  into  the  body-mind  system.  With  sufficient 
practice,  this  process  can  be  performed  anywhere  at  any  time  without  anyone  suspecting 
that  this  exercise  is  being  performed.  Merely  turning  the  attention  to  a specific  center  will 
be  enough  to  throw  it  into  some  kind  of  activity  producing  at  the  very  least  a sense  of 
tingling  there  which  ultimately  spreads  all  over. 

First  of  all,  the  position  of  the  centers  as  shown  in  the  Portal  diagram  must  be 
memorized.  The  student  who  has  studied  the  Knowledge  Lectures  on  the  Qabalah  should 
have  no  problem  with  this  by  now.  The  meditation,  for  such  we  may  call  it,  may  be 
performed  while  sitting  up  or  lying  down  flat  on  the  back  in  a perfectly  relaxed  state.  The 
hands  may  be  permitted  to  lie  folded  in  the  lap  with  fingers  interlaced  or  to  rest  comfortably 
by  one's  side.  Calmness  of  mind  should  be  induced,  and  some  minutes  devoted  to  the 
rhythmic  breathing  to  bring  about  the  sense  of  rippling  playing  around  the  solar  plexus. 

Then  turn  the  attention  to  Kether,  somewhat  above  the  crown  of  the  head.  Try  to 
imagine  it  as  a ball  or  sphere  of  brilliant  white  light  - do  this  easily  without  straining  or 
forcing.  If  the  mind  wanders  at  first,  as  it  usually  does  unless  you  have  learned  by  now  to 
concentrate  well,  wait  a moment  or  two  and  gently  lead  it  back  to  the  task  at  hand.  At  the 
same  time,  vibrate  or  hum  the  divine  name  EHEIEH,  pronouncing  it  as  Eh-huh-yay.  After  a 
few  days  of  persistent  practice,  to  vibrate  the  name  in  the  center  will  be  found  quite  easy. 
Kether  and  its  divine  name  is  the  seat  of  the  overshadowing  divinity,  the  Yechidah,  the 
higher  and  divine  Genius  we  can  all  draw  upon. 

The  effect  of  this  concentration  and  vibration  is  to  awaken  the  center  into  dynamic 
activity;  it  begins  to  vibrate  and  rotate  above  the  crown  of  the  head  when  light  and  energy 
begin  to  pour  down  on  the  lower  Sephiroth.  Even  the  finger  tips  and  the  toes  react  to  this 
awakening  by  the  sensations  of  a faint  prickling  which  later  develops  into  a mighty 
throbbing  of  power.  The  name  should  be  vibrated  audibly  for  some  considerable  time  until 
skill  has  been  acquired.  A humming  sound  will  do  while  one  has  the  mental  image  of  the 
name  desired.  When  enough  skill  has  been  acquired  through  practice,  the  name  may  be 
hummed  silently  in  any  particular  center  desired.  Again,  if  the  mind  tends  to  wander,  the 
frequent  repetition  of  the  vibration  or  hum  will  do  much  to  facilitate  the  task  of 
concentration. 

Keep  the  mind  here  for  some  five  minutes  or  so,  by  which  time  it  should  be  seen  to 
glow  and  scintillate.  Then  imagine  that  from  this  center  emanates  a shaft  of  white  light 
moving  downwards  into  the  Daath  center  in  the  neck.  Here  it  expands  to  form  another 
sphere  of  white  light,  about  the  size  of  a small  saucer.  If  the  larynx  is  felt  to  be  the  center 
of  this  Sephirah,  Daath,  then  the  distance  from  it  to  the  cervical  vertebrae  at  the  back  of  the 
neck 


57 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


will  be  approximately  the  radius.  Naturally,  this  distance  will  vary  with  every 
person.  A technique  similar  to  the  above  for  Kether  should  be  pursued  with  this  sphere, 
which  we  name  the  Air  center.  It  should  be  strongly  and  vividly  imagined  as  a scintillating 
sphere  of  white  light,  shining  and  glowing  from  within.  The  divine  name  pertaining  to  this 
sphere  is  YHVH  ELOHIM  - pronounced  as  Yuh-hoh-voh  Eh-loh-heem. 

Let  the  vibratory  or  humming  sound  be  made  a number  of  times  until  it  is  clearly  felt  as 
a definite  sensory  experience.  There  is  absolutely  no  mistaking  the  sensation  of  its 
awakening.  About  the  same  time  should  be  spent  formulating  Daath  or  this  Air  center  as 
was  devoted  to  the  Kether  center.  When  you  feel  ready  to  move  from  it,  imagine  that  the 
shaft  of  white  light  descends  from  the  throat  to  the  center  of  the  chest,  to  the  Tiphareth 
center.  Then  feel  that  it  expands  behind  the  sternum  or  breast  bone  to  form  once  more 
another  center,  the  so-called  Fire  center.  Its  traditional  divine  Name  is  YHVH  ELOAH  ve- 
DAATH,  pronounced  as  Yuh-hoh-voh  Eh-loh  ve-Dah-ahth.  Some  students  have 
complained  that  the  above  divine  name  is  excessively  long  and  difficult  to  pronounce.  After  a 
long  period  of  experimentation,  I have  substituted  the  gnostic  name  IAO,  commonly  used 
in  the  Adeptus  Minor  Key  word,  for  the  Hebrew  words.  Both  are  attributed  Qabalistically 
to  Tiphareth  on  the  Tree,  and  so  are  equally  valid.  It  is  my  experience  that  this  Name  is  just 
as  effective  as  is  the  Hebrew  divine  Name,  and  in  my  own  use  of  this  meditation,  it  has 
become  a permanent  part  of  the  technique. 

IAO  should  be  pronounced  as  Eee  (as  in  key)  Ah-Oh,  and  again  should  be  hummed 
or  intoned  with  vigor.  In  fact,  it  is  far  simpler  to  vibrate  this  name  than  almost  any  other,  and 
the  vibration  it  produces  is  clear  and  strong. 

When  you  have  felt  you've  dwelt  long  enough  on  this  center,  continue  sending  the 
shaft  of  light  downwards  until  it  reaches  the  pelvic  area,  the  region  of  the  generative 
organs.  Form  here,  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  before,  a sphere  of  radiant  light-energy  of 
approximately  the  same  size,  that  of  a saucer.  Here  also  a name  is  to  be  pronounced  so  as  to 
produce  the  vibratory  awakening  of  the  center  which  is  to  be  felt  in  every  molecule  and  cell  in 
that  area.  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI  is  the  divine  name  of  Yesod,  where  this  center  is  located,  and 
is  to  be  pronounced  as  Shah-die  Ale  Chye  (remember  that  the  ch  is  gutteral.)  Let  the  mind 
get  accustomed  to  concentrate  upon  this  center  for  several  minutes,  visualizing  it  as  of  an 
active  white  brilliance.  And  whenever  the  mind  happens  to  wander  from  its  task,  bring  it  back 
by  repeatedly  vibrating  the  name  given  above. 

The  final  step  in  completing  the  Middle  Pillar  is  to  have  the  shaft  of  white  light 
descend  from  the  pelvis  to  the  feet.  There  it  expands  from  a point  just  below  each  ankle  to 
form  the  fifth  sphere  in  Malkuth.  This  for  convenience  sake  is  called  the  Earth  center, 
thus  completing  the  regimen  of  the  elements.  Formulate  here  a brilliant  white  center  of 
approximately  the  same  size  as  the  others.  As  you  know  by  now  the  divine  name  of 
Malkuth  is  ADONAI  ha-ARETZ,  pronounced  as  Ah-doh-nye  hah-Ah-retz.  Fixed  and 
steady  meditation  on  this  area  should  induce  the  awakening  of  this  center  and  the  vibration 
of  the  name  should  stimulate  the  sense  of  energy  pouring  through  enormously. 


58 


VOLUME  THREE 


Again,  stay  with  this  as  long  as  you  feel  you  are  accomplishing  the  activation  of 
the  center.  When  finished,  return  in  your  imagination  to  Kether,  and  visualize  the  Middle 
Pillar  as  a shaft  of  silvery  light  studded  with  five  gorgeous  diamonds  of  excellent  brilliance. 
Maintain  this  image  just  long  enough  to  know  that  the  centers  have  been  awakened. 

For  some  students  with  a good  imaginative  faculty,  the  colour  of  these  centers  can 
be  changed  to  accord  with  the  Order  aattribution  of  the  colours  of  the  elements.  That  is  the 
Kether  center  remains  brilliantly  white;  the  Daath  center  is  changed  to  lavender;  the  heart 
center  to  red  for  Fire  and  Tiphareth;  the  pelvic  or  Water  center  is  given  a blue  colour,  while 
the  Earth  or  Malkuth  center  is  given  a russet  colour,  the  rich  deep  color  of  Earth  itself,  the 
very  foundation  on  which  we  all  rest.  Other  students  who  may  not  possess  this  eidetic 
faculty  in  any  abundance  and  who  find  that  repeated  effort  does  not  yield  major  dividends 
(I  have  known  many  highly  educated  and  intelligent  students  who  are  eidetic  negative  and 
do  not  find  this  at  all  easy)  in  which  case  1 suggest  they  continue  using  the  colour  of  white  all 
through  their  practice. 

The  Order  technique  as  described  in  the  Portal  document  then  suggests  building  up 
the  rest  of  the  Sephiroth  on  the  Tree  of  Life  in  the  sphere  of  sensation.  My  own  experience 
is  that  this  is  superfluous.  For  the  purpose  that  we  have  in  mind  this  approach  is  redundant. 
The  Sephiroth  can  be  placed  easily  in  the  aura  by  a process  that  1 have  called  the  circulation 
technique,  which  can  now  be  described. 

The  first  step  in  this  approach  is  to  throw  the  mind  upwards  to  the  coronal  center, 
Kether,  imagining  it  to  be  in  a state  of  vigorous  activity  once  more.  In  such  a state  it  throws 
an  enormous  amount  of  energy  into  the  Sephirotic  system,  transforming  it  in  such  a way  as  to 
make  it  readily  available  for  any  activity  in  the  human  system.  Imagine  then  that  the  energy 
begins  to  stream  down  the  left  side  of  the  body,  or  Tree,  in  a broad  band  extending  out  some 
distance  from  the  body.  As  the  current  of  energy  descends  down  the  trunk  and  thighs  to  the 
feet,  try  to  synchronise  the  movement  of  the  energy  with  the  breathing  process.  As  the 
breathing  proceeds,  let  the  band  of  energy  pass  from  the  left  foot  to  the  right  foot,  and  then 
ascend  up  the  right  side  of  the  body  to  the  coronal  center  once  more,  returning  to  the  center 
whence  it  came.  Keep  on  repeating  this  process,  accompanied  by  the  breathing  until  you 
can  feel  the  connection  between  the  movement  of  the  energy  through  the  right  and  left  Pillars 
of  the  Tree  and  the  inhalation  and  exhalation  of  air.  You  will  of  course  realize  that  this  is  an 
interior  psychic  circulation,  though  it  has  its  own  physical  correlatives. 

This  process  is  followed  by  another  type  of  circulation  which  is  readily 
understandable  once  the  notion  of  the  Tree  having  four  Pillars  (when  projected  into  a solid 
sphere,  which  the  aura  is)  is  grasped.  Return  in  contemplation  to  Kether,  and  then  direct 
the  band  of  energy  down  the  front  of  the  body  towards  the  feet,  always  synchronized  with  the 
breathing  process.  As  you  inhale,  move  the  energy  from  the  front  of  the  feet  to  the  heels,  and 
then  up  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  towards  Kether  again.  Be  sure  to  continue  the 
circulatory  process  until  it  is  perceptible,  as  a definite  movement  of  energy.  Do  not  worry 
too  much  if  the  imagination  does  not  seem  keen  enough  to  visualize  this  movement. 
Sometimes  merely  willing  and  feeling  that  it  is  moving  is  adequate  to  get  the  energy  to  follow 
the  notion  of  the  Pillars. 


59 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


These  two  types  of  circulation  establish  the  four  Pillars  very  clearly  and  definitely,  and 
if  persisted  in  for  sometime,  the  sensation  is  unmistakable,  practically  physical.  General 
experience  and  perception  indicates  that  this  sphere  of  light  and  energy  extends  outwards  to 
a distance  approximating  the  length  of  the  oustretched  arm.  And  it  is  within  this  light 
sphere  that  the  physical  man  exists  rather  like  a kernel  within  a nut. 

The  final  method  of  circulation  may  be  likened  to  the  action  of  a fountain  - 1 call  it 
the  fountain  circulation.  In  much  the  same  way  as  water  is  forced  or  sucked  up  through  a 
tube  until  it  jets  up  above  falling  in  a spray  on  all  sides,  so  does  the  energy  behave  when 
directed  by  the  will  and  imagination  in  this  type  of  circulation. 

Throw  the  attention  downwards  to  Malkuth,  the  Earth  center,  feeling  it  to  be  the 
culmination  of  all  the  others,  the  receptacle  of  all  the  others,  the  terminal  and  storehouse  of 
the  incoming  vital  force.  You  should  then  imagine  that  this  power  ascends  or  is  attracted 
upwards  to  Kether  above  the  crown  of  the  head.  The  energy,  following  the  will,  ascends 
upwards  and  then  sprays  over  from  Kether,  falling  downwards  on  all  sides  towards 
Malkuth  where  it  is  again  concentrated  and  accumulated  ready  for  another  move  upwards.  It 
will  be  found  that  breathing  in  will  enable  the  energy  to  move  upwards  to  Kether  most 
readily,  whereas  the  exhalation  seems  naturally  to  accompany  the  spraying  overhead  and 
falling  downwards  of  the  energy  towards  Malkuth. 

This  completes  the  formation  of  the  axis  of  the  Tree,  the  five  Pillars  described  so 
vividly  in  various  of  the  Order  papers.  Keep  this  notion  constantly  in  mind  when  working 
these  circulations.  Once  the  five-columned  Tree  has  been  well  formulated  so  that  it  can  be 
felt,  then  let  the  mind  dwell  on  the  idea  of  the  sphere  of  light,  the  LVX,  spiritual  and  healing 
in  quality,  surrounding  and  inter-penetrating  the  entire  body.  You  should  feel  an  unmistakable 
sense  of  calmness  and  vitality  and  poise,  as  though  the  mind  were  placid  and  still.  The  body,  in 
a lovely  state  of  relaxation,  should  feel  in  every  part  that  it  is  thoroughly  charged  and 
permeated  by  the  vibrant  power  of  life. 

It  is  at  this  stage  of  the  exercise  that  the  student  should  review  some  of  the  prayers 
or  invocations  current  in  the  Order  procedures.  For  example,  there  is  the  Prayer  of  the  H 
ierophant  in  the  Neophyte  degree  as  he  descends  from  the  throne  of  the  East  towards  the 
candidate  kneeling  at  the  altar.  "I  come  in  the  Power  of  the  Light.  I come  in  the  Light  of 
Wisdom.  I come  in  the  Mercy  of  the  Light.  The  Light  hath  healing  in  its  Wings." 

There  is  also  the  other  prayer  used  by  the  Hierophant  in  the  same  ritual  which  again 
may  be  used  here  in  order  to  call  down  the  divine  light.  "0  Lord  of  the  Universe,  the  Vast  and 
the  Mighty  One,  Ruler  over  the  Light  and  the  Darkness,  we  adore  thee  and  we  invoke  thee. 
Look  Thou  with  favor  upon  me,  who  now  standeth  before  Thee  and  grant  thine  aid  unto  the 
highest  aspirations  of  my  soul  so  that  I may  prove  worthy  of  thy  help  to  perform  the  Great 
Work."  The  speech  of  the  Chief  Adept  in  the  Vault  during  the  5-6  Ritual  is  also  worthy  of 
being  memorized  so  that  it  may  be  recited  during  this  exercise: 

I am  the  resurrection  and  the  Life.  Whosoever  believeth  in  me  though  he  were  dead 
yet  shall  he  live,  and  whosoever  Iiveth  and  believeth  in  me,  the  same  shall  never  die.  I am 
the 


60 


VOLUME  THREE 


First  and  I am  the  Last.  I am  he  that  liveth  but  was  dead,  and  behold!  1 am  alive 
for  evermore  and  hold  the  keys  of  death  and  of  hell.  For  I know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth 
and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth. 

I am  the  Way,  the  Truth  and  the  Life.  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  me.  1 am 
the  Purified.  I have  passed  through  the  gates  of  darkness  unto  Light.  1 have  fought  upon 
earth  for  good.  1 have  finished  my  work.  I have  entered  the  Invisible. 

I am  the  Sun  in  his  rising,  passed  through  the  hour  of  cloud  and  of  night.  I am 
Amoun,  the  concealed  One,  the  Opener  of  the  Day.  I am  Osiris  Onnophris,  the  Justified 
One,  the  Lord  of  Life,  triumphant  over  death.  There  is  no  part  of  me  which  is  not  of  the 
Gods.  I am  the  preparer  of  the  Pathway,  the  rescuer  unto  the  Light.  Let  the  White  Light  of 
the  Divine  Spirit  descend. 

The  next  ritual  fragment  is  rather  different  from  the  foregoing,  although  both  have 
a similar  personal  effect  when  slowly  repeated,  meditated  upon,  and  felt  intensely.  It  consists 
of  two  parts  - the  first  one  being  a sort  of  petition  of  the  higher  and  divine  Genius,  while  the 
second  bespeaks  of  the  realization  of  identity  with  it. 

Thee  I invoke  the  Bornless  One.  Thee  that  didst  create  the  Earth  and  the  Heavens. 
Thee  that  didst  create  the  Night  and  the  Day.  Thee  that  didst  create  the  Darkness  and  the 
Light.  Thou  art  Man  made  Perfect,  whom  no  man  hath  seen  at  any  time.  Thou  art  God  and 
very  God.  Thou  hast  distinguished  between  the  Just  and  the  Unjust.  Thou  didst  make  the 
female  and  the  male.  Thou  didst  produce  the  seed  and  the  fruit.  Thou  didst  form  men  to 
love  one  another  and  to  hate  one  another.  Thou  didst  produce  the  moist  and  the  dry,  and  That 
which  nourisheth  all  created  things. 

The  second  part  should  follow  only  after  a long  pause,  in  which  one  attempts  to 
realize  just  what  it  is  that  the  prayer  has  asserted,  and  that  it  is  raising  the  mind  to  an 
apprehension  of  the  hidden  secret  Godhead  within,  which  is  the  creator  of  all  things. 

This  is  the  Lord  of  the  Gods.  This  is  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  This  is  He  Whom  the 
winds  fear.  This  is  He  who  having  made  voice  by  his  commandment  is  Lord  of  all  things, 
king,  ruler  and  helper.  Hear  me  and  make  all  spirits  subject  unto  me,  so  that  every  spirit  of 
the  firmament  and  of  the  ether,  upon  the  earth  and  under  the  earth,  upon  dry  land  and  in  the 
water,  of  whirling  air  and  of  rushing  fire,  and  every  spell  and  scourge  of  God  the  Vast  One 
may  be  made  obedient  unto  me. 

I am  He  the  Bornless  Spirit,  having  sight  in  the  feet,  strong  and  the  immortal  fire.  I 
am  He,  the  Truth.  I am  He  who  hate  that  evil  may  be  wrought  in  the  world.  I am  He  that 
lighteneth  and  thundereth.  I am  He  from  whom  is  the  shower  of  the  Life  of  Earth.  I am  He 
whose  mouth  ever  flameth.  I am  He,  the  begetter  and  manifester  unto  the  Light.  I am  He, 
the  Grace  of  the  World.  The  Heart  girt  with  a Serpent  is  my  Name. 

These  prayer  fragments  are  suggestive  only  and  are  to  be  used  or  rejected,  as  each 
student  feels  fit.  There  is  no  final  authority  within  the  Order  for  their  usage. 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


This  exercise  has  an  extended  usage,  far  beyond  the  development  of  insight  and 
enlightenment  as  though  it  provided  a magical  engine  whereby  one's  enlightened  will  may 
find  suitable  expression.  Let  me  preface  any  further  remarks  by  stating  that  from  the 
practical  point  of  view,  the  rudiments  of  the  astrological  schema  are  of  untold  value  in  that 
they  offer  a concise  classification  of  the  broad  division  of  things.  I am  not  here  concerned 
with  astrology  as  such,  merely  that  it  is  convenient  to  use  its  schema.  Its  roots  are  in  the 
seven  principal  ideas  or  planets  to  which  most  ideas  and  things  may  be  referred.  To  each  of 
these  root  ideas  there  is  attributed  a positive  and  negative  colour,  and  a Divine  Name  for  the 
purpose  of  vibration.  I propose  naming  the  planets  with  their  principal  attributions  as 
follows: 

Saturn.  Older  people  and  old  plans.  Debts  and  their  repayment.  Agriculture  and  real 
estate,  death,  wills,  stability,  inertia.  Positive  colour  is  indigo;  negative,  black.  YHVH 
Elohim  - best  pronounced  Yuh-hoh-voh  Eh-loh-heem. 

Jupiter.  Is  abundance,  plenty,  growth,  expansion,  generosity.  Spirituality,  visions, 
dreams,  long  journeys,  subjective  or  otherwise.  Bankers,  creditors,  debtors,  gambling. 
Positive  colour  is  purple;  negative  blue.  EL,  pronounced  exactly  as  written  or  as  Ale. 

Mars.  Energy,  haste,  anger,  construction  or  destruction  (according  to  application). 
Danger,  risks,  surgery.  Vitality  and  magnetism,  will  power.  Positive  and  negative  colours 
bright  red.  Elohim  Gibor,  best  pronounced  Eh-loh-heem  Gibor. 

Sun.  Superiors,  employers,  executives,  officials.  Power  and  success.  Life,  money, 
growth  of  all  kinds.  Illumination,  imagination,  mental  power.  Health.  Positive  colour 
orange;  negative  colour  yellow  or  gold.  YHVH  Eloah  ve-Daath.  This  is  such  a long  clumsy 
name,  that  though  traditional  I have  decided  to  replace  it  with  a much  simpler  and  also 
traditional  name.  IAO  pronounced  ee  (as  in  key)  ah-oh. 

Venus.  Social  affairs,  affections  and  emotions,  women,  younger  people.  All 
pleasures  and  the  arts,  music,  beauty,  extravagance,  luxury,  self-indulgence.  Both  of  the 
colours  emerald  green.  YHVH  Tzabaoth,  pronounced  Yuh-hoh-voh  Tzah-bah-oth. 

Mercury.  Business  matters,  writing,  contracts,  judgment  and  short  journeys.  Buying, 
selling,  bargaining.  Neighbours,  giving  and  obtaining  information.  Literary  abilities, 
publishing,  and  intellectual  friends.  Books,  papers,  etc.  Positive  colour  yellow;  negative 
colour  orange.  Elohim  Tzabaoth,  pronounced  Eh-loh-heem  Tzah-bah-oth. 

Moon.  General  public,  women.  Sense-reactions.  Short  journeys  and  removals. 
Changes  and  fluctuations.  The  personality.  Positive  colour  blue;  negative  colour  puce. 
Shaddai  el  Chai,  pronounced  shah-dye  ale  Chye  (gutteral  ch.) 

These  very  briefly  are  the  attributions  of  the  planets  under  which  almost  everything 
and  every  subject  may  be  classified.  This  classification  is  extremely  useful  because  it 
simplifies  enormously  one's  task  of  physical  and  spiritual  development.  It  can  simplify,  at 
least  in  general  theory,  much  of  the  practical  work  of  the  Order,  in  fact  even  enabling  one 
to  simplify  and  classify  the  work  to  be  done.  A little  actual  usage  of  the  method  will 
indicate  further  uses  to  which  it  may  be  put. 


62 


VOLUME  THREE 


THE  KNOWLEDGE  LECTURES  FIRST  LECTURE  The  FOUR  ELEMENTS  of  the 


Ancients  are  conditions  of: 

Heat  and  Dryness  Fire 

Heat  and  Moisture  Air 

Cold  and  Dryness  Earth 

Cold  and  Moisture  Water 


There  are  twelve  Signs  in  the  Zodiac: 


1. 

Aries,  the  Ram 

T 

2. 

Taurus,  the  Bull 

8 

3. 

Gemini,  the  Twins 

n 

4. 

Cancer,  the  Crab 

U D 

5. 

Leo,  the  Lion 

a 

6. 

Virgo,  the  Virgin 

m 

7. 

Libra,  the  Scales 

63 


< <1  D>  > 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


8.  Scorpio,  the  Scorpion  ^ 

9.  Sagittarius,  the  Archer  $ 

10.  Capricornus,  the  Goat 

11.  Aquarius,  the  Water-Bearer  ~ 

12.  Pisces,  the  Fishes  X 


These  Twelve  Signs  are  distributed  among  what  are  called  the  Four  Triplicities,  or  sets 
of  three  Signs.  Each  one  is  attributed  to  one  of  the  Four  Elements,  and  they  represent  the 
operation  of  the  elements  in  the  Zodiac. 


To  Fire  belong: 

Aries,  Leo,  Sagittarius 


t a t 


To  Earth  belong: 

Taurus,  Virgo,  Capricornus  8 n 

To  Air  belong: 

Gemini,  Libra,  Aquarius  El  ^ Z? 

To  Water  belong: 

Cancer,  Scorpio,  Pisces  zs  ttl  X 


To  the  Ancients,  six  planets  besides  the  Sun  were  known.  They  also  assigned 
certain  planetary  values  to  the  North  and  South  Nodes  of  the  Moon;  that  is,  the  points 
where  the  Moon's  orbit  touches  that  of  the  Ecliptic. 

These  were  named: 

Caput  Draconis  --  Head  of  the  Dragon  cfl> 

Cauda  Draconis  — Tail  of  the  Dragon  V 

Since  the  discovery  of  two  more  distant  Planets  Neptune  and  Uranus,  these  two 
terms  have  been  partially  replaced  by  them. 

The  effect  of  Caput  Draconis  is  similar  to  W 


The  effect  of  Cauda  Draconis  is  similar  to  1$ 


64 


VOLUME  THREE 


The  names  of  the  Old  Planets  are: 

Saturn  h 

Jupiter  ^ 
Mars  cf 


Sol  O 

Venus  ? 

Mercury  $ 


Moon  3) 

SECOND  LECTURE 

In  alchemy  the  teaching  is  that  there  are  three  principles  namely: 

Sulphur  -f- 

Mercury  $ 


Salt 

The  metals  attributed  to  the  planets  are: 

Lead  h 

Tin  % 

Iron  cT 

Silver  D 


© 

Gold 

Copper 

Quicksilver 


o 

? 

$ 


The  following  terms  are  used  in  alchemical  texts,  and  mean: 

SOL  PHILOSOPHORUM  - The  pure  living  alchemical  spirit  of  gold  - the  refined 
essence  of  heat  and  fire. 

LUNA  PHILOSOPHORUM  - The  pure  living  alchemical  spirit  of  silver  - the 
refined  essence  of  heat  and  mositure. 

THE  GREEN  LION  - The  stem  and  root  of  the  radical  essence  of  metals.  THE 
BLACK  DRAGON  - Death,  putrefaction,  decay. 

THE  KING  - Red  - The  Qabalistic  Microprosopus.  Tiphareth  - analogous  to  Gold 
and  the  Sun. 

THE  QUEEN  - White  - The  Qabalistic  bride  of  Microprosopus.  Malkah  - analogous 
to  Silver  and  the  Moon. 


65 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Letter 

Power 

Value 

Name 

Meaning 

K 

A 

1 

Aleph 

Ox 

B,V 

2 

Beth 

House 

i 

G,  Gh 

3 

Gimel 

Camel 

i 

D,  Dh 

4 

Daleth 

Door 

n 

H 

5 

Heh 

Window 

i 

V,  0,  U 

6 

Vau 

Pin  or  hook 

t 

Z 

7 

Zayjn 

Sword  or  armour 

n 

Ch 

8 

Cheth 

Fence  or  enclosure 

b 

T 

9 

Teth 

Snake 

s 

I,  Y,  J 

10 

Yod 

Hand 

a 

K,  Kh 

20 

Caph 

Fist 

*} 

L 

30 

Lamed 

Ox  goad 

0 

M 

40 

Mem 

Water 

: 

N 

50 

Nun 

Fish 

D 

S 

60 

Samekh 

Prop 

V 

Aa,  Ngh 

70 

Ayin 

Eye 

£> 

P,  F 

80 

Peh 

Mouth 

X 

Tz 

90 

Tzaddi 

Fish  hook 

P 

Q 

100 

Qoph 

Ear.  Back  of  head 

R 

200 

Resh 

Head 

V 

S,  Sh 

300 

Shin 

Tooth 

r\ 

T,  Th 

400 

Tau 

Cross 

Each  Hebrew  letter  represents  a number  and  a meaning.  Five  letters  have  a different  shape 
and  also  a different  number  when  written  at  the  end  of  a word.  They  are  called  Finals.  Of  these 
Finals  Mem  is  distinguished  by  being  the  only  oblong  letter.  The  other  four  Caph,  Nun,  Peh, 
Tzaddi  have  long  tails  which  should  come  below  the  line  as  shown  (See  table  below).  Sometimes 
the  letters  are  depicted  as  very  large,  in  which  case  their  numerical  value 


66 


VOLUME  THREE 


is  multiplied,  such  as  a very  large  Aleph  represents  1000,  a very  large  Beth  2000,  and 
so  on.  When  practising  how  to  draw  Hebrew  letters  the  student  would  do  well  to  make  them 
on  lined  sheets.  Also  remember  that  these  letters  are  written  from  right  to  left.  The  Order 
also  teaches  that  these  are  Holy  symbols  and  therefore  should  be  carefully  drawn  and 
square. 

TABLE  OF  FINAL  LETTERS 


Letter 

Power 

Value 

Name 

1 

K,  Kh 

500 

Caph 

& 

M 

600 

Mem 

t 

N 

700 

Nun 

P,  F 

800 

Peh 

V 

Tz 

900 

Tzaddi 

The  Dagesh  is  a dot  or  point  placed  in  some  of  the  Hebrew  letters.  It  changes  the 
sound  value  of  the  letter.  In  modern  Hebrew  script  it  represents  a vowel;  however  it  is  not 
used  in  this  book.  S.  R.  M.  D.  asserts  it  is  a late  invention  to  standardise  pronunciation. 

The  Hebrew  Qabalists  referred  the  highest  and  most  abstract  ideas  to  the  emanations 
of  Deity.  There  are  ten  emanations.  Each  one  is  a Sephirah,  the  plural  being  Sephiroth.  When 
arranged  in  a certain  manner,  they  form  what  is  called  the  Etz  Chayim  or  The  Tree  of  Life. 

THE  ETZ  CHAYIM  OR  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE 


1 

Kether 

K-Th-R 

Crown 

VD 

2 

Chokmah 

Ch-K-M-H 

Wisdom 

3 

Binah 

B-I-N-H 

Understanding 

rm 

4 

Chesed 

Ch-S-D 

Mercy 

non 

5 

Geburah 

G-B-U-R-H 

Severity 

rma 

6 

Tiphareth 

T-Ph-A-R-Th 

Beauty 

7 

Netzach 

N-Tz-Ch 

Victory 

niu 

8 

Hod 

H-O-D 

Glory 

Tin 

9 

Yesod 

Y-S-O-D 

Foundation 

w 

10 

Malkuth 

M-L-K-U-Th 

Kingdom 

67 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  LESSER  RITUAL  OF  THE  PENTAGRAM 

In  some  quarters  the  pentagram  or  five  pointed  star  is  considered  an  "evil"  or  demoniacal 
symbol.  On  the  contrary  with  the  point  upwards  it  represents  the  spiritualization  of  the 
more  elemental  aspects  of  man.  Some  modern  groups  have  decided  to  invert  the 
pentagram,  not  for  "evil"  purposes  but  to  indicate  that  it  is  a symbol  of  change.  Other 
groups  who  in  fact  are  "evil"  have  borrowed  the  pentagram  as  their  insignium.  This  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  Order  usage  of  it. 

THE  USES  OF  THE  PENTAGRAM  RITUAL 


When  tracing  the  pentagram  do  make  it  large.  As  you  trace  the  banishing 
pentagram  move  your  arm  down  to  the  middle  of  the  left  thigh.  Then  swing  upwards  at  an 
angle  to  about  the  top  of  the  head.  From  there  move  the  arm  down  to  the  middle  of  the  right 
thigh;  then  upwards  to  the  left  shoulder,  straight  over  to  the  right  shoulder  and  return  to 
the  starting  point  of  the  left  thigh.  The  invoking  pentagram  should  be  traced  in  exactly  the 
opposite  way,  beginning  at  the  apex  and  moving  down  to  the  left  thigh,  etc. 

I have  often  been  horrified  when  students  who  have  visited  me  on  occasion  trace  a 
miniscule  pentagram,  about  5 inches  high  in  front  of  their  heads. 

I. 


INVOKING 


BANISHING 


The  Order  suggests  that  the  Pentagram  Ritual  may  be  used  as  a form  of  prayer,  the 
Invoking  pentagram  in  the  morning,  and  the  Banishing  pentagram  in  the  evening.  The 
names  which  will  be  given  shortly  should  be  pronounced  inwardly  in  the  breath  vibrating  or 
humming  it  as  much  as  possible.  (For  a complete  description  see  the  Regardie  Tapes, 
Falcon  Press,  1982,  If  you  do  not  require  the  complete  set  of  six  tapes  with  instruction 
book,  you  can  order  the  single  tape  on  this  subject.  Just  specify  the  Banishing  Ritual  of  the 
Pentagram).  Try  to  feel  that  the  entire  body  throbs  and  tingles  as  the  wave  of  vibration  is 
directed  to  the  ends  of  the  quadrant. 


68 


VOLUME  THREE 


It  is  said  that  the  Banishing  Pentagram  may  be  used  as  a protection  against 
negative  psychologic  states  in  both  yourself  and  others.  Make  a mental  image  of  your 
concern  or  anxiety  then  formulate  it  before  you.  Project  it  away  from  you  with  the  saluting 
sign  of  a Neophyte  (which  is  depicted  on  a later  page)  and  when  it  is  about  three  feet  away 
prevent  its  return  with  the  sign  of  silence.  Now  imagine  the  form  in  the  Eastern  quadrant 
before  you  and  perform  the  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram  to  destroy  it.  In  your  mind's 
eye  see  it  dissolve  on  the  outside  of  your  circle  of  flame. 

Furthermore  it  may  be  used  as  an  exercise  in  concentration.  Seated  in  meditation 
or  lying  down,  imagine  yourself  standing  up  in  robes  and  holding  a dagger.  Project  your 
consciousness  into  this  mental  image  of  yourself.  When  there  move  to  the  East.  Make 
yourself  feel  there  by  touching  the  wall,  opening  your  eyes,  stamping  on  the  floor  etc. 

Begin  the  ritual  while  in  this  form  and  move  around  the  room  mentally  vibrating  the 
words  and  trying  to  feel  them  being  emitted  from  the  mental  image.  Finish  the  ritual  in  the 
East.  Try  to  feel  what  has  resulted  from  the  ritual,  then  walk  back  and  stand  behind  the 
head  of  your  resting  physical  body  and  let  yourself  be  reabsorbed. 


HOW  TO  PERFORM  THE  RITUAL 
THE  INVOKING  PENTAGRAM 

Take  a steel  dagger  or  knife  in  the  right  hand,  face  East: 

Touch  your  forehead  and  say  Atoh  (thou  art). 

Touch  your  chest  and  say  Malkuth  (the  Kingdom). 

Touch  the  right  shoulder  and  say  ve-Geburah  (and  the  Power).  Touch  the  left 
shoulder  and  say  ve-Gedulah  (and  the  Glory). 

Clasp  your  hands  in  the  center  of  the  chest  and  say  le  Olahm  (forever).  Hold  the 
dagger,  point  upwards,  in  clasped  hands  and  say  Amen  (so  be  it). 

The  word  Amen  in  addition  means  the  end.  It  has  been  associated  with  Amoun  the 
concealed  one.  It  is  also  a notariqon  of  three  Hebrew  words,  Adonai  Melekh  Neh-eh-mon, 
which  means  The  Lord  Faithful  King. 

Facing  East  make  a very  large  invoking  pentagram  as  shown  above.  When  completed 
thrust  the  point  of  the  dagger  to  the  center  of  the  pentagram  and  vibrate  the  Deity  name 
YHVH  (Yod,  Heh,  Vau,  Heh),  imagining  that  your  voice  carries  the  vibration  to  the  East  of 
the  Universe. 


69 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hold  the  dagger  out  in  front  of  you  and  move  to  the  South.  Trace  the  pentagram 
there  and  vibrate  the  Deity  name  Adonai. 

Go  to  the  West,  make  a large  pentagram  again  and  vibrate  Eheieh. 

Move  to  the  North  with  arm  holding  dagger  outstretched.  Make  the  large  pentagram 
and  vibrate  Agla. 

Return  to  the  East  always  completing  your  Circle  by  bringing  the  dagger  to  the 
imagined  center  of  the  first  Pentagram.  Now  stand  with  arms  outstretched  in  the  form  of  a 
Cross  and  say: 

Before  Me  Raphael  Rah-phah-ale 

Behind  me  Gabriel  Gah-bree-ale 

On  my  right  Michael  Mee-chah-ale 

On  my  left  Auriel  Or-ree-ale 

Now  say,  Before  me  flames  the  Pentagram. 

Behind  me  shines  the  Six-Rayed  Star. 

Again  make  the  Qabalistic  Cross  as  in  the  beginning. 

For  Banishing  the  same  Ritual  is  used  with  the  reversal  of  the  lines  of  the 
Pentagram. 


70 


VOLUME  THREE 


OTHER  ALCHEMICAL  ATTRIBUTIONS 
TO  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE 


Kether 

Mercury 

Metallic  Root 

Chokmah 

Salt 

Lead 

Binah 

Sulphur 

Tin 

Chesed 

Silver 

Silver 

Geburah 

Gold 

Gold 

Tiphareth 

Iron 

Iron 

Netzach 

Copper 

Hermaphroditical  Brass 

Hod 

Tin 

Brass 

Yesod 

Lead 

Mercury 

Malkuth 

Mercury 

Medicina 

Philosophorum 

Metallorum 

The  four  Orders  of  the  Elementals  are: 

Spirits  of  the  Earth  Gnomes 

Spirits  of  the  Air  Sylphs 

Spirits  of  the  Water  Undines 

Spirits  of  the  Fire  Salamanders 

These  are  the  essential  spiritual  beings  called  upon  to  praise  God  in  Benedicite 
Omnia  Opera.  The  Kerubim  are  the  living  powers  of  YHVH  on  the  material  plane,  and  the 
presidents  of  the  four  elements.  They  operate  through  the  Fixed  or  Kerubic-signs  of  the 
Zodiac  and  are  thus  symbolized  and  attributed. 


Kerub  of  Air 

Man 

Aquarius 

Kerub  of  Fire 

Lion 

Leo 

a 

Kerub  of  Earth 

Bull 

Taurus 

8 

Kerub  of  Water 

Eagle 

Scorpio 

pi 

Tetragrammaton  means  the  Four-lettered  name  (YHVH)  and  refers  to  the 
unpronounceable  Name  of  God  symbolized  by  Jehovah. 

The  Faver  of  Water  of  Purification  refers  to  the  Waters  of  Binah,  the  Female  Power 
reflected  in  the  Waters  of  creation. 


The  Altar  of  Burnt  Offering  for  the  sacrifice  of  animals  symbolises  the  Qlippoth  or 
Evil  Demons  of  the  plane  contiguous  to  and  below  the  Material  Universe.  It  points  out  that 
our 


71 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


passions  should  be  sacrificed.  (This  simply  means  that  one's  passions  should  be  under 
the  control  of  Will,  as  indicated  in  the  Paper  entitled  On  the  Purification  of  the  Soul). 

The  Altar  of  Incense  in  the  Tabernacle  was  overlaid  with  gold.  Ours  is  Black  to  symbolise 
our  work  which  is  to  separate  the  Philosophic  Gold  from  the  Black  Dragon  of  Matter. 

The  Qlippoth  are  the  Beings  (sometimes  referred  to  as  "Evil")  below  Malkuth,  and  the 
Shells  of  the  Dead. 


THE  QLIPPOTH  ON  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE 


Kether 

Thaumiel 

The  two  contending  Forces 

Chokmah 

Ghogiel 

The  Hinderers 

Binah 

Satariel 

The  Concealers 

Chesed 

Agshekeloh 

The  Breakers  in  Pieces 

Geburah 

Golohab 

The  Burners 

Tiphareth 

Tagiriron 

The  Disputers 

Netzach 

Gharab  Tzerek 

The  Ravens  of  Death 

Hod 

Samael 

The  Liar  or  Poison  of  God 

Yesod 

Gamaliel 

The  Obscene  Ones 

Malkuth 

Lilith 

Queen  of  Night  and  Demons 

THE  ALTAR  DIAGRAM  OF  THE  TREE 


The  altar  diagram  shows  the  Ten  Sephiroth  with  the  connecting  Paths  numbered  and 
lettered,  and  the  Serpent  winding  over  each  Path.  Around  each  Sephirah  are  written  the  Names 
of  the  Deity,  Archangel  and  Angelic  Host.  The  twenty-two  Paths  are  bound  together  by  the 
Serpent  of  Wisdom.  It  unites  the  Paths  but  does  not  touch  any  of  the  Sephiroth,  which  are 
linked  by  the  Flaming  Sword.  The  Flaming  Sword  is  formed  by  the  natural  order  of  the  Tree  of 
Fife.  It  resembles  a flash  of  Fightning. 

The  Two  Pillars  on  either  side  of  the  Altar  represent: 

Active:  The  White  Pillar  on  the  South  Side. 

Male. 

Adam. 

Pillar  of  Light  and  Fire.  Right  Kerub. 

Metatron. 


72 


SERPENT  OF  WISDOM 


73 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Passive:  The  Black  Pillar  on  the  North  Side. 

Female. 

Eve. 

Pillar  of  Cloud.  Left  Kerub. 

Sandalphon. 

THE  FOUR  WORLDS  OF  THE  QABALAH 

The  Qabalists  conceived  of  four  planes  of  existence  between  God  and  man.  They 


are: 

ATZILUTH,  Archetypal  - Pure  Deity. 

BRIAH,  Creative  - Archangelic. 

YETZIRAH,  Formative  - Angelic.  iTPiD 

ASSIAH,  Action  - Material  World. 

Assiah,  the  world  of  Matter,  Man,  Shells,  and  Demons  is  divided  into  ten  houses 
or  Heavens.  They  are: 

Primum  Mobile,  Rashith  ha  Gilgalim.  JVtPRT 

Sphere  of  the  Zodiac,  Mazloth. 

Sphere  of  Saturn,  Shabbathai. 

Sphere  of  Jupiter,  Tzedek. 

Sphere  of  Mars,  Madim. 

Sphere  of  the  Sun,  Shemesh. 

Sphere  of  Venus,  Nogah.  HJD 

Sphere  of  Mercury,  Kokab. 

Sphere  of  the  Moon,  Levanah. 

Sphere  of  Elements,  Olam  Yesodoth.  nTHD*' 


SOME  TAROT  CORRESPONDENCES 

The  traditional  Tarot  consists  of  a pack  of  78  cards  made  up  of  Four  Suits 
(symbolic  of  the  four  worlds  discussed  above)  of  14  cards  each,  together  with  22  Trumps 
or  Major  Arcana,  which  tell  the  story  of  the  Soul. 


74 


VOLUME  THREE 


Each  suit  consists  of  ten  numbered  cards  (referred  to  the  ten  Sephiroth)  as  in  modern  playing 
cards,  but  there  are  four  instead  of  three  honours:  King,  Queen,  Knight,  and  Knave. 

The  Four  Suits  are: 


Wands  are  comparable  to  Diamonds. 

Cups  are  comparable  to  Hearts. 

Swords  are  comparable  to  Spades. 

Pentacles  are  comparable  to  Clubs. 

THIRD  LECTURE 

The  Soul  is  divided  by  the  Qabalists  into  three  principal  parts: 

NESCHAMAH  - The  highest  part,  answering  to  the  Three  Supernals,  and  to  the  higher 
4spirations  of  the  Soul. 

RUACH  - The  middle  part,  answering  to  six  Sephiroth  from  Chesed  to  Yesod,  inclusive,  and  to 
the  mind  and  reasoning  powers. 

NEPHESCH  - The  lowest,  answering  to  Malkuth,  and  to  the  animal  instincts. 

Neschamah  itself  is  further  divided  into  three  parts: 

YECHIDAH  - is  referred  to  Kether. 

CHIAH  - is  referred  to  Chokinah. 

NESCHAMAH  - is  referred  to  Binah. 

THE  THREE  CLASSES  OF  HEBREW  LETTERS 
The  Sepher  Yetzirah  divides  the  Hebrew  Alphabet  into  three  classes  of  letters,  a 3,  a 7,  a 
12. 

Three  Mothers  tt  R 

Seven  Doubles  fl  3 “1  3 3 

Twelve  Singles  p S J)  D ) B n 11  H 

The  Holy  Place  of  the  Temple  embraces  the  symbolism  of  the  22  letters.  The  table  of  Shew- 
Bread,  the  single  letters.  The  Altar  of  Incense  are  the  three  Mother  letters. 

Astral  Spirits  are  those  belonging  to  the  Astral  Plane.  Such  are  false  and  illusionary  forms,  shells 
of  the  dead,  and  ghosts  and  phantoms,  that  are  occasionally  seen  in  seances. 

Elemental  Spirits  are  those  belonging  to  the  nature  of  the  Elements;  some  are  good  and  some  are 

evil. 


75 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


An  Angel  is  a pure  and  high  Spirit  of  unmixed  good  in  office  and  function. 

In  the  Tarot,  the  ten  small  cards  of  each  suit  refer  to  the  Sephiroth.  The  four  suits  refer  to  (he 
letters  of  YHVH.  Wands  to  Yod,  Cups  to  Heh,  Swords  to  Vau,  and  Pentacles  to  Heh  (final). 

These  four  suits  also  refer  to  the  four  worlds  of  the  Qabalah.  Wands  to  Atziluth,  Cups  to  Briah, 
Swords  to  Yetzirah,  and  Pentacles  to  Assiah. 

The  Honours  of  the  Tarot  pack  are,  as  it  were,  the  Vice-gerants  of  the  Great  Name  (YHVH),  in 
the  Qabalistic  World  to  which  each  suit  is  referred.  They  also  symbolize  Father,  Mother,  Son,  Daughter; 
Birth,  Life,  Death,  Resurrection. 


THE  FYLFOT  CROSS 


A 

•/ 

Q 

mm 

T 

■IS 

8 

O 

sitl 

m 

V 

m 

ha 

The  17  squares  out  of  a square  of  smaller  squares,  refer  to  the  Sun  in  the  twelve  Signs  of  the 
Zodiac  and  the  Four  Elements.  They  are  arranged  so  that  the  fixed  signs,  mutable  and  cardinal  signs  are 
placed  in  juxtaposition. 


THE  CADUCEUS 


This  form  of  the  Caduceus  of  Hermes  is  that  of  the  Three  Mother  letters.  Shin,  Aleph.  and  Mem. 
It  represents  Air,  as  the  mediator  between  Fire  above  and  Water  below. 


76 


VOLUME  THREE 


This  symbol  has  another  meaning  on  the  Tree  of  Life.  The  upper  part  and  wings  touch  Chokmah 
and  Binah.  The  knob  touches  Kether.  These  are  the  Three  Supernals. 

The  seven  lower  Sephiroth  are  embraced  by  the  twin  Serpents  whose  heads  rest  upon  Chesed 
and  Geburah 


THE  MOON  ON  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE 


In  the  Moon’s  increase  the  Pillar  of  Mercy  is  embraced.  In  its  decrease  the  Pillar  of  Severity  is 
embraced.  At  the  full  Moon  it  reflects  the  Sun  of  Tiphareth. 


FOURTH  LECTURE 

Below  are  the  Geomantic  figures  and  their  Zodiacal  Attributions. 


77 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


T 

a 

PUFR 

B 

a 

PC ELLA 

a 

& 

AMISS  JO 

m 

a 

HI  BEL'S 

n 

Al  Bl  S 

/ 

a 

ACQUISITIO 

a 

i 

POPIL  LLS 

7f 

a 

CARCER 

• 

• 

* 

• 

VIA 

- 

a 

1 MISHKA 

n 

• * 

V 

* 

FORTUNE  MAJOR 

x 

s 

[ AETIT1A 

n 

a 

FDRTL'NA  MINOR 

a 

H 

CAP  IT  DAACON1S 

CONJl  NCTIO 

* 

* 

CAUDA  DR  A CON  IS 

LINEAL  FIGURES  OF  THE  PLANETS 
Below  are  the  numbers  and  lineal  figures  of  the  planets: 


Saturn 

3 

Triangle 

Jupiter 

4 

Square 

Mars 

5 

Pentagram 

Sun 

6 

Hexagram 

Venus 

7 

Heptagram 

Mercury 

8 

Octagram 

Moon 

9 

Enneagram 

78 


VOLUME  THREE 


This  topic  is  considerably  elaborated  in  a very  important  document  entitled  Polygons  and 
Polygrams.  There  are  a number  of  drawings  to  illustrate  each  point  made. 

THE  MAGICAL  SQUARES  OF  THE  PLANETS 
They  are  formed  of  the  squares  of  the  number  of  the  planet,  arranged  so  as  to  yield  the  same 
number  each  way.  The  number  of  the  sum  of  each  column  of  figures  and  the  number  of  the  total  of  all 
the  number  of  the  squares  are  also  especially  attached  to  the  planet.  For  example  the  number  of  the 
planet  Saturn  is  3,  square  9,  the  sum  of  all  columns  vertical,  horizontal  and  diagonal  is  15.  The  total  sum 
of  all  numbers  is  45.  These  numbers  are  then  formed  into  Divine  and  Spirit  names  . 

THE  SOLID  GREEK  CUBICAL  CROSS 


It  is  the  admission  badge  for  the  Path  of  Tau,  and  is  composed  of  22  squares  which  answer  to  the 
22  letters  of  the  Hebrew  Alphabet. 

THE  SOLID  TRIANGLE  OR  TETRAHEDRON 


This  figure  is  also  known  as  the  Pyramid  of  Fire.  It  is  the  Admission  Badge  for  the  Path  of  Shin, 
representing  the  simple  Fire  of  Nature  and  the  latent  or  hidden  Fire. 

The  three  upper  triangles  (note  figure  is  in  2 dimensional  space)  refer  to  Fire  - Solar,  Volcanic 
and  Astral.  The  lowest  or  basal  triangle  represents  the  latent  heat. 


This  Admission  Badge  for  the  Path  of  Resh  has  thirteen  squares.  It  is  referred  to  the  Sun  in  the 
Twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  arranged  in  triplicities. 


79 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


O 


It  is  the  Admission  Badge  to  the  grade  of  Practicus.  It  is  referred  to  the  Tree  of  Life  as  shown  in 
the  diagram.  It  embraces  nine  of  the  Sephiroth  exclusive  of  Kether. 

Yesod  and  Malkuth  are  referred  to  the  lower  triangle  the  former  to  the  apex  and  latter  to  the 
base.  Like  the  Caduceus,  it  furthers  represents  Water,  Fire  and  Air,  but  in  a different  combination.  The 
Crescent  refers  to  the  Waters  above  the  Firmament,  the  sphere  to  the  Firmament,  and  the  basal  triangle 
to  the  consuming  Fire,  which  is  opposed  to  the  Fire  symbolized  by  the  upper  part  of  the  Caduceus. 


THE  SYMBOL  OF  MERCURY 

On  the  Tree  of  Life  it  embraces  all  the  Sephiroth  but  Kether.  The  horns  spring  from  Daath 
(knowledge)  which  is  not,  properly  speaking,  a Sephirah,  but  rather  a conjunction  of  Chokmah  and 
Binah. 


FIFTH  LECTURE  OR  AZOTH 

Azoth  is  a word  formed  from  the  initial  and  final  letters  of  the  Greek,  Latin  and  Hebrew 
Alphabets  thus;  A and  Z,  Alpha  and  Tau,  Alpha  andOmega.  It  is  used  with  various  meanings  by 
different  writers,  but  generally  signifies  essence.  It  is  commonly  used  amongst  the  writers  on  Alchemy. 


80 


VOLUME  THREE 


81 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  following  names  occur  in  Qabalistic  writings: 

Ain  Nothing  - Not 


Ain  Soph 


Without  End 


Ain  Soph  Aur 


Infinite  Light 


These  three  are  the  Veils  of  negative  existence  behind  as  it  where  Kether. 

Arik  Anpin  - MACROPROSOPUS  or  the  vast  countenance  is  one  of  the  titles  of  Kether,  yet 
another  of  its  titles  is  the  Ancient  of  Days,  Aatik  Yomin.  Kether  or  the  vast  countenance  emanates  first 
as  Abba  the  supernal  Father,  and  Aima,  the  supernal  Mother.  Abba  is  referred  to  Yod  of  YHVH,  and 
Aima  is  referred  to  Heh  of  YHVH.  Elohim  is  a name  given  to  these  two  Hypostases  united. 


As  Elohim  they  are  considered  the  parents  of  the  Son,  Zauir  Anpin,  also  called 
MICROPROSOPUS,  or  the  lesser  countenance. 

Abba  is  referred  to  Yod  and  Chokmah.  Aima  is  referred  to  Heh  and  Binah.  Zauir  Anpin  is 
referred  to  the  6 Sephiroth  Chesed,  Geburah,  Tiphareth,  Netzach,  Hod,  Yesod  and  of  these  especially  to 
Tiphareth. 

Malkah  the  queen  and  Kalah  the  bride  are  titles  of  Malkuth  when  considered  as  the  spouse  of 
Zauir  Anpin,  the  Microprosopus. 

The  letters  of  the  name  YHVH  contain  these  meanings: 

Yod  is  referred  to  Abba. 

Heh  to  Aima. 

Vau  to  Zauir  Anpin. 

Heh  (1)  to  Malkah. 

These  letters  are  also  referred  to  the  four  worlds  and  the  four  suits  of  the  Tarot  thus: 


Yod’ 

Atziluth 

Wands 

Heh 

Briah 

Cups 

Vau 

Yetzirah 

Swords 

Heh 

(f) 

Assiah 

Pentacles 

82 


VOLUME  THREE 


There  are  ten  Sephiroth  in  each  of  the  four  worlds.  Each  Sephirah  has  its  own  ten  Sephiroth 
making  400  Sephiroth  in  all  - the  number  of  the  letter  Tau,  the  Cross,  the  Universe,  the  completion  of  all 
things. 

The  Tarot  is  referred  to  the  Tree  of  Life  in  the  following  manner. 

The  four  Aces  are  placed  on  the  throne  of  Kether.  The  remaining  small  cards  of  each  suit  are 
placed  on  the  respective  Sephiroth,  two  on  Chokmah,  three  on  Binah,  etc.  The  twenty  two  Trumps  are 
then  arranged  on  the  paths  between  them  according  to  the  letters  to  which  they  are  attributed.  The  King 
and  Queen  of  the  suit  are  placed  besides  Chokmah  and  Binah,  the  Knight  and  Knave  by  Tiphareth  and 
Malkuth.  The  Tarot  Trumps  thus  receive  the  equilibrium  of  the  Sephiroth  they  connect. 

ADMISSION  BADGES  USED  IN  THE  GRADE  OF  PHILOSOPHUS 

First  is  the  Calvary  Cross  of  twelve  squares. 


mm 

l-l  ' 

• . |q|  i 
If  " 

- Is I 1 


It  admits  to  the  path  of  Qoph,  the  29th  path,  and  refers  to  the  Zodiac  and  to  the  eternal  River  of 
Eden,  divided  into  four  heads  as  follows: 


83 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


NAHER  - The  River 

1.  Hiddikel 

2.  Pison 

3.  Gihon 

4.  Phrath  - Euphrates 

The  Pyramid  of  the  four  elements  admits  to  the  path  of  Tzaddi,  the  28th  path. 


On  the  sides  of  the  pyramid  are  the  Hebrew  names  of  the  elements.  On  the  apex  is  the  word 
ETH,  meaning  essence  and  on  the  base  is  the  word  OLAM,  meaning  world. 

The  next  Badge  is  the  Calvary  Cross  of  ten  squares  admitting  to  the  path  of  Peh,  Mars,  the  27th 

Path. 


The  ten  squares  are  referred  to  the  Ten  Sephiroth  in  balanced  disposition.  It  is  also  the  opened 
out  form  of  the  double  cube  of  the  Altar  of  incense. 

Another  Badge  is  the  Hegemon’s  Cross  admitting  to  the  Grade  of  Philosophus. 


This  Cross  embraces  Tiphareth,  Netzach,  Hod,  and  Yesod  resting  upon  Malkuth.  This  Cross  also 
refers  to  the  6 Sephiroth  of  Microprosopus  and  is  the  opened  out  form  of  the  cube. 


84 


VOLUME  THREE 


Finally  we  have  the  symbol  of  Venus  on  the  Tree  of  Life 


It  embraces  all  ten  Sephiroth  on  the  Tree.  It  is  a fitting  emblem  of  the  isis  of  Nature.  Since  it 
contains  all  the  Sephiroth  its  circle  should  be  made  larger  then  that  of  Mercury  shown  in  a previous 
diagram. 


85 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ANOTHER  ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  TREE 
There  are  various  formats  of  the  Sephiroth.  The  most  frequent  has  already  been  given,  but  there 
is  another  in  common  usage  and  will  be  seen  to  have  been  employed  in  some  of  the  large  Altar  diagrams 
of  both  the  Practicus  and  Philosophus  Grade.  It  is  often  referred  to  as  The  Seven  Palaces  of  Assiah 
attributed  to  the  ten  Sephiroth. 


This  drawing  represents  the  triad  of  elements  operating  through  the  Sephiroth  and  reflected 
downwards  into  the  Tree.  Air  is  reflected  straight  down  the  Middle  Pillar,  from  Kether  through 
Tiphareth  to  Yesod  and  the  upper  quadrant  of  Malkuth.  Water  is  relfected  cross-wise  from  Binah 
through  Chesed  to  Hod.  Fire  is  reflected  cross-wise  from  Chokmah  through  Geburah  to  Netzach. 
Malkuth  therefore  becomes  the  receptacle  of  the  other  three  elements. 


THE  REFLECTION  OF  THE  ELEMENTS  DOWN  THE  TREE 


86 


VOLUME  THREE 


MEDITATION  NUMBER  ONE 

Let  the  Neophyte  consider  a point  as  defined  in  mathematics  as  having  position  but  no 
magnitude  and  let  him  note  the  ideas  to  which  this  gives  rise.  Concentrating  his  faculties  on 
this,  as  a focus,  let  him  endeavour  to  realise  the  Immanance  of  the  Divine  throughout 
Nature,  in  all  her  aspects. 

Begin  by  finding  a position,  balanced,  but  sufficiently  comfortable.  Breath  rhythmically 
until  the  body  is  still  and  the  mind  quiet.  Keep  this  state  for  a few  minutes  at  first  and  for 
longer  as  you  get  more  used  to  preventing  the  mind  from  wandering.  Think  now  of  the 
subject  for  meditation  in  a general  way  then  choose  out  one  thought  or  image  and  follow 
that  to  its  conclusion. 

The  simplest  rhythm  for  the  beginner  is  the  Fourfold  Breath. 

1.  Empty  the  lungs  and  remain  thus  while  counting  4. 

2.  Inhale,  counting  4 so  that  you  feel  filled  with  breath  to  the  throat. 

3.  Hold  this  breath  while  counting  4. 

4.  Exhale,  counting  4 till  the  lungs  are  empty. 

This  should  be  practised,  counting  slowly  or  quickly  till  you  obtain  a rhythm  that  suits 
you  one  that  is  comforting  and  stilling. 

Having  attained  this,  count  the  breath  thus  for  two  or  three  minutes,  till  you  feel  quiet, 
and  then  proceed  with  the  meditation. 

MEDITATION  NUMBER  TWO 

Let  the  Zelator  meditate  on  a straight  line.  Let  him  take  a ruler  or  a pencil  and  by  moving 
it  a distance  equal  to  its  length,  outline  a square. 

Having  done  this,  let  him,  after  quieting  his  mind  with  the  rhythmic  breathing  taught  in  the 
first  meditation,  mentally  formulate  a cube,  and  endeavor  to  discover  the  significance  of 
this  figure  and  its  correspondences. 

Let  him  meditate  upon  minerals  and  crystals,  choosing  especially  a crystal  of  SALT,  and 
entering  into  it,  actually  feel  himself  of  crystalline  formation. 

Looking  out  on  the  Universe  from  this  standpoint,  let  him  identify  himself  with  the 
EARTH  SPIRITS  in  love  and  sympathy,  recalling  as  far  as  he  can  their  prayer  as  said  in  the 
closing  of  the  Zelator  Grade. 

Let  him  meditate  upon  the  EARTH  TRIPLICITY,  visualising  the  symbols  of  a BULL,  a 
VIRGIN,  a GOAT  which  stand  for  KERUBIC  EARTH  - MUTABLE  EARTH  - 
CARDINAL  EARTH. 

For  the  above  terms  consult  a simple  astrology  manual.  Make  notes  of  the  ideas  and 
pictures  which  arise  in  your  mind. 


87 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


MEDITATION  NUMBER  THREE 

Let  the  Theoricus  practise  the  Moon  Breath,  while  saying  mentally  the  word  AUM: 
(The  Moon  Breath  is  through  the  left  nostril  only.) 

Let  him  meditate  upon  the  waxing  and  waning  crescents,  while  visualising  a silver 
crescent  upon  an  indigo  background. 

Let  him  now  call  before  his  mind  the  Signs  of  the  Airy  Triplicity  and  enclosed  in  these,  let 
him  meditate  upon  the  numbers  nine  and  five  and  therewith  the  forms  of  the  Pentagram 
and  Pentangle. 

Let  him  now  rise  in  imagination  above  the  mineral  world  into  the  world  of  trees  and 
flowers  and  identify  himself  in  love  and  sympathy  with  the  Powers  of  the  Elements  behind 
these. 

Let  him  realise  the  mental  world  where  mind  rules  over  matter,  and  let  him  meditate 
upon  the  ideas  of  appearance  and  reality. 

MEDITATION  NUMBER  FOUR 

Let  the  Practicus  meditate  upon  the  Symbols  of  the  Rhomboid  and  the 
Vesica.  Let  him  seek  out  their  meanings  and  correspondences.  Let  him 
contemplate  the  symbol  Mercury  and  the  Number  8. 

Let  him  now  learn  to  control  his  emotions,  on  no  account  giving  way  to  anger,  hatred 
and  jealousy,  but  to  turn  the  force  he  hitherto  expended  in  these  directions  towards  the 
attainment  of  perfection,  that  the  malarial  marsh  of  his  nature  may  become  a clear  and 
limpid  lake,  reflecting  the  Divine  Nature  truly  and  without  distortion. 

Let  him  identify  himself  with  the  Powers  of  Water,  considering  the  Water  Triplicity  in  all 
its  aspects,  with  its  attributions  and  correspondences. 

MEDITATION  NUMBER  FIVE 

Let  the  PHILOSOPHUS  meditate  upon  the  symbol  of  the  Fire  Triangle  in  all  its 
aspects. 

Let  him  contemplate  the  symbol  of  the  Planet  VENUS  until  he  realises  the  Universal 
Love  which  would  express  itself  in  perfect  service  to  all  mankind  and  which  embraces 
Nature  both  visible  and  invisible. 

Let  him  identify  himself  with  the  powers  of  FIRE,  consecrating  himself  wholly  until  the 
Burnt  Sacrifice  is  consummated  and  the  Christ  is  conceived  by  the  Spirit.  Let  him 
meditate  upon  the  Triplicity  of  Fire  - its  attributes  and  correspondences. 


88 


VOLUME  THREE 


MEDITATION  NUMBER  SIX 

Let  the  Aspirant  meditate  upon  the  Cross  in  its  various  forms  and  aspects  as  shown  in  the 
Admission  Badges  throughout  the  Grades. 

Let  him  consider  the  necessity  and  prevalence  of  sacrifice  throughout  nature  and  religion.  Let  him 
realise  the  saying  of  the  Master,  ‘Whosoever  shall  save  his  life  shall  lose  it,  and  whosoever  shall  lose  his 
life  shall  save  it.’ 

‘Except  an  ear  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abideth  alone,  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth 
much  fruit.’ 

Let  him  endeavour  to  realise  his  own  place  and  relative  importance  in  the  Universe,  striving  to 
stand  outside  himself  and  allowing  only  such  claims  as  he  would  allow  to  another. 

Let  him  carefully  abstain  from  talking  of  himself,  his  feelings  or  experiences  that  he  may  gain 
continence  of  speech,  and  learn  to  control  the  wasteful  activities  of  his  mind. 

Let  him  contemplate  the  Sun  as  thinly  veiled  in  clouds. 


DEVELOPMENTAL  EXERCISES 
THE  SIGIL  OF  THE  HOLY  NAME 
By 

V.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 

The  Order  prescribed  certain  meditations  to  be  done  in  the  intervals  between  the 
Grades.  There  are  varying  reactions  to  these  - some  approving,  others  disapproving.  In  order 
to  fill  a gap  between  the  studies  of  the  Qabalah  and  the  more  advanced  magical  work  of  the 
Inner  Order,  gradually  over  the  years  I developed  a set  of  exercises  that  I found  to  be  very 
useful.  They  are  not,  strictly  speaking,  the  traditional  Golden  Dawn  exercises  or  meditations, 
but  they  are  based  essentially  on  the  techniques  in  vogue  in  the  Order.  These  exercises  will 
make  use  of  the  basic  methods  of  many  systems  such  as  rhythmic  breathing,  the  vibration 
of  names,  visualisation  of  images,  sigils  from  the  Rose,  and  many  others.  I recommend  them 
because  they  form  a kind  of  bridge  between  the  theoretical  work  of  the  Order  and  the  far 
more  technical  processes  that  are  given  later. 

Many  of  these  exercises  should  begin  with  rhythmic  breathing  in  order  to  establish 
some  degree  of  quiescence  of  body  and  mind.  The  Order  recommended  a four  fold  breath, 
that  is  to  inhale  to  the  count  of  four,  hold  the  breath  for  the  same  length  of  time  and  exhale 
to  the  count  of  four,  and  then  hold  for  four.  It  only  requires  a little  practice  a couple  of  times  a 
day  in  order  to  achieve  some  degree  of  expertise.  Some  of  the  signs  of  success  are:  a sense  of 
quiet  and  stillness  both  physically  and  mentally,  feeling  as  though  one  has  become 
energised,  and  above  all  that  there  is  a rippling  sensation  over  and  around  the  diaphragm. 
With  a little  regular  practice,  these  results  will  occur  fairly  quickly.  Then  you  can  proceed 
with  the  next  step.  Feel  free  to  modify  the  breathing  rhythm.  If  necessary  for  your  own 


89 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


comfort,  change  the  holding  period  to  two  instead  of  four.  Or,  leave  out  the  holding 
period  altogether  and  just  breath  in  to  the  count  of  four  and  exhale  to  the  same  count. 
Everything  depends  on  how  you  feel  about  what  you  are  doing. 

A diagram  accompanies  this  text.  It  depicts  a sigil  placed  over  a human  figure.  A sigil 
is  simply  a traditional  technical  term  meaning  a signature.  It  can  be  derived  either  from  the 
Rose,  as  depicted  later  in  this  volume,  or  from  a Kamea  or  magical  square,  also  given  later. 
The  signature  given  in  this  diagram  is  based  on  the  Hebrew  word  Eheieh  and  is  derived 
from  the  Rose.  As  described  later,  one  simply  draws  a line  from  the  first  Hebrew  letter  to 
the  next,  etc.,  until  the  Sigil  is  completed. 


SIGIL  OF  EHEIEH 

The  diagram  depicts  the  form  of  a human  being,  with  this  Sigil  superimposed.  Study 
it  carefully  first,  so  that  when  you  try  to  visualise  this  you  will  have  a clear  conception  of  what 
you  are  trying  to  do.  Sit  down  comfortably  in  a straight  backed  chair,  or  lie  down  on  a bed 


90 


VOLUME  THREE 


or  couch,  and  begin  the  process  with  a few  minutes  rhythmic  breathing.  Then 
visualize  this  Sigil  of  the  Holy  Name  in  black,  not  on  the  surface  of  your  body,  but  inside, 
within  your  own  being  - not  external  to  you.  Visualise  it  as  beginning  in  the  heart  region, 
ascending  to  the  head,  descending  straight  down  to  the  feet,  and  then  rises  up  to  the  heart 
once  more.  Don't  be  disturbed  if  your  mind  wanders  occasionally  or  often.  Just  patiently 
bring  it  back  to  the  topic  you  are  contemplating  and  proceed,  without  self-criticism.  It 
will  require  a good  deal  of  practice  to  achieve  a high  degree  of  concentration.  One  aid  you 
will  find  useful  is  to  vibrate  the  name  given  above  several  times,  audibly  rather  than  silently. 
It  is  simply  a device  to  facilitate  your  concentration. 

Do  this  morning  and  evening  for  some  weeks  if  need  be  until  you  become  aware  of 
something  going  on  within  which  you  have  not  noticed  before.  1 do  not  wish  to  describe  any  of 
the  results  possible  in  order  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  suggestion  intruding  into  your 
discipline,  but  whatever  the  result  is  it  will  encourage  you  and  provide  the  stimulus  to 
continue  to  bring  the  Divine  White  Light  into  operation  within  your  own  being.  A later 
exercise  described  in  the  Portal  Meditation  elaborates  this  in  what  is  called  the  Middle 
Pillar  technique.  But  for  the  time  being  this  Sigil  exercise  is  a splendid  preparation  for  later 
work.  Just  be  patient  and  faithful  - the  rest  will  follow  by  itself. 

As  expertise  develops,  change  the  color  of  the  Sigil  from  black  to  white.  Keep  the 
shape  intact,  in  other  words  do  not  change  anything  except  the  color.  Follow  the  program 
already  delineated  above. 

SENSITIVITY  TRAINING 

Procure  a set  of  cards,  either  ordinary  playing  cards  or  one  of  the  many  available 
Tarot  decks.  Remember  there  is  a Golden  Dawn  pack  which  may  be  obtained  from  any 
occult  bookstore  or  from  the  U.S.  Games  Systems,  Inc.  in  New  York  City.  Do  keep  in  mind 
some  of  the  teaching  given  in  the  preliminary  Tarot  document  earlier  in  this  book. 

Shuffle  the  pack  carefully  so  as  to  get  the  feel  of  the  cards  first,  as  well  as  to  get  some 
of  your  own  atmosphere  or  magnetism  into  the  cards.  Spend  a few  minutes  doing  this  and 
looking  at  the  cards  to  become  somewhat  familiar  with  the  way  they  look.  Shuffle  them 
once  more,  then  place  the  deck  face  downwards.  Touch  the  top  card  without  turning  it 
over.  While  touching  it  try  to  feel  (or  guess)  what  Suit  it  is.  Remember  - the  Suit,  not  the 
nature  of  the  card.  With  ordinary  playing  cards  feel  whether  it  is  Clubs,  Spades,  Diamonds  or 
Hearts.  With  the  Tarot  deck,  Wands,  Cups,  Swords,  Pentacles  or  any  of  the  Trumps.  Give 
your  imagination  free  rein.  Remember,  it  is  of  no  consequence  if  you  find  you  are  wrong 
when  you  turn  the  card  up.  Consider  the  whole  experiment  as  practice  or  as  a game.  It  might 
be  a good  idea  to  keep  a pencil  and  a sheet  of  paper  handy  so  that  you  may  enter  your 
findings. 

After  touching  the  top  card,  and  having  tried  to  sense  what  suit  it  is,  turn  the  card 
over.  Record  first  what  your  guess  was,  and  after  turning  the  card  over,  record  what  the 
card 


91 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


actually  was.  At  first,  and  perhaps  for  some  considerable  time,  you  may  find  yourself 
not  hitting  anything  right  at  all.  Do  not  permit  yourself  to  get  discouraged.  Just  continue 
the  practice.  After  a while  you  may  find  yourself  guessing  right  once  in  a dozen  times,  which 
is  not  at  all  bad.  With  repeated  practice,  you  may  find  yourself  guessing  the  right  suit  time  and 
time  again.  All  of  this  must  be  recorded.  This  will  ultimately  determine  what  your  degree  of 
accuracy  is,  and  therefore  how  your  sensitivity  is  developing.  Remember,  stick  to  guessing 
the  suit  only  at  first.  Later  on,  more  rigorous  tests  of  the  growing  sensitivity  can  be 
developed.  But  go  slowly.  One  step  at  a time. 

SENSITIVITY  TRAINING  II 

Shuffle  the  cards  thoroughly  as  before,  so  that  all  the  cards  are  well  distributed  and 
bear  little  relationship  to  their  former  positions.  Again,  place  the  sheet  of  paper  and  a pencil 
by  your  side  so  that  you  may  record  without  effort  the  results  of  your  practice. 

Then  lay  the  right  hand  on  the  top  of  the  first  card  of  the  pack  as  before,  face 
downwards.  Keep  it  there  for  a while.  Be  quiet  and  still,  breathing  easily.  Now  try  to  guess 
whether  the  card  is  a "pip,"  that  is  one  of  the  numbered  cards  from  Ace  or  1 to  10.  At  this 
juncture  do  not  be  concerned  about  the  Suit  as  you  did  before,  nor  the  color,  nor  any  other 
detail.  Just  the  number  of  the  card  itself. 

You  have  ten  choices.  Do  not  play  games  with  yourself  by  thinking  of  just  that,  or 
by  running  through  these  numbers  consecutively  in  your  mind.  Be  quiet,  and  while  your  hand 
is  resting  on  the  card,  wait  for  a particular  number  to  pop  into  your  mind.  As  before,  there 
will  be  many  errors,  naturally.  But  with  continued  practice,  you  will  surprise  yourself  by  the 
increasing  number  of  accurate  guesses  you  will  make.  At  times  you  will  feel  you  are  getting 
progressively  worse  instead  of  better.  Pay  little  attention  to  this,  discouraging  though  it 
may  appear  to  be.  Quickly  enough,  you  will  find  that  your  score  will  slowly  improve  and 
rise  considerably. 

Enter  these  results  on  the  paper  at  your  side.  This  is  imperative. 

When  you  feel  you  are  doing  well  at  this  game,  add  one  more  category  to  what  you 
are  doing.  Try  to  sense  or  guess  not  only  the  number,  but  the  Suit. 

If  you  are  using  the  Tarot  deck,  remember  Wands  and  Swords  are  compatible,  and  so 
are  Cups  and  Pentacles.  If  you  happen  to  hit  on  6 of  Cups  when  you  guessed  it  might  be  6 
of  Pentacles,  you  are  not  doing  too  badly.  Likewise  with  the  other  Suits.  7 of  Swords  is  not  a 
bad  find  for  a guess  of  7 of  Wands.  And  so  on,  etc. 

Be  patient  with  yourself,  and  do  not  expect  miracles  for  the  time  being.  Your  skill 
and  sensitivity  will  slowly  improve  as  you  proceed.  There  are  side  benefits  to  be  gained  from 
this  practice.  Apart  from  all  other  things  which  I will  gloss  over  here,  you  will  find  your 
intuition  becoming  more  finely  attuned  to  the  intimations  of  your  own  inner  and  higher 
being.  It  paves  the  way  to  becoming  aware  of  the  influence  and  guidance  of  your  own  higher 
and  divine  Genius,  which  is  one  of  the  major  goals  of  the  Great  Work. 


92 


VOLUME  THREE 


HOLY  GROUND 

Recall  the  biblical  story  of  Moses  hearing  the  voice  of  God  in  the  desert  telling  him 
to  take  off  his  sandals  for  the  ground  he  was  treading  on  was  Holy  Ground. 

As  part  of  the  initiatory  process,  it  is  as  necessary  to  sanctify  your  Malkuth  and  elevate 
it  to  the  higher  consciousness  of  Kether  as  it  is  to  bring  down  Godhead  into  the  holy 
kingdom.  Initiation  is  thus  a dual  process.  To  sensitize  the  lower  vehicles  and  to  invoke  the 
higher.  Properly  speaking,  this  dual  process  should  proceed  simultaneously,  but  in  order  to 
render  the  certainty  of  this  process,  this  exercise  was  devised  to  ensure  compliance  with 
tradition. 

Sit  down  comfortably  in  your  straight  backed  chair,  beginning  to  work  on  the 
rhythmic  breathing  process.  Remove  shoes  or  slippers,  so  that  the  feet  are  placed  firmly  on 
the  floor.  Then  try  to  imagine  that  flames  are  shooting  up  from  the  floor  beneath  you, 
flaming  not  merely  around  your  feet  but  through  them.  Before  beginning  the  exercise,  get 
some  idea  of  what  flames  look  like  from  a picture  or  photograph,  or  even  look  at  a gas 
burner.  If  you  have  a barbecue  in  your  back  yard  or  have  made  a bonfire  recently,  use  these 
as  models  for  your  mental  pictures. 

While  working  thus,  try  to  feel  that  your  feet  are  getting  hotter  and  hotter  because  of 
the  flames  underneath.  It  should  not  take  too  long  to  experience  the  sensation  of  heat  there, 
which  should  make  the  visualization  process  much  easier,  if  there  is  some  difficulty  when 
first  imagining  this,  do  not  hesitate  to  resort  to  any  artifice  to  help  achieve  the  appropriate 
sensation.  For  example,  obtain  some  Sloan's  liniment  or  Absorbine  Jr.  or  a patent  arthritic 
medication  named  HEET.  Daub  a small  quantity  of  any  one  of  these  substances  on  the  feet, 
either  directly  under  the  ankle,  or  making  a straight  line  with  the  dauber  from  heel  to  big  toe  in 
the  middle  of  the  sole  of  the  foot.  Since  the  skin  on  the  sole  is  much  thicker  than 
elsewhere,  you  may  have  to  have  several  applications  of  the  dauber  before  you  begin  to  feel 
any  sensation  from  the  dermo-irritant  effect  of  the  substance.  It  should  produce  some 
definite  physical  sensation  in  the  foot.  This  will  enable  your  imagination  to  function  more 
easily  and  vigorously  to  produce  fire  and  flame  sensations  in  the  feet. 

Following  the  terms  of  the  magical  tradition,  remember  that  the  feet  are  attributed  to 
Malkuth  on  the  Tree  of  Life,  to  which  various  divine  and  angelic  names  belong.  Use  these  as 
often  as  you  wish  both  to  aid  your  concentration  as  well  as  to  invoke  the  forces  of  Earth  and 
Fire.  Adonai  ha-Aretz  is  the  Divine  Name  governing  Earth,  while  YHVH  Tzabaoth  is  that 
attributed  to  Fire.  If  you  are  not  sure  of  the  other  names,  refresh  your  memory  by 
referring  to  the  appropriate  tables  or  Knowledge  Lectures.  Then  use  these  names 
vigorously  and  always  audibly.  You  are  committed  by  the  very  nature  of  this  system  to 
invoke  the  highest  divine  Names  you  know  when  working  on  any  magical  topic. 

Do  this  exercise  for  a minimum  of  fifteen  minutes  twice  a day  for  as  long  a period  of 
time  as  you  can,  and  of  course  make  a record  of  your  results.  In  the  event  you  are  allergic  to 
any 


93 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


of  the  medications  mentioned,  wash  the  area  thoroughly  with  soap  and  water,  or 
whatever  anti-allergic  product  you  are  accustomed  to  use.  Before  commencing  their  use, 
test  the  product  out  by  daubing  a small  quantity  on  your  forearm.  If  there  is  no  allergic 
response,  continue.  But  if  there  is  evidence  of  allergy,  wash  it  off  and  refrain  from  its 
further  use. 

THE  QABALISTIC  CROSS 

This  magical  gesture  is  referred  to  again  and  again  throughout  the  whole  Golden 
Dawn  system.  The  correct  way  of  doing  this  is  as  follows: 

1.  Stand  upright,  facing  East.  Imagine  you  are  growing  very  tall.  So  tall  that 
your  head  is  above  the  clouds,  while  beneath  your  feet  the  Earth  seems  like  a small  globe  on 
which  you  are  standing.  Spend  a few  minutes  trying  to  achieve  this  piece  of  visualisation. 
The  success  of  the  whole  manouevre  depends  on  this. 

2.  Intone  or  vibrate  Atoh,  while  touching  the  forehead  with  the  forefinger  of 
the  right  hand.  Imagine  that  above  you  is  the  White  Light  of  Kether,  from  which  a ray 
descends  as  you  proceed  with  the  exercise. 

3.  Bring  the  hand  down  from  the  head  to  the  middle  of  the  chest  and  intone  or 
vibrate  Malkuth.  Feel  that  the  ray  of  Light  descends  all  the  way  to  the  feet,  not  simply  to  the 
chest  which  you  are  touching.  This  establishes  the  shaft  of  the  cross  in  Light. 

4.  Move  the  hand  over  to  the  left  shoulder,  and  vibrate  ve-Gedulah.  While 
doing  this,  imagine  that  the  entire  shoulder  is  ablaze  with  light  ready  to  move  over  to  the 
right  side  to  form  the  cross  bar  of  Light. 

5.  Move  the  hand  over  to  the  right  shoulder,  and  vibrate  ve-Geburah.  This  will 
complete  the  cross  bar,  so  that  the  entire  cross  is  now  formulated. 

6.  Clasp  the  hands  over  the  chest,  and  vibrate  le-Olahm  Amen.  As  you  do  this, 
try  to  become  acutely  aware  of  this  gigantic  cross  of  light  formulated  through  your  entire 
body,  now  gigantic  and  extending  high  into  upper  space. 

Practice  this  again  and  again.  Do  not  hurry  this  procedure.  Do  it  slowly,  slowly 
enough  to  obtain  some  clear  visualizations  of  the  descending  shaft  of  light  with  the  cross 
bar  at  shoulder  level.  Vibrate  the  names  strongly,  if  need  be  several  times,  not  only  to 
improve  your  concentration  but  to  help  formulate  the  cross  more  clearly  and  vividly. 

It  should  be  mentioned  that  once  the  exercise  is  over,  the  whole  process  should  be 
reversed.  That  is,  one  should  imagine  oneself  gradually  reassuming  one's  normal  size  and 
absorb  the  cross  of  light  into  oneself.  Close  with  the  sign  of  Silence.  With  time  you  will 
become  more  conscious  of  the  overshadowing  presence  of  your  higher  and  divine  Genius, 
upon  whose  aid  and  guidance  you  can  count.  But  you  must  first  open  yourself  to  Its 
presence  by  making  the  appropriate  gestures  and  the  right  kind  of  aspiration. 

This  may  be  done  as  often  as  you  wish.  There  are  no  set  times  for  this  practice.  The 
more  often  the  better. 


94 


VOLUME  THREE 


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

Kether  is  Yechidah  in  man,  the  higher  and  divine  Genius,  the  holy  Spirit.  This  has 
been  established  thoroughly  in  all  that  has  gone  before.  It  is  the  basis  of  the  Qabalah  and  of 
the  whole  Order  system.  This  exercise  is  to  further  assist  you  to  gain  a deeper  apprehension 
of  its  constant  overshadowing  presence.  All  the  work  you  have  been  doing  before  - the 
theoretical  intellectual  work  relating  to  the  Qabalah  etc.,  is  really  to  sharpen  your  intuitive 
faculties,  to  open  yourself  to  a higher  consciousness. 

The  symbol  for  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Hebrew  letter  Shin.  Since  every  Hebrew  letter 
is  a number  as  well,  you  should  already  have  learned  that  its  numerical  value  is  300.  The 
Hebrew  words  for  the  Spirit  of  the  Gods  are  Ruach  Elohim  (Roo-ahch  Eh-loh-heem). 

These  words  also  have  a numerical  value  of  300;  thus  the  letter  Shin  can  well  serve  as  their 
symbol. 

Again,  sit  upright  in  your  straight  backed  chair,  and  immediately  establish  the 
rhythmic  breath.  By  now  you  should  be  fairly  adept  in  accomplishing  this  without  much 
fanfare. 

Above  the  head  visualize  a large  letter  Shin  in  flaming  red.  Visualize  it  as  vividly  as 
possible  until  you  feel  it  vibrating  just  above  your  scalp.  The  divine  Name  attributed  to 
Kether  is  Eheieh.  Vibrate  this  often,  as  recommended  with  the  previous  exercises  since  it 
serves  both  as  an  aid  to  your  concentration  and  to  link  you  up  with  the  higher  forces  of  your 
own  being. 

As  with  previous  exercises,  should  any  difficulty  arise,  a single  daub  of  the 
recommended  medical  substances  should  create  enough  skin  irritation  on  the  scalp  to  enable 
you  to  focus  all  your  attention  there  with  relative  ease.  Again,  I recommend  recording 
whatever  results,  or  lack  of  them,  that  you  obtain,  in  your  private  record  book. 

THE  CLEANSING  BREATH 

This  is  an  accompaniment  of  the  rhythmic  breath  and  should  be  used  to  terminate 
any  and  all  the  exercises  and  practices  in  this  section. 

It  is  really  very  simple.  Take  a full  breath,  in  which  all  the  parts  of  the  chest  are 
employed  to  full  capacity.  When  the  chest  is  fully  inflated,  hold  the  breath  for  a few 
seconds.  Then  pucker  up  the  lips  as  though  you  were  about  to  whistle,  though  do  not  blow 
out  the  cheeks.  Then  exhale  the  air  out  vigorously  through  the  opening  in  the  mouth.  Let  this 
opening  be  a narrow  one,  and  puff  out  only  a little  air  at  a time. 

Pause  for  a while,  still  retaining  the  balance  of  the  air.  Repeat  the  process,  that  is 
continue  to  puff  the  air  out  through  the  opening  of  the  mouth  with  some  force  or  vigor. 
Pause  once  more,  and  repeat  until  all  the  air  is  gone.  This  will  force  the  chest  to  rebound 
almost  automatically  when  the  exhalation  is  completed  in  this  way.  If  there  is  a little 
dizziness  due  to  hyperventilation,  stop  and  sit  down  for  a moment  or  two  before  resuming. 
Repeat  this  type  of  breath  over  a period  of  time  until  it  can  be  performed  with  ease  and 
comfort. 


95 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


PRITHIVI 

You  have  already  been  introduced  in  a rather  superficial  way  to  the  Hindu  tattwa 
system.  Now  we  will  employ  these  tattwas  in  a practical  way,  as  an  introduction  to  the 
possibility  of  self-initiation,  in  steps  as  it  were. 

The  diagram  in  the  colour  plate  section  of  this  book  shows  a square.  Imagine  it  to  be 
yellow.  It  is  the  symbol  of  Earth  in  Hindu  psychology  - Prithivi.  It  represents  anything  in  its 
solid,  physical  and  tangible  state,  with  a host  of  other  meanings  that  you  will  come  to 
discover  in  the  course  of  your  working  with  these  exercises.  Look  at  this  large  yellow  square 
for  a moment  or  two,  then  close  your  eyes  to  imagine  it  enclosing  you.  Feel  as  if  you  are 
sitting  in  it,  or  standing  in  or  against  a yellow  wall.  Do  not  try  any  tricks  with  this  yellow 
square,  such  as  obtaining  complementary  colors  or  imagining  that  you  are  passing  through 
imaginary  doors,  etc.  Just  see  it  as  it  is  - a large  yellow  square  in  which  you  are  sitting.  Hold 
your  attention  to  this  and  only  this. 

Then  following  the  terms  of  our  esoteric  tradition,  a series  of  hierarchical  names  have 
to  be  vibrated  in  order  to  place  you  in  total  harmony  with  the  forces  you  are  dealing  with.  As 
the  Adeptus  Minor  ritual  indicates,  colors  are  not  symbols  of  forces;  they  are  elemental 
forces.  Yellow  is  not  a symbol  of  anything.  It  is  a specific  subtle  type  of  energy  in  and  for 
itself.  These  energies  can  be  activated  by  the  use  of  the  appropriate  divine  and  angelic 
names,  enabling  the  energies  to  revitalize  and  transform  your  various  psychosomatic 
vehicles  into  the  sensitive  receivers  they  need  to  be  if  you  are  to  achieve  success  in  the  Great 
Work. 

The  divine  Name  is  Adonai  ha-Aretz,  the  Archangelic  Name  being  Auriel.  Vibrate 
these  names  vigorously  and  frequently  both  to  facilitate  concentration  and  until  your  body 
and  all  therein  is  vibrating  and  tingling  exquisitely.  When  you  experience  that,  you  will 
know  that  you  are  on  the  right  track.  Persist  in  this  for  some  considerable  time,  doing  it  a 
couple  of  times  a day.  Record  your  results. 


VAYU 

This  is  a large  blue  circle,  again  to  be  found  in  the  coloured  plate  section  of  this 
book.  Imagine  that  it  encloses  you.  This  blue  circle  is  called  Vayu,  attributed  to  the  element  of 
Air.  Again,  remember  that  it  is  being  employed  to  carry  on  the  slow  but  inevitable  process 
of  preparing  you  for  initiation.  It  is  being  accomplished  in  small  increments,  to  enable  you  to 
adjust  to  the  process  without  undue  strain  or  stress. 

Follow  a procedure  similar  to  the  preceding  one.  Imagine  you  are  seated  or 
standing  against  a wall  on  which  is  inscribed  a large  light  blue  circle,  sitting  or  standing. 
Do  not  attempt  anything  beyond  what  is  here  described. 

In  accordance  with  the  western  magical  tradition,  you  are  going  to  vibrate  the 
highest  divine  Names  that  you  know,  in  order  to  align  yourself  with  spiritual  reality  and  to 
protect  yourself  against  mishap.  The  divine  Name  is  Shaddai  El  Chai.  At  the  moment  we 
are  not 


96 


VOLUME  THREE 


concerned  with  the  literal  meaning  of  these  names.  We  know  they  have  a 
significant  vibratory  effect,  and  their  use  helps  tremendously  in  bringing  the  mind  back  to 
focus.  Do  this  exercise  as  often  as  you  see  fit  until  your  mind  concentrates  easily  on  the 
image,  and  until  you  feel  the  awakening  of  tingling  and  vibration  sensations  within  your 
whole  being. 

Follow  a similar  procedure  with  the  remaining  tattwas.  Apas  the  silver  crescent  for 
Water,  Tejas  the  red  triangle  for  Fire,  and  Akasa  the  black  egg  for  Spirit.  The  Knowledge 
Lectures  will  provide  the  appropriate  Names  for  use  with  each  one. 

LOVE 

This  magical  way  of  life  is  characterized  by  its  total  lack  of  sentimentality.  It  is 
direct,  straightforward  and  unequivocal  in  its  dealings  with  the  different  components  of 
your  psychospiritual  make  up  and  your  subsequent  relationships  with  the  people  in  your 
environment. 

But  this  does  not  mean  to  imply  that  the  emotional  and  spiritual  components  of  man 
are  regarded  with  disdain  or  of  little  account.  On  the  contrary:  Love  is  the  law,  love  under 
will.  Without  love,  all  one's  working  are  sterile  and  will  avail  one  nothing.  But  love  must 
accord  with  law,  with  the  scheme  of  things,  and  of  course  fit  in  with  the  general 
philosophical  and  theoretical  grounds  of  the  magical  tradition. 

It  is  an  interesting  and  most  useful  observation  that  there  is  only  one  planetary 
symbol  which  embraces  all  of  the  Sephiroth  on  the  Tree  of  Life.  It  does  this  without  any 
strain  or  force,  as  you  will  see  from  the  acompanying  diagram.  This  planet  is  Venus,  the 
planet  of  love.  We  are  not  now  concerned  with  any  specific  astrological  attributions  or 
meanings  other  than  that  Venus  is  more  or  less  equivocal  with  love.  The  Hebrew  word  is 
either  Ahavoh  or  Chesed,  one  of  the  Sephiroth.  Chesed  means  loving  kindness.  Associate 
these  words  with  the  symbol  of  Venus  which  is  a circle  astride  a cross. 


Consult  the  diagram,  noting  how  all  the  ten  Sephiroth  fit  into  its  geometrical  form. 
Then  assume  your  meditative  posture  in  the  upright  straight  backed  chair,  commencing 
with  the 


97 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


rhythmic  breath.  Then  visualize  the  symbol  Venus  synthesizing  the  whole  Tree, 
which  by  now  you  have  learned  is  the  glyph  of  your  own  self,  the  whole  self.  Back  into  the 
figure  as  it  were,  feeling  that  the  planetary  symbol  is  conterminous  with  your  being. 

There  are  no  artifices  that  you  can  employ  here  to  conjure  up  a sensation  or  emotion 
of  love.  But  you  can,  while  meditating,  reflect  on  what  love  is,  whom  you  have  loved,  and 
how  you  felt.  Concentrate  on  all  these  feelings  and  emotions,  while  imagining  you  are  the 
symbol  Venus.  Accompany  this  concentration  with  the  simplest  type  of  rhythmic 
breathing,  counting  4 in  and  4 out. 

For  a short  time,  watch  the  breath  enter  the  nostrils,  thinking  The  breath  flows  in, 
and  then  as  it  leaves  the  nostrils  The  breath  flows  out. This  is  simple.  Maintain  this  exercise 
day  in  and  day  out  until  you  begin  to  acquire  the  feeling  and  some  of  the  subtleties 
connected  with  it. 

Then,  with  this  becoming  habitual,  change  the  language  in  your  mind  to  Love  flows  in 
to  me,  and  then  when  exhaling  Love  flows  out  from  me.  Meditate  that  love  flows  into  you 
from  Kether,  the  most  High,  and  from  you  with  your  blessing  to  every  single  being  in  the 
whole  universe.  You  may  wish  to  employ  one  of  the  lovely  passages  from  the  traditional 
rituals  of  the  Golden  Dawn  while  breathing  out  love  to  the  whole  world.  Such  as:  Holy  art 
thou,  Lord  of  the  Universe,  for  Thy  glory  flows  out  to  the  ends  of  the  Universe,  rejoicing. 


98 


VOLUME  THREE 


99 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  FOUR 


BASIC  TECHNIQUES 


100 


VOLUME  THREE 


101 


VOLUME  FOUR 


VOLUME  FOUR 

BASIC  TECHNIQUES 

GENERAL  ORDERS 

Members  of  the  Second  Order  in  Caledonia  are  requested  not  to  arrange  privately  for 
Second  Order  teaching  with  private  members  in  Anglia  or  elsewhere.  All  instructions  will  be 
arranged  for  on  application  to  headquarters  in  Caledonia  as  well  as  manuscripts  supplied  in  this 
Order,  and  examinations  arranged. 

Members  are  requested  to  strengthen  rather  than  weaken  their  central  authority,  and  to 
work  in  harmony. 

Approved  by  the  Chief  Adept  of  the  Order,  G.H.  Frater  D.D.C.F.  7-4.  (September  1897, 
Revised  in  1898.) 

Every  member  of  the  Inner  Order  has  been  admitted  by  the  permission  of  the  Chief 
Adept,  and  every  member  only  retains  his  membership  by  the  continued  approval  of  the  Chief 
Adept  in  Brittania. 

There  is  no  admission  fee,  nor  annual  subscription.  But  inasmuch  as  the  Chiefs  have 
made  themselves  liable  for  certain  expenditures  by  establishing  and  maintaining  a Home  for  the 
Order  in  London,  they  anticipate  that  each  member  will  assist,  in  accordance  with  his  means,  in 
supporting  the  Order,  and  supplying  the  funds  necessary  for  the  general  maintenance  of  the 
Home,  the  expenses  of  assemblies,  and  the  extension  of  the  Library. 

The  Chief  Adept  — the  G.H.  Frater  D.D.C.F.  — is  now  the  source  of  all  official 
instruction.  The  Chief  Adept  in  Charge,  G.H.  Frater  N.O.M.,  is  his  executive  Officer.  He  also 
now  holds  the  office  of  Registrar  of  the  Second  Order,  and  to  him  all  communications 


1 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


and  appeals  are  to  be  addressed.  The  V.H.  Soror  Shemeber  acts  as  Assistant  Registrar  to 
supervise  the  circulation  of  Rituals,  etc. 

Continuance  of  membership  of  the  Second  Order  implies  a contract  to  return  to  the 
Registrar  on  demand,  or  upon  resignation,  demission  or  expulsion,  all  documents,  rituals,  rolls, 
implements,  and  insignia  possessed  as  an  Adeptus  Minor. 

Membership  also  implies  an  assent  to  the  right  of  the  Chief  Adept  to  publish  to  all  other 
members,  the  fact  and  cause  of  any  suspension,  resignation,  demission,  or  expulsion  from  the 
Second  Order. 

Every  member  is  expected  to  attend  the  Annual  Ceremony  on  the  Corpus  Christi  Day  or 
to  send  to  the  Registrar  before  the  date  of  assembly  a reasonable  excuse  for  absence.  The  fact  of 
the  existence  of  a Home  for  the  Second  Order  as  well  as  the  address  thereof,  is  to  be  preserved 
as  a secret  from  every  member  of  the  Outer  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  as  much  as  from  those 
outside  the  pale  of  the  Order. 

The  Adepti  assembled  at  the  Home  form  a Council  which  may  take  cognisance  of  all 
matters  affecting  the  welfare  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  and  of  the  Second  Order.  They 
may  report  any  Resolution,  arrived  at  by  a majority  of  two  thirds  of  those  present,  at  any  council 
to  the  Registrar,  who  shall  place  the  Resolution  before  the  Chief  Adept,  but  such  Council  must 
be  a representative  one. 

Membership  of  the  Second  Order  implies  a desire  and  an  effort  to  make  progress  in  the 
special  studies  therein  taught.  As  in  the  Outer  Order,  the  Roll  will  be  revised  once  a year,  and  if 
the  G.H.  Chiefs  consider  that  any  member  has  failed  to  make  such  efforts  at  progress  as  might 
be  ressonably  expected,  they  may  call  upon  any  member  for  an  explanation.  If  this  latter  is  not 
deemed  satisfactory,  it  may  be  followed  by  suspension,  or  an  edict  of  degradation  to  the  rank  of 
a Lord  of  the  Portal,  or  of  cessation  of  membership. 

Offences  against  the  terms  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  Obligation  are  deemed  of  the  utmost 
gravity,  while  infraction  of  executive  regulations  unless  repeated  and  indefensible,  will  be 
deemed  of  less  grave  importance.  The  Chiefs  hope  that  private  differences  between  members 
will  be  amicably  arranged  in  private,  as  they  have  no  wish  to  interfere  in  such  matters. 

Members  should  at  all  times  be  very  careful  not  to  shew  any  disrespect  to  the  personal 
religious  feelings  of  other  members. 

Notices  will  be  from  time  to  time  posted  in  the  Library,  in  reference  to  minor 
regulations,  price  of  the  books,  and  to  the  holding  of  classes  for  instruction. 

Whenever  one  Adept  writes  to  another  Adeptus  Minor  on  Second  Order  matters,  he  must 
stamp  the  envelope  in  a peculiar  manner;  viz,  in  the  usual  corner,  but  with  the  stamp  turned 
around,  so  that  the  face  looks  upwards  — like  C.R.C.  in  the  Pastos. 

You  are  particularly  requested  to  think  and  speak  at  all  times  with  tolerance  and  respect 
of  all  other  Schools  of  true  Occultism,  and  of  the  Eastern  Philosophy  as  contrasted  with 
Hermeticism  and  the  Rosicrucian  fraternity. 


2 


VOLUME  FOUR 


The  works  of  the  Lake  Harris  school  are  better  avoided.  The  H.  B.  of  L.  is  condemned, 
as  of  course  are  Luciferian  or  Palladistic  teachings.  The  so-called  Rose  Croix  of  Sir  Peladan  is 
considered  as  an  ignorant  perversion  of  the  Name,  containing  no  true  knowledge  and  not  even 
worthy  of  the  title  of  an  occult  order.  The  Black  Mass  is  naturally  by  its  own  confession  of  the 
evil  magic  school.  The  Martinists,  as  long  as  they  adhere  to  the  teachings  of  their  Founder, 
should  not  be  out  of  harmony  with  the  R.R.  et  A.C. 

Regulations  for  the  conduct  of  the  progress  of  a member  through  the  Zelator  sub-grade 
of  the  grade  of  Adeptus  Minor. 

FIRST  STAGE  - NEOPHYTE  ADEPTUS  MINOR 

1.  Admission  ceremony.  After  which  receive  Ritual  A which  consists  of  general 
instructions. 

The  Adeptus  Minor  Ritual  is  to  be  thoroughly  studied  and  the  clauses  of  the  Obligation 
as  referred  to  the  Sephiroth  are  to  be  impressed  upon  the  memory. 

2.  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram.  Commit  the  system  to  memory. 

3.  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram.  Commit  the  system  to  memory. 

4.  Receive  ritual  U,  the  Microcosm,  to  be  attentively  studied  though  not  learned  by  heart. 

5.  Receive  Ritual  Z-l  and  Z-3. 

6.  Receive  Ritual  D and  make  Lotus  wand  to  be  consecrated  after  approval  of  Chief  in 
Charge. 

7.  Receive  Ritual  E and  F,  and  make  Rose  Cross,  and  consecrate  it  after  approval  as 

before. 

8.  Receive  Ritual  G,  and  make  and  consecrate  the  five  Implements  as  before. 

9.  Receive  Ritual  K,  the  Consecration  Ceremony.  And  M-the  Hermes  Vision  and  Lineal 
figures,  and  W-Hodos  Chamelionis. 

10.  Receive  and  study  Flying  Rolls  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  inclusive  at  any  period 
during  the  first  stage. 

The  Adept  must  pass  Examinations  marked  A and  B at  the  end  of  this  First  Stage,  and 
thus  become  a Zelator  Adeptus  Minor. 

(Note.  By  permission  of  the  Chief  Adept,  6,  7,  and  8 may  be  taken  immediately  after  3. 
Then  4 and  5.) 


SECOND  STAGE  - ZELATOR  ADEPTUS  MINOR 

11.  Receive  and  study  Flying  Rolls  11,  12,  14,20,21,26,28,29,  30,  and  may  now  pass  C, 
G,  and  E examinations. 


THIRD  STAGE  - TAROT  SYSTEM 

12.  Receive  and  study  Rituals  N,  0,  P,  Q,  R.  Must  now  pass  G,  C,  D,  and  Eexaminations. 


3 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


FOURTH  STAGE  - ENOCHIAN  SYSTEM 

13.  Receive  and  study  Rituals  H,  S,  T,  X,  Y.  Must  now  pass  F examination. 

FIFTH  STAGE 

14.  Receive  and  study  Rituals  Z-2,  and  practise  Consecration  and  Invocation.  Must  pass 
H Examination.  Practical  success  in  Ceremonials  of  Z-2  is  required. 

These  Rituals  and  Flying  Rolls  may  be  sent  by  mail  covered  and  fastened  up  against 
inspection.  Members  must  return  them  in  a similar  manner.  If  they  do  not  register  them,  they 
will  be  held  liable  to  replace  them  if  lost  in  transit.When  a document  is  marked  'To  be  kept.  . 
.days'  this  must  not  be  exceeded. 

On  the  completion  of  this  course  of  study  and  the  passing  of  the  eight  examinations 
referred  to,  the  Chief  Adepts  may,  at  their  discretion,  admit  the  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor  to  the 
subgrade  of  Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor.  But  there  exists  no  actual  right  to  such  higher  grade.  This 
course  may  be  completed  within  two  years. 

The  examinations  leading  from  the  sub-grades  of  Neophyte  and  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor 
to  the  sub-grade  of  Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor. 

The  examinations  are  partly  viva  voce,  partly  written  in  the  presence  of  the  Examiner, 
and  partly  written  at  home.  In  the  latter  case,  manuscripts  may  be  referred  to,  but  no  personal 
assistance  may  be  obtained  under  the  pain  of  entire  rejection. 

No  Adept  will  be  admitted  to  sub-grade  of  Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor  unless  he  shows  a 
competent  knowledge  of  every  one  of  these  subjects.  Adepts  who  have  passed  any  examinations 
are  required  to  refrain  from  supplying  information  as  to  the  questions  and  procedure  they  have 
experienced  to  any  other  Adept  until  he  has  passed  the  same  examination.  The  order  of  passing 
the  examinations  has  already  been  defined. 

The  Examiner  in  Chief  reserves  the  right  to  make  further  regulations  as  required,  as  to 
procedure  after  failures  to  pass  these  examinations,  or  may  subsequently  insist  on  the 
Examinations  being  taken  in  any  different  order  than  already  laid  down. 

Z.A.M.  TO  Th.  A.M. 

EIGHT  EXAMINATIONS 
A.  PRELIMINARY 

Part  I Written.  Part  2 Viva  voce  and  Practical  in  presence  of  Examiner.  No  part  at  home. 

The  Obligation,  Proof  of  familiarity  with  all  clauses. 

Minutum  Mundum  diagrams.  Names,  Letters,  Colors,  Tarots,  with  Tarot  attributions  of 
Sephiroth  and  Paths. 

Rose  and  Cross  Sigils.  Draw  Sigil  for  any  given  name. 

Supreme  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram.  Allotment  of  Elements,  names  and  forces;  mode  of 
drawing  any  or  all. 

In  Part  1,  the  Ceremonials  must  show  'effect'  as  well  as  verbal  accuracy. 


4 


VOLUME  FOUR 


B.  ELEMENTAL 

Part  I Written,  and  Part  I viva  voce  in  presence  of  Examiner.  No  part  at  home. 

The  Magical  Implements.  Sword,  Cup,  Wand,  Dagger  and  Pantacle  and  Lotus  Wand. 

The  construction,  constitution,  symbolism  of  these  and  rules  for  their  use.  The  dangers  of 
imperfect  construction  and  ignorant  use.  Ceremonies  of  Consecration,  Formulae  of  Invocation. 

Z.A.M.  TO  Th.  A.M. 

C.  PSYCHIC 

Spirit  Vision  and  Astral  Projection. 

Part  I.  In  presence  of  Examiner,  viva  voce  and  Practical.  Describe  results  with  symbol 
supplied.  Judging  Tattwa  cards  and  visions  from  Tattwa  cards. 

Part  2.  In  the  absence  of  the  Examiner,  assisted  if  desired  by  manuscripts  and  lectures, 
but  without  personal  assistance.  Written  essays  on  experience  with  symbols  of  Tattwas,  made  by 
the  Candidate  but  chosen  by  the  Examiner. 

Z.  A.  M.  TO  Th.  A.  M. 

D.  DIVINATION 

Astrology,  Geomancy,  Tarot.  The  practice  of  Divination  by  these  three  systems.  Part  2. 
Divination  by  all  three  schemes  upon  a given  subject.  Report  in  writing  to  be  done  at  home  — 
without  personal  assistance. 

Part  3.  A supplementary  viva  voce  examination  if  required. 

Z.A.  M.  TO  Th.  A.  M. 

E.  MAGIC 

Talismans  and  Flashing  Tablets  — their  formation  and  consecration.  Ascending  to  the 
planes.  Formation  of  Angelic  and  Telesmatic  Figures  from  Letters  of  Name  supplied. 

Vibrating  mode  of  pronouncing  Divine  Names.  The  actual  vibration  of  ADONAI HA- 
ARETZ  until  radiance  of  Aura  is  established. 

Part  1.  Perform  Ceremony  of  Invocation  or  Banishing  of  the  forces  of  any  given  Sign, 
Planet  or  Element. 

From  a given  symbol,  travel  to  the  Plane  and  ascend  vibrating  the  proper  Names,  etc. 
Vibration  of  ADONAI  HA-ARETZ  until  radiance  suffices. 

Part  2.  At  home.  Make  and  consecrate  a Talisman  for  a given  purpose.  Make  and  charge 
three  flashing  tablets,  viz:  for  an  Element,  a Planet  and  a Sign. 

Draw  and  colour  Angelic  figures  or  Elemental  figures  appropriate  to  these  as  may  be 
required. 


5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Z.  A.  M.  TO  Th.  A.  M. 

F.  ELEMENTAL  ENOCHIAN  TABLETS 

Especially  the  10  Servient  square  of  each  Lesser  Angle  as  to  Angel,  Sphinx  and  God. 
Chess  play,  relation  of  pieces  to  Tarots,  etc.,  as  taught  in  Y.  1.  and  Y.2.  Rituals. 

Part  1.  Written  in  presence  of  Examiner.  Ability  to  fill  up  all  attributions  of  any  given 
Lesser  Angle.  Viva  voce  if  required. 

Part  2.  Written  report  of  Astral  visit  to  certain  squares,  with  the  buildings  and  colourings 
of  the  division  of  each  square,  and  drawings  coloured  of  appropriate  Angel,  Sphinx  and  Pyramid 
God,  as  required. 

Z.  A.  M.  TO  Th.  A.  M. 

G.  SYMBOLICAL 

Symbols  and  Formulae  from  the  Neophyte  Ritual.  Explain  all  allusions  of  any  paragraph 
and  the  symbolism  of  any  Robe,  Lamen,  Wand  or  Action.  Also  the  Neophyte  Secret  Words  and 
the  Coptic  Alphabet. 

Viva  Voce  and  written  in  the  presence  of  the  Examiner  at  his  discretion. 

Consecration  and  Evocation. 

A ceremony  on  the  Formulae  of  Ritual  Z-2  must  be  performed  before  the  Examiner,  and 
must  meet  with  his  approval  as  to  method,  execution  and  effect. 

The  Chief  Adept  in  charge  desires  that  each  Adept  will  procure  a small  manuscript  book, 
and  enter  for  himself  the  titles  and  subdivisions  of  all  the  Examinations,  with  this  phrase  written 
out  for  each  examination: 

'I,  the  undersigned,  do  this  day  certify  that  I have  duly  examined  and  am  satisfied 
with  attainments  which  have  been  shown.' 

This  book  must  then  be  shown  at  each  examination,  and  also  on  admission  to  the  Grade 
of  Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor. 

CATALOGUE  OF  MANUSCRIPTS 

A.  General  Orders. 

B.  Ritual  of  Pentagram. 

C.  Ritual  of  Hexagram. 

D.  Lotus  Wand. 

E.  Rose  Cross. 

F.  Sigils  from  the  Rose. 

G.  Five  Implements. 

H.  Enochi  Clavis  or  the  Tablets  of  Enoch. 

I.  Adeptus  Minor  Obligation. 


6 


VOLUME  FOUR 


J.  Consecration  Ceremony  Of  The  Vault. 

K.  History. 

M.  Hermes  Vision.  Lineal  Figures. 

N.  Tarot  Description. 

O.  Astronomic  — Tarot. 

P.  Tarot  Star  Maps. 

Q.  Key  to  Tarot  divination. 

R.  Tabulated  Rules,  Tarot. 

S.  Enochian  Attributions  — Official. 

T.  The  Enochian  Calls. 

U.  Microcosm. 

V.  Hodos  Chamelionis. 

X.  Pyramid  Gods. 

Y — 1 . Chess  and  Chaturanga. 

Y — 2.  Chess  Formulae  and  Rules. 

Z — 1.  Upon  the  Neophyte  Ritual. 

Z — 2.  Ceremonial  Magic. 

Z — 3.  Simbolism 


CATALOGUE  OF  FLYING  ROLLS 
../gdrolls/flyl.htm 

1.  Warnings. 

2.  Purity  and  Will. 

3.  Administrative. 

4.  Spirit  Vision. 

5.  Imagination. 

6.  Note  on  No.  2. 

7.  Alchemy,  physical. 

8.  Geomantic  Pentagram. 

9..  Right  and  Left  Pillars. 

10.  Self-sacrifice. 

11.  Clairvoyance. 

12.  Telesmatic  Images  and  Adonai  ha-Aretz. 

13.  Secrecy  and  Hermetic  Love. 

14.  Talismans. 

15.  Man  and  God. 

16.  Fama  Fraternitatis. 

17.  Vault  Sides. 

18.  Progress  in  the  Order. 

19.  Aims  and  means  of  Adeptship 

20.  Elementary  view  of  Man. 

2 1 . Know  Thyself. 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


22.  Free  Will. 

23.  Tattwic  Visions. 

24.  Horary  Figures. 

25.  Essay  on  Clairvoyance. 

26.  Planets  and  Tattwas. 

27.  Theurgie. 

28.  Use  of  Implements. 

29.  Administrative. 

30.  Skrying  Rules. 

31.  Ethiopic  Letters. 

32.  Theban  Letters. 

33.  Enochian  Square  Visions. 

34.  An  Exorcism. 

35.  Notes  on  the  Exordium  in  Z.  Ritual. 

36.  On  Skrying  by  V.N.R. 

TECHNIQUES  OF  INVOCATION 

Here  follow  some  of  the  basic  techniques  of  invocation.  They  are  relatively 
simple  --  but  absolutely  important.  Let  there  be  no  equivocation  about  this.  They  are 
so  important  that  I recommend  that  they  be  committed  to  memory  --  perfectly  and 
by  rote. 

On  examining  some  of  the  early  documents  of  the  Order  as  well  as  those  of 
the  later  formulation  of  the  Order,  the  Stella  Matutina,  I am  constantly  struck  by  the 
fact  that  in  the  rituals,  whether  of  initiation  or  of  personal  growth  and  developement, 
the  pentagrams  and  hexagrams  pertaining  to  the  operation  are  depicted  in 
diagrammatic  form.  This  eternally  surprises  me.  For  despite  the  fact  that  the  papers 
on  the  Pentagram  and  Hexagram  rituals  suggest,  nay  demand,  that  the  contents  be 
committed  to  memory,  few  apparently  took  this  injunction  seriously.  Instead  of 
being  content  with  the  rubric  of  the  ritual  stating  that  for  example  the  invoking 
Pentagram  of  Air  should  be  traced  in  the  Air,  or  that  the  banishing  Hexagram  of 
Mercury  should  be  traced,  the  members  whose  papers  I have  seen  drew  the 
appropriate  figure.  This  of  course  suggests  that  the  figures  were  not  committed  to 
memory,  and  that  the  member  had  to  draw  the  appropriate  figure  on  the  pages  of  the 
ritual  in  order  to  jog  his  memory. 

Now  all  of  this  is  totally  unnecessary  --  which  is  why  I am  demanding 
categorically  that  the  serious  student  study  the  following  papers  and  commit  the 
schema  to  memory.  Try  to  study  the  papers  with  the  idea  in  mind  of  perceiving  the 
underlying  attributions.  In  that  case,  should  a momentary  doubt  arise  as  to  what 
figure  to  employ,  all  one  has  to  do  is  to  visualize  the  attributions  to  the  respective 
angles,  and  then  recall  the  basic  rules  involved.  With  the  Pentagrams,  the  rule  is  to 
trace  towards  the  angle  involved  to  invoke,  and  move  away  from  to  banish.  In  the 
case  of  the  Hexagram,  the  rule  is  to  trace  clockwise  from  the  angle  you  are  dealing 
with  in  order  to  invoke,  and  anti-clockwise  in  order  to  banish.  It  is  that  simple. 


8 


VOLUME  FOUR 


It  is  so  simple  au  fond  that  it  puzzles  me  considerably  when  I find  the  Pentagrams 
and  Hexagrams  depicted  in  diagrams  in  various  rituals  — like  the  Consecration  of  the 
Elemental  Weapons,  etc.  It  must  imply  that  students  are  careless,  or  adopt  a trifling  attitude 
towards  these  basic  but  most  important  elements  of  the  art  of  Invocation.  The  whole  art  of 
Magic  is  rooted  in  these  basics,  without  which  there  is  nothing  but  form  and  emptiness. 

So  let  this  be  a word  to  the  wise.  Memorize  the  basics  then  there  will  be  no  problem.  In 
that  case  one  could  proceed  to  the  next  important  part  of  ritual,  the  visualizations.  To  repeat  a 
former  statement,  there  can  be  no  magical  progress  without  visualizing  the  lineal  figures  or  the 
Godforms.  Take  one  step  at  a time.  Start  with  the  basics  first,  then  proceed  to  the  more  complex. 
The  Godforms  and  the  Telesmatic  Images  are  every  bit  as  important  as  are  the  lineal  figures  — 
in  fact,  more  so.  They  will  require  a good  deal  of  practise  to  achieve  any  degree  of  skill.  All 
the  more  reason  to  memorize  what  can  be  called  the  more  mechanical  phases  of  magical 
procedures. 

One  of  the  most  satisfactory  ways  of  learning  these  basics  is  to  devise  a simple  ritual 
which  can  be  performed  daily  without  too  much  trouble.  It  should  include  the  fundamental 
drills,  such  as  the  greater  ritual  of  the  Pentagram,  plus  a dramatic  element  which  will  do 
something  to  and  for  the  student. 

Nearly  fifty  years  ago  I composed  a short,  simple  ritual  which  I used  every  day  for 
practically  a year.  As  time  went  on,  and  as  I became  more  familiar  with  the  rudiments  of  the 
Golden  Dawn  system,  it  developed  into  a species  of  what  I came  to  call  Opening  by 
Watch  tower.  It  employed  all  the  important  items  of  the  Greater  Ritual  plus  the  use  of  the 
Elemental  Weapons.  As  a result,  in  no  time  at  all,  a considerable  expertise  was  obtained  in  the 
fundamental  principles  of  magical  invocation  and  banishing  which  has  stood  me  in  good 
stead  throughout  the  years.  This  really  accounts  for  my  adamant  insistence  on  the  elimination 
of  diagrams  of  hexagrams  and  pentagrams  in  Rituals,  which  appalls  me  more  and  more  as  I 
retype  some  of  the  earliest  documents  of  the  Order. 

In  a book  published  by  Aquarian  Press  in  England,  entitled  Ceremonial  Magic,  I 
reproduced  this  ritual  with  several  variations.  There  are  innumerable  changes  that  can  be  rung 
on  a simple  theme.  The  student  who  really  wants  to  be  proficient  in  the  magical  arts  can  take 
one  of  these  themes  which  I reproduce  somewhere  in  this  book  and  work  it  to  his  considerable 
advantage.  By  doing  so,  he  will  come  to  a profound  understanding  of  numberless  other 
schemata  which  at  first  sight  bear  little  relationship  to  what  he  is  about  to  do.  (By  V.H.  Frater 
A.M.A.G.). 

THE  RITUAL  OF  THE  PENTAGRAM 

The  Pentagram  is  a powerful  symbol  representing  the  operation  of  the  Eternal  Spirit  and 
the  Four  Elements  under  the  divine  Presidency  of  the  letters  of  the  Name  Yeheshuah.  The 
elements  themselves  in  the  symbol  of  the  Cross  are  governed  by  Yhvh.  But  the  letter  Shin, 
representing  the  Ruach  Elohim,  the  Divine  Spirit,  being  added  thereto,  the  Name 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


becometh  Yeheshuab  or  Yehovashah  - the  latter  when  the  letter  Shin  is  placed  between 
ruling  Earth  and  the  other  three  letters  of  Tetragrammaton. 

From  each  re-entering  angle  of  the  Pentagram,  therefore,  issueth  a ray,  representing  a 
radiation  from  the  Divine.  Therefore  is  it  called  the  Flaming  Pentagram,  or  Star  of  the  Great 
Fight,  in  affirmation  of  the  forces  of  Divine  Fight  to  be  found  therein. 

Traced  as  a symbol  of  good,  it  should  be  placed  with  the  single  point  upward, 
representing  the  rule  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  For  if  thou  shouldst  write  it  with  the  two  points 
upward,  it  is  an  evil  symbol,  affirming  the  empire  of  matter  over  that  Divine  Spirit  which  should 
govern  it.  See  that  thou  doest  it  not. 

Yet,  if  there  may  arise  an  absolute  necessity  for  working  or  conversing  with  a Spirit  of 
evil  nature,  and  that  to  retain  him  before  thee  without  tormenting  him,  thou  hast  to  employ  the 
symbol  of  the  Pentagram  reversed  - (for,  know  thou  well,  thou  canst  have  no  right  to  injure  or 
hurt  even  evil  Spirits  to  gratify  curiousity  or  caprice)  - in  such  a case,  thou  shalt  hold  the  blade  of 
thy  Magical  Sword  upon  the  single  lowest  point  of  the  Pentagram,  until  such  time  as  thou  shalt 
license  him  to  depart.  Also,  revile  not  evil  spirits  — but  remember  that  the  Archangel  Michael  of 
whom  St.  Jude  speaketh,  when  contending  with  Satan,  durst  not  bring  a railing  accusation 
against  him  but  said  ‘The  Ford  rebuke  thee’. 

Now,  if  thou  wilt  draw  the  Pentagram  to  have  by  thee  as  a symbol,  thou  shalt  make  it  of 
the  colours  already  taught,  upon  the  black  ground.  There  shall  be  the  sign  of  the  Pentagram,  the 
Wheel,  the  Fion,  the  Eagle,  the  Ox,  and  the  Man,  and  each  hath  an  angle  assigned  unto  it  for 
dominion.  Hence  ariseth  the  Supreme  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram,  according  to  the  angle  from 
which  the  Pentagram  is  traced.  The  circle  or  Wheel  answereth  to  the  all-pervading  Spirit:  The 
laborious  Ox  is  the  symbol  of  Earth;  the  Fion  is  the  vehemence  of  Fire;  the  Eagle,  the  Water 
flying  aloft  as  with  wings  when  she  is  vaporized  by  the  force  of  heat:  the  Man  is  the  Air,  subtle 
and  thoughtful,  penetrating  hidden  things. 

At  all  times  complete  the  circle  of  the  place  before  commencing  an  invokation. 

The  currents  leading  from  Fire  to  Air  and  from  Earth  to  Water  are  those  of  Spirit  — the 
mediation  of  the  Active  and  Passive  Elements.  These  two  Spirit  Pentagrams  should  precede  and 
close  Invocations  as  the  equilibrium  of  the  Elements,  and  in  establishing  the  harmony  of  their 
influence.  In  closing,  these  currents  are  reversed. 


SPIRIT 

INVOKING  PENTAGRAMS 


arrow 


& 


10 


VOLUME  FOUR 


SPIRIT 

BANISHING 


BITOM 


closing  10* 

ACTIVES 


EX  A HP 


oosim;  tor 

—t  PVSMVES 


HtXJMA 

\AVTA 


They  are  the  invoking  and  banishing  Pentagrams  of  the  Spirit.  The  Sigil  of  the  Wheel 
should  be  traced  in  their  centre.  In  the  invoking  Pentagram  of  Earth  the  current  descendeth  from 
the  Spirit  to  the  Earth.  In  the  Banishing  Pentagram,  the  current  is  reversed.  The  Sigil  of  the  Ox 
should  be  traced  in  the  centre.  These  two  Pentagrams  are  in  general  use  for  invocation  or 
banishing,  and  their  use  is  given  to  the  Neophyte  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  under  the  title 
of  the  Lesser  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram. 

This  Lesser  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram  is  only  of  use  in  general  and  less  important 
invocations.  Its  use  is  permitted  to  the  Outer  that  Neophytes  may  have  protection  against 
opposing  forces,  and  also  that  they  may  form  some  idea  of  how  to  attract  and  to  come  into 
communication  with  spiritual  and  invisible  things.  The  Banishing  Pentagram  of  Earth  will  also 
serve  thee  for  any  opposing  Astral  force.  In  all  cases  of  tracing  a Pentagram,  the  angle  should  be 
carefully  closed  at  the  finishing  point. 

The  invoking  Pentagram  of  Air  commenceth  from  Water,  and  that  of  Water  commenceth 
from  the  Angle  of  Air.  Those  of  Fire  and  Earth  begin  from  the  angle  of  Spirit.  The  Kerubic 
symbol  of  the  Element  is  to  be  traced  in  the  centre.  The  banishing  Signs  are  reversing  of  the 
current.  But  before  all  things,  complete  the  circle  of  the  place  wherein  thou  workest,  seeing  that 
it  is  the  key  of  the  rest. 

Unless  you  want  to  limit  or  confine  the  force,  make  not  a circle  round  each  Pentagram, 
unless  for  the  puipose  of  tracing  the  Pentagram  truly.  In  concentrating  however  the  force  upon  a 
symbol  or  Talisman,  thou  shalt  make  the  circle  with  the  Pentagram  upon  it  so  as  to  concentrate 
the  force  together  thereon. 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


&AM5HING  INVOKING 


12 


VOLUME  FOUR 


RULE:  Invoke  towards,  and  banish  from,  the  point  to  which  the  Element  is  attributed.  Air 
hath  a watery  symbol,  (Aquarius)  because  it  is  the  container  of  rain  and  moisture.  Fire  hath  the 
form  of  the  Lion-Serpent  (Leo).  Water  hath  the  alchemic  Eagle  of  distillation  (Eagle’s  Head). 
Earth  hath  the  laborious  Ox  (Taurus).  Spirit  is  produced  by  the  One  operating  in  all  things.  The 
elements  vibrate  between  the  Cardinal  points  for  they  have  not  an  unchangeable  abode  therein, 
though  they  are  allotted  to  the  Four  Quarters  in  their  invocation  in  the  Ceremonies  of  the  First 
Order.  This  attribution  is  derived  from  the  nature  of  the  winds.  For  the  Easterly  wind  is  of  the 
Nature  of  Air  more  especially.  The  South  Wind  bringeth  into  action  the  nature  of  Fire.  West 
winds  bring  with  them  moisture  and  rain.  North  winds  are  cold  and  dry  like  Earth.  The  S.W. 
wind  is  violent  and  explosive  — the  mingling  of  the  contrary  elements  of  Fire  and  Water.  The 
N.W.  and  S.W.  winds  are  more  harmonious,  uniting  the  influence  of  the  two  active  and  passive 
elements.  Yet  their  natural  position  in  the  Zodiac  is:  Fire  in  the  East,  Earth  in  South,  Air  in  West, 
and  Water  in  the  North.  Therefore  they  vibrate:  Air  between  West  and  East.  Fire  between  East 
and  South.  Water  between  North  and  West.  Earth  between  South  and  North.  Spirit  also  vibrateth 
between  the  Height  and  Depth.  So  that,  if  thou  invokest,  it  is  better  to  look  towards  the  position 
of  the  winds,  since  the  Earth,  ever  whirling  on  her  poles,  is  more  subject  to  their  influence.  But  if 
thou  wilt  go  in  the  Spirit  Vision  unto  their  abode,  it  is  better  for  thee  to  take  their  position  in  the 
Zodiac  Air  and  Water  have  much  in  common,  and  because  one  is  the  container  of  the  other, 
therefore  have  their  symbols  been  at  all  times  transferred,  and  the  Eagle  assigned  to  Air  and 
Aquarius  to  Water.  Nevertheless,  it  is  better  that  they  should  be  attributed  as  before  stated  and 
for  the  foregoing  reason  is  it  that  the  invoking  sign  of  the  one  and  the  banishing  sign  of  the  other 
counterchange  in  the  Pentagram.  When  thou  dealest  with  the  Pentagram  of  the  Spirit  thou  shalt 
give  the  saluting  signs  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  Grade,  and  for  the  Earth  the  Sign  of  Zelator,  and  for 
Air  that  of  Theoricus,  and  for  Water  that  of  Practicus,  and  for  Fire,  Philosophus.  If  thou  wilt  use 
the  Pentagram  to  invoke  or  banish  the  Zodiacal  forces,  thou  shalt  use  the  Pentagram  of  the 
Element  unto  which  the  Sign  is  referred,  and  trace  in  its  centre  the  usual  Sigil  of  the  Sign  thus: 


WATERY:  BANISHING  FIERY:  INVOKING 

FOR  PISCES  FOR  ARIES 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


And  whenever  thou  shalt  trace  a Sigil  of  any  nature,  thou  must  commence  at  the  left  hand 
of  the  Sigil  or  symbol  tracing  it  in  a clockwise  motion. 

Whenever  thou  invokest  the  forces  of  the  Zodiacal  Signs  as  distinct  from  the  Elements, 
thou  shalt  erect  an  astrological  chart  of  the  Heavens  for  the  time  of  working  so  that  thou  mayest 
know  toward  what  quarter  or  direction  thou  shouldst  face  in  working.  For  the  same  Sign  may  be 
in  the  East  at  one  time  of  the  day  and  in  the  West  at  another. 

Whenever  thou  shalt  prepare  to  commence  any  magical  work  or  operation,  it  will  be 
advisable  for  thee  to  clear  and  consecrate  the  place  of  work  by  performing  the  Lesser  Banishing 
Ritual  of  the  Pentagram.  In  certain  cases,  especially  when  working  by  or  with  the  forces  of  the 
Planets,  it  may  be  wise  also  to  use  the  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram. 

In  order  that  a Force  and  a Current  and  a Colour  and  a Sound  may  be  united  together  in 
the  same  symbol,  unto  each  angle  of  the  Pentagram  certain  Hebrew  divine  Names  and  Names 
from  the  Angelic  Tablets  are  allotted.  These  are  to  be  pronounced  with  the  invoking  and 
banishing  Pentagrams  as  thou  mayest  see  in  this  diagrams. 


w -f 


The  attributions  of  the  angles  of  the  Pentagram  are  the  key  of  its  Ritual.  Herein,  during 
ordinary  invocation  without  the  use  of  the  Enochian  Tablets  of  the  Elements,  thou  shalt 
pronounce  the  Divine  Name  A1  with  the  Pentagram  of  Water,  and  Elohim  with  Fire,  etc.  But  if 
thou  art  working  with  the  Elemental  or  Enochian  Tablets,  thou  shalt  use  the  Divine  Names  in  the 
Angelic  language  drawn  therefrom.  For  Earth,  Emor  Dial  Hectega,  etc.,  and  for  Spirit  the  four 
words:  Exaip  in  the  East;  Hcoma  in  the  West:  Nanta  in  the  North;  and  Bitom  in  the  South. 

In  the  pronunciation  of  all  these  Names,  thou  shalt  take  a deep  breath  and  vibrate  them  as 
much  as  possible  inwardly  with  the  outgoing  breath,  nbt  necessarily  loudly,  but  with  forcible 
vibration  thus:  A-a-a-el-Il  (Since  this  Divine  name  consists  of  only  two  letters  I consistently 
make  a practice  of  vibrating  the  letters  separately  viz,  Aleph  Lamed,  then  the  sound  as  indicated 
before).  Or  Em-or-r  Di-a-11  Hec-te-e-gah.  If  thou  wilt,  thou  mayest  also  trace  the  letters  or  Sigils 
of  these  Names  in  the  Air 


14 


VOLUME  FOUR 


To  invoke  the  forces  of  the  Four  Elements  at  once,  at  the  Four  Quarters,  commence  at  the 
East  and  there  trace  the  equilibrating  Pentagram  of  the  Actives  and  the  invoking  Pentagram  of 
Air  and  pronounce  the  proper  Names.  Then  carry  round  the  point  of  thy  wand  to  the  South  and 
there  trace  the  equilibrating  Pentagram  for  Actives  and  the  invoking  Pentagram  of  Fire  and 
pronounce  the  proper  Names.  Thence,  pass  to  the  West,  trace  the  Equilibrating  Pentagram  for 
Passives  and  the  Invoking  Pentagram  for  Water  and  pronounce  the  proper  Names;  thence  to  the 
North,  trace  the  equilibration  of  the  Passives  and  the  invoking  Pentagram  of  Earth,  pronounce  the 
proper  Names,  and  then  complete  the  circle  of  the  place. 

In  the  same  manner  shalt  thou  banish,  unless  thou  desirest  to  retain  certain  of  the  Forces 
for  a time.  All  invocations  shall  be  opened  and  closed  with  the  Qabalistic  Cross:  In  certain  cases 
other  Names,  as  those  of  Angels  and  Spirits,  may  be  pronounced  towards  their  proper 
quarters. and  their  Names  and  Sigils  traced  in  the  Air. 

If  thou  workest  with  but  one  Element,  thou  shalt  make  - (if  it  be  an  active  element  as  Fire 
or  Air)  - the  equilibrating  Pentagram  for  Actives  only  and  the  Element’s  own  invoking 
Pentagram,  and  not  those  of  the  other  Elements.  If  it  be  a passive  Element  - Earth  or  Water  thou 
shalt  make  the  Equilibriating  Pentagram  of  the  passives  only  and  the  invoking  Pentagram  and 
banishing  follow  the  same  law.  Also,  see  that  thou  pronouncest  the  proper  Names  with  the 
proper  Pentagrams. 

SUPREME  INVOKING  RITUAL  OF  THE  PENTAGRAM 

Face  East. 

Make  Qabalistic  Cross. 


Make  Equilibriated  Active  Pentagram  of  Spirit 


Vibrate  Exarp  in  making  Pentagram. 
Vibrate  Eheieh  in  making  Wheel. 

Finish  with  the  Adeptus  Minor  grade  Signs. 
Make  the  Invoking  Pentagram  of  Air. 


Vibrate  Oro  Ibah  Aozpi  in  making  Pentagram. 
Vibrate  Yhvh  in  making  Aquarius. 

Finish  with  the  Theoricus  grade  Sign. 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Carry  point  of  instrument  to  the  South 


Make  Equilibriated  Active  Pentagram  of  Spirit. 
Vibrate  Bitom  in  making  Pentagram. 

Vibrate  Eheieh  in  making  Wheel. 

Give  Adeptus  Minor  grade  Signs. 

Make  the  Invoking  Pentagram  of  Fire. 


Vibrate  Oip  Teaa  Pedoce  in  making  Pentagram. 
Vibrate  Elohim  in  making  Leo  sigil. 

Make  the  Philosophus  Grade  Sign. 

Carry  point  of  instrument  to  the  West 


Make  Equilibriated  Passive  Pentagram  of  Spirit. 
Vibrate  Hcoma  in  making  Pentagram. 

Vibrate  Agla  in  making  Wheel. 

Give  Adeptus  Minor  grade  Signs. 

Make  Invoking  Pentagram  of  Water. 


Vibrate  Empeh  Arsel  Gaiol  in  making  Pentagram. 
Vibrate  A1  in  making  Eagle  Head. 

Give  the  Practicus  Grade  Sign. 

Carry  point’  of  instrument  to  the  North 


16 


VOLUME  FOUR 


Make  Equilibriated  Active  Pentagram  of  Spirit. 
Vibrate  Nanta  in  making  Pentagram. 

Vibrate  Agla  in  making  Wheel. 

Give  Adeptus  Minor  grade  Signs. 

Make  Invoking  Pentagram  of  Earth. 


Cross. 


Vibrate  Emor  Dial  Hectega  in  making  Pentagram. 

Vibrate  Adonai  in  making  Taurus. 

Give  Zelator  Grade  Sign. 

Carry  point  of  instrument  to  the  East. 

Finish  in  East  as  in  Lesser  Pentagram  Ritual  with  the  Four  Archangels  and  Qabalistic 

THE  RITUAL  OF  THE  HEXAGRAM 


The  Hexagram  is  a powerful  symbol  representing  the  operation  of  the  Seven  Planets 
under  the  presidency  of  the  Sephiroth,  and  of  the  seven-lettered  Name,  ARARTTA.  The 
Hexagram  is  sometimes  called  the  Signet  Star  or  Symbol  of  the  Macrocosm,  just  as  the 
Pentagram  is  called  the  Signet  Star  or  Symbol  of  the  Microcosm.  ARARITA  is  a divine  name  of 
the  Seven  letters  formed  of  the  Hebrew  initials  of  the  sentence: 

One  is  his  beginning.  One  is  his  individuality.  His  permutation  is  one. 

As  in  the  case  of  the  Pentagram,  from  each  re-entering  angle  of  the  Hexagram  issueth  a 
ray  representing  a radiation  from  the  divine.  Therefore  it  is  called  the  Flaming  Hexagram,  or  the 
six-rayed  Signet  Star.  Usually,  it  is  traced  with  the  single  point  uppermost.  It  is  not  an  evil 
symbol  with  the  two  points  upward,  and  this  is  a point  of  difference  from  the  Pentagram. 

Now  if  thou  dost  draw  the  Hexagram  to  have  by  thee  as  a Symbol,  thou  shalt  make  it  in 
the  colours  already  taught  and  upon  a black  ground.  These  are  the  Planetary  Powers  allotted  unto 
the  Angles  of  the  Hexagram. 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hinf  Ikiilr 

Uuccn  Scak 

Unlu  1 h t upptfrttGSl 

h 

iJUli&O 

DJui 

I'-nli;  LtiK  knwinrlQSt 

Bhw 

Pu it 

Unto  Eb?  rlftlvl  hand  upper 

% 

VI  nlrd 

hit!* 

UnW  Ebe  j Ifih-I  hand  lower 

? 

Cietn 

Gram 

Gnlu  llM  Ml  ha.nd  upper 

Red 

R*4 

trio  ib*  Iffr  hand  lower 

¥ 

Yfllnw 

Orinuf 

In  tlhc-  t-c-nttr  is  llh«  Sun 

0 

Orinft 

Gaidar 

The  order  of  attribution  is  that  of  the  Sephiroth  on  the  Tree  of  Life.  Hence  ariseth  the 
Supreme  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram  according  to  the  Angles  from  which  it  is  traced. 

The  uppermost  angle  answereth  also  to  Daath  and  the  lowest  to  Yesod,  and  the  other 
angles  to  the  remaining  angles  of  the  Microprosopus.  The  Hexagram  is  composed  of  the  two 
triangles  of  Fire  and  Water,  and  is  therefore  not  traced  in  one  continuous  line  like  the  Pentagram, 
but  by  each  Triangle  separately.  (The  exception  to  this  is  the  use  of  Unicursal  Hexagram,  by 
means  of  which  Hexagram  is  traced  in  one  continuous  line.  This  is  demonstrated  at  considerable 
length  at  the  end  of  this  section.) 

All  the  invoking  Hexagrams  follow  the  course  of  the  Sun  in  their  current,  that  is  from  left 
to  right.  But  the  banishing  Hexagrams  are  traced  from  right  to  left  from  the  same  angle  as  their 
respective  invoking  Hexagrams  contrary  to  the  course  of  the  Sun.  The  Hexagram  of  any 
particular  Planet  is  traced  in  two  Triangles,  the  first  starting  from  the  angle  of  the  Planet,  the 
second  opposite  to  the  commencing  angle  of  the  first.  The  Symbol  of  the  Planet  itself  is  then 
traced  in  the  centre.  Thus  in  the  case  of  the  invoking  Hexagrams  of  Saturn,  the  first  triangle  is 
traced  from  the  angle  of  Saturn,  following  the  course  of  the  Sun,  the  second  triangle  from  the 
angle  of  the  Moon. 

(Only  trace  the  central  Planetary  symbol  in  practice  — the  others  shown  on  the  diagram 
only  for  illustration.)  Vibrate  Ararita  while  tracing  the  Hexagram  and  divine  Name  of  the  Planet 
when  tracing  its  symbol. 


BANISHING 


INVOKING 


18 


VOLUME  FOUR 


But  the  invoking  Hexagram  of  the  Moon  is  first  traced  from  the  angle  of  the  Moon,  its 
second  angle  being  traced  from  the  triangle  of  Saturn. 

The  banishing  Hexagram  for  Jupiter,  for  example,  is  traced  from  the  same  angle  as  the 
invoking  Hexagram,  and  in  the  same  order,  but  reversing  the  current’s  direction.  In  all  cases  the 
Symbol  of  the  Planet  should  be  traced  in  the  centre 

BANISHING  INVOKING 


19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


BANISHING  INVOKING 


20 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


INVOKING 

\ 


Vim  I FLOAT!  VF,  - DAATH 


22 


VOLUME  FOUR 


(The  divine  Name  here  is  so  cumbersome  and  long,  that  I experimented  some  while  ago  with 
others  attributed  to  SOL.  Thus  I began  to  use  IAO  with  no  diminution  of  solar  effects.  It  is 
shorter  and  easier  to  use.  l.R.) 

(N.B.  for  the  Hebrew  spelling  of  all  these  Names,  refer  back  to  an  early  Knowledge 
Lecture.  I.R.) 

But  for  the  Sun  all  six  invoking  Hexagrams  of  the  Planets  should  be  traced  in  their 
regular  planetary  order  and  the  symbol  of  the  Sun  traced  in  the  centre.  And  for  his  banishing 
hexagram  also,  all  the  six  banishing  hexagrams  of  the  other  Planets  should  be  employed  in 
their  regular  order,  only  that  the  symbol  of  the  Sun  should  be  traced  therein.  (Because  all  of 
this  is  so  cumbersome  the  Unicursal  Hexagram  is  of  such  great  advantage.  I.R.). 

Remember  that  the  symbol  of  Luna  varieth,  and  as  Moon  in  her  increase  she  is  favorable. 
But  Moon  is  not  so  favourable  for  good  in  her  decrease.  The  symbol  of  Luna  in  the  centre  of  the 
Hexagram  should  be  traced  if  in  her  increase;  by  the  reverse  in  her  decrease.  Remember  that  the 
symbol  in  her  decrease  represents  restriction  and  is  not  so  good  a symbol  as  the  Moon  in  her 
increase.  And  at  the  full  Moon  exactly  it  is  represented  by  a full  circle  but  at  new  Moon  a dark 
circle. 

The  last  two  forms  of  Luna  are  not  good  in  many  cases.  If  thou  wilt  invoke  the  Forces  of 
the  Head  of  the  Dragon  of  the  Moon  thou  shalt  trace  the  lunar  invoking  Hexagram  and  write 
therein  the  symbol  of  Caput  and  for  the  tail  Cauda.  These  Forces  of  Caput  and  Cauda  are  more 
easy  to  be  invoked  when  either  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  is  with  them  in  the  Zodiac  in  conjunction.  In 
these  invocations  thou  shalt  pronounce  the  same  Names  and  Letters  as  are  given  with  the  Lunar 
Hexagram.  Caput  is  of  a benevolent  character,  and  Cauda  of  a malefic,  save  in  a very  few 
matters.  And  be  thou  well  wary  of  dealing  with  these  forces  of  Caput  and  Cauda  or  with  those  of 
Sol  and  Luna  during  the  period  of  an  eclipse,  for  they  are  the  Powers  of  an  eclipse.  For  an  eclipse 
to  take  place  both  the  Sun  and  Moon  must  be  in  conjunction  with  them  in  the  Zodiac,  these  two 
luminaries  being  at  the  same  time  either  in  conjunction  or  opposition  as  regards  each  other. 

In  all  Rituals  of  the  Hexagram  as  in  those  of  the  Pentagram,  thou  shalt  complete  the  circle 
of  the  place.  Thou  shalt  not  trace  an  external  circle  round  each  Hexagram  itself  unless  thou 
wishest  to  confine  the  force  to  one  place  — as  in  charging  a Symbol  or  Talisman. 

From  the  attribution  of  the  Planets,  one  to  each  angle  of  the  Hexagram,  shalt  thou  see  the 
reason  of  the  sympathy  existing  between  each  superior  planet  and  one  certain  inferior  Planet. 

That  is,  that  to  which  it  is  exactly  opposite  in  the  Hexagram.  And  for  this  reason  is  it  that  the 
Triangle  of  their  invoking  and  banishing  Hexagrams  counter-change.  The  superior  Planets  are 
Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars.  The  inferior  Planets  are  Venus,  Mercury,  Luna.  And  in 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  midst  is  placed  the  Fire  of  the  Sun.  Therefore  the  superior  Saturn  and  the  Inferior 
Luna  are  sympathetic,  so  are  Jupiter  and  Mercury,  Mars  and  Venus. 

In  the  Supreme  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram  the  Signs  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  Grade  are  to  be 
given,  but  not  those  of  the  Grades  of  the  First  Order,  notwithstanding  these  latter  are  made  use  of 
in  the  Supreme  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram.  And  because  the  Hexagram  is  the  Signet  Star  of  the 
Macrocosm  or  Greater  World,  therefore  is  it  to  be  employed  in  all  invocations  of  the  Forces  of 
the  Sephiroth:  though  the  Signet  Star  of  the  Pentagram  represents  their  operation  in  the  Luna 
World,  in  the  Elements  and  in  Man. 

If  thou  wilt  deal  with  the  Forces  of  the  Supernal  Triad  of  the  Sephiroth,  thou  shalt  make 
use  of  the  Hexagrams  of  Saturn;  for  Chesed  those  of  Jupiter,  for  Geburah  those  of  Mars;  for 
Tiphareth  those  of  the  Sun,  and  for  Netzach  those  of  Venus,  and  for  Hod  those  of  Mercury,  and 
for  Yesod  and  Malkuth  those  of  the  Moon. 

Know  also  that  the  Sephiroth  are  not  to  be  invoked  on  every  slight  occasion,  but  only 
with  due  care  and  solemnity.  Above  all,  the  forces  of  Kether  and  Chokmah  demand  the  greatest 
purity  and  solemnity  of  heart  and  mind  in  Shim  who  would  penetrate  their  mysteries.  For  such 
high  knowledge  is  only  to  be  obtained  by  him  whose  Genius  can  stand  in  the  Presence  of  the 
Holy  Ones.  See  that  thou  usest  the  Divine  Names  with  all  reverence  and  humility  for  cursed  is  he 
that  taketh  the  Name  of  the  Vast  One  in  vain. 

When  thou  tracest  the  Symbol  of  a Planet  in  the  centre  of  a Hexagram,  thou  shalt  make 
the  same  of  a proportionable  size  to  the  interior  of  the  Hexagram,  and  thou  shalt  trace  them  from 
left  to  right  generally  following  the  course  of  the  Sun  as  much  as  possible.  Caput  and  Cauda 
Draconis  may  follow  the  general  rule. 

When  thou  shalt  invoke  either  the  Forces  of  one  particular  Planet  or  those  of  them  all, 
thou  shalt  turn  thyself  towards  the  Quarter  of  the  Zodiac  where  the  Planet  thou  invokest  then  is. 
For  owing  both  to  their  constant  motion  in  the  Zodiac  and  to  the  daily  movement  of  the  same,  the 
position  of  a Planet  is  continually  changing,  and  therefore  it  is  necessary  for  thee  in  such  a case 
to  erect  an  astrological  chart  of  the  position  of  the  Planets  in  the  heavens  for  the  actual  time  of 
working,  so  that  thou  mayest  see  the  direction  of  each  Planet  from  thee.  This  is  even  more 
necessary  when  working  with  the  Planets  than  with  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

When  thou  shalt  desire  to  purify  or  consecrate  any  place,  thou  shalt  perform  the  Lesser 
Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram,  either  in  conjunction  with,  or  instead  of  that  of  the 
Pentagram,  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  For  example,  if  thou  hast  been  working 
on  the  plane  of  the  Elements  before,  it  will  be  well  to  perform  the  Lesser  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram 
before  proceeding  to  thee  work  of  a Planetary  nature,  so  as  thoroughly  to  clear  the  places  of 
Forces  which,  although  not  hostile  or  evil  of  themselves,  will  yet  not  be  in  harmony  with  those  of 
an  altogether  different  Plane.  And  ever  be  sure  that  thou  dost  complete  the  circle  of  the  place 
wherein  thou  workest. 


24 


VOLUME  FOUR 


THE  FOUR  FORMS 

These  are  the  four  forms  assumed  by  conjoining  the  two  triangles  of  the  Hexagram  on 
which  the  Lesser  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram  is  based. 

The  first  form  is: 


The  angles  are  attributed  as  in  the  diagram.  Its  affinity  is  with  the  Eastern  Quarter;  the 
position  of  Fire  in  the  Zodiac.  (Note:  To  form  these  from  the  usual  Hexagram,  lower  the  inverted 
triangle,  then  reverse  it  by  throwing  the  Lunar  angle  up  to  the  top  from  being  lowest.  Mars  and 
Jupiter  do  not  change  sides.) 


The  second  form  is  the  ordinary  Hexagram  with  the  attribution  of  the  angles  as  usual:  the 
affinity  being  rather  with  the  Southern  Quarter,  the  position  of  Earth  in  the  Zodiac,  and  of  the 
Sun  at  his  culmination  at  noon. 

The  third  form  is: 


The  angles  are  attributed  as  shown  and  its  affinity  is  with  the  Western  Quarter,  the 
position  of  Air  in  the  Zodiac. 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  fourth  form  is: 


The  angles  are  attributed  as  shown  and  its  affinity  is  with  the  Northern  Quarter,  the 
position  of  Water  in  the  Zodiac. 

With  each  of  these  forms  the  Name  Ararita  is  to  be  pronounced.  Also  as  in  the  preceding 
cases  there  will  be  seven  modes  of  tracing  each  of  these  four  forms,  according  to  the  particular 
Planet  with  those  Forces  thou  art  working  at  the  time. 

The  Hexagrams  of  Saturn  may  be  used  in  general  and  comparatively  unimportant 
operations,  even  as  the  Pentagram.  In  these  four  forms  of  the  Hexagram  thou  shalt  trace  them 
beginning  at  the  angle  of  the  Planet  under  whose  regimen  thou  art  working,  following  the  course 
of  the  Sun  to  invoke,  and  reversing  the  course  to  banish.  That  is  to  say,  working  from  left  to  right 
for  the  former  and  from  right  to  left  for  the  latter.  Remember  always  that  the  symbols  of  the 
Elements  are  not  usually  traced  on  Sigils  but  are  replaced  by  the  Kerubic  Emblems  of  Aquarius, 
Leo,  Taurus  and  the  Eagle  head. 

THE  LESSER  RITUAL  OF  THE  HEXAGRAM 

Commence  with  the  Qabalistic  Sign  of  the  Cross  as  in  the  Lesser  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram, 
and  use  what  manner  of  Magical  implement  may  be  necessary  according  to  the  manner  of 
working,  either  the  Lotus  Wand  or  the  Magical  Sword. 

Stand  facing  East,  If  thou  desirest  to  invoke  thou  shalt  trace  the  figure  thus: 


Following  the  course  of  the  Sun,  from  left  to  right  and  thou  shalt  pronounce  the  name 
Ararita,  vibrating  it  as  much  as  possible  with  thy  breath  and  bringing  the  point  of  the  Magical 
Implement  to  the  center  of  the  figure. 

But  if  thou  desirest  to  banish  thou  shalt  trace  it  thus: 


26 


VOLUME  FOUR 


From  right  to  left,  and  see  that  thou  closest  carefully  the  finishing  angle  of  each  triangle. 
Carry  thy  magical  implement  round  to  the  South  and  if  thou  desirest  to  invoke  trace  the  figure 
thus: 


But  if  to  banish  then  from  left  to  right  thus: 


Bring  as  before  the  point  of  thy  magical  implement  to  the  center  and  pronounce  the  Name 

Ararita. 

Pass  to  the  West,  and  trace  the  figure  for  invoking  thus: 


Banishing  thus: 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Then  to  the  North,  Invoking: 


! 7 

% t 


Banishing: 


Then  pass  round  again  to  the  East  so  as  to  complete  the  circle  of  the  place  wherein  thou 
standest,  then  give  the  LVX  signs  and  repeat  the  analysis  of  the  Pass-word  INRI  of  the  Adeptus 
Minor  Grade. 

ADDENDUM 

Now  in  the  Supreme  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram,  when  thou  shalt  wish  to  attract  in  addition 
to  the  forces  of  a Planet,  those  of  a Sign  of  the  Zodiac  wherein  he  then  is,  thou  shalt  trace  in  the 
centre  of  the  invoking  Hexagram  of  the  Planet,  the  Symbol  of  that  Sign  of  the  Zodiac  beneath  his 
own;  and  if  this  be  not  sufficient,  thou  shalt  also  trace  the  invoking  Pentagram  of  the  Sign  as  it  is 
directed  in  the  ritual  of  the  Pentagram. 

In  the  tracing  of  the  Hexagram  of  any  Planet  thou  shalt  pronounce  therewith  in  a 
vibratory  manner  as  before  taught,  both  the  Divine  Name  of  the  Sephira  which  ruleth  the  Planet 
and  the  Seven-letterd  Name  Ararita,  and  also  the  particular  letter  of  that  Name  which  is  referred 
to  that  particular  Planet. 

Now  if  thou  shalt  wish  to  invoke  the  forces  of  One  particular  Planet,  thou  shalt  find  in 
what  Quarter  of  the  heavens  he  will  be  situate  at  the  time  of  working.  Then  thou  shalt  consecrate 
and  guard  the  place  wherein  thou  art  by  the  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram.  Then  thou 
shalt  perform  the  Lesser  Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram,  yet  tracing  the  four  figures  employed 
from  the  angle  of  the  Planet  required,  seeing  that  for  each  Planet  the  mode  of  tracing  varieth.  If 
thou  dealest  with  the  Sun,  thou  shalt  invoke  by  all  six  forms  of  the  Figure  and  trace  within  them 
the  Planet  Symbol  and  pronounce  the  Name  Ararita  as  has  been  taught. 

Then  shalt  thou  turn  unto  the  quarter  of  the  planet  in  the  Heavens  and  shalt  trace  his 


28 


VOLUME  FOUR 


invoking  Hexagram  and  pronounce  the  proper  Names,  and  invoke  what  Angels  and 
Forces  of  that  Nature  may  be  required,  and  trace  their  Sigils  in  the  air. 

When  thou  hast  finished  thy  invocation  thou  shalt  in  most  cases  license  them  to  depart 
and  perform  the  Banishing  Symbols  upon  it  which  would  have  the  effect  of  entirely  de-charging 
it  and  reducing  it  to  the  condition  it  was  in  when  first  made  —that  is  to  say  dead  and  lifeless. 

If  thou  wishest  to  bring  the  Rays  of  all  or  several  of  the  Planets  into  action  at  the  same 
time,  thou  shalt  discover  their  quarter  in  the  Heavens  for  the  time  of  working,  and  thou  shalt 
trace  the  general  Lesser  Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram,  but  not  differentiated  for  any 
particular  Planet,  and  then  thou  shalt  turn  to  the  Quarters  of  the  respective  Planets  and  invoke 
their  forces  as  before  laid  down;  and  banish  them  when  invocation  is  finished,  and  conclude  with 
the  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram.  And  ever  remember  to  complete  the  circle  of  the 
place  wherein  thou  workest,  following  the  course  of  the  sun. 

N.B.  The  series  of  Hexagrams  to  invoke  and  banish  Solar  forces  are 
repetitive,  clumsy  and  tedious.  Crowley  had  developed  an  Unicursal 
Hexagram  to  which  all  the  regular  traditional  attributions  could  be  made.  I 
found  later  that  this  was  not  original  with  Crowley  but  could  be  found  in  the 
document  on  Polygons  and  Polygrams.  In  any  event,  it  was  a happy  find.  It 
is  a great  deal  easier  and  less  tedious  in  operation,  and  I first  published  these 
findings  in  Ceremonial  Magic  Aquarian  Press,  I am  reproducing  the 
attributions  here,  for  I feel  sure  that  the  modern  student  does  not  wish  to  be 
bogged  down  by  unnecessary  traditional  forms  which  can  be  replaced  by  a 
streamlining  effect.  I.R. 


h 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


BANISHING 


INVOKING 


30 


VOLUME  FOUR 


BANISHING 


INVOKING 


z. 


31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


BANISHING 


INVOKING 


The  following  includes.  Sword  description,  Use,  Consecration,  Mode  of  use,  Caution. 
Need  of  reverence. 

This  is  for  general  use  in  Banishing  for  defense  against  evil  forces,  and  in  certain 
invocations. 

The  Sword  should  be  of  medium  length  and  weight. 

Any  convenient  sword  may  be  adapted  for  this  use,  the  pattern  of  the  hilt  here  given  is 
not  essential.  But  the  handle,  hilt  and  guard  must  be  such  as  to  offer  surface  suitable  for 
inscriptions. 

Pentagrams  should  be  painted  on  salient  portions  because  it  is  the  lineal  figure  of 
GEBURAH. 

The  Divine  and  Angelic  Names  related  to  GEBURAH  are  then  to  be  added  and  also  their 
sigils  taken  from  the  Rose. 

The  Motto  of  the  Adept  is  to  be  engraved  upon  it,  or  upon  the  hilt  in  letters  of  emerald 
green  colour,  in  addition  to  the  other  mystic  devices  and  Names. 


32 


VOLUME  FOUR 


The  Blade  should  be  clean  and  bright,  and  the  hand  hilt  and  guard  should  be  painted 
bright  scarlet.  Upon  this  as  a ground  colour  the  inscriptions  are  to  be  added  in  emerald  green. 

The  Sword  has  then  to  be  consecrated  in  due  form. 

USE 

It  is  to  be  used  in  all  cases  where  great  force  and  strength  are  to  be  used  and  are  required, 
but  principally  for  banishing  and  for  defense  against  evil  forces. 

For  this  reason  it  is  under  the  presidency  of  GEBURAH  and  of  MARS.  Thus  their  Names 
and  forces  are  to  be  invoked  at  its  consecration,  which  should  take  place  onthe  Day  and  Hour  of 
Mars,  or  used  during  the  course  of  the  Fiery  Tattwa. 

Here  again  let  the  Z.A.M.  remember  his  Obligation  never  to  use  his  knowledge  of 
practical  magic  for  purposes  of  evil.  Let  him  be  well  assured  that  if  he  do  this,  notwithstanding 
his  pledge,  the  evil  he  endeavours  to  bring  about  will  react  on  himself,  and  that  he  will 
experience  on  his  own  person  and  in  his  own  affairs  that  very  thing  which  he  has  endeavoured  to 
bring  about  for  another. 

So  also  may  he  perish  and  be  blotted  out  from  among  us. 

MODE  OF  USE 

When  it  is  desired  to  concentrate  and  to  use  the  full  force  of  the  Sword,  hold  it  thus.  The 
pommel  of  the  hilt  rests  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  with  the  thumb  and  forefinger  extended  along 
the  hilt,  towards  the  guard. 

CAUTION 

Need  of  Reverence.  Remember  that  there  is  hardly  a circumstance  in  the  Rituals,  even  of 
the  First  Order,  which  has  not  its  special  meaning  and  application,  and  which  does  not  conceal  a 
potent  magical  formula. 

These  ceremonies  then  have  brought  thee  into  contact  with  certain  forces  which  thou  hast 
now  to  learn  how  to  awaken  in  thyself.  And  to  this  end,  read,  study  and  re-read  what  thou  hast 
already  received.  Be  not  sure  even  after  the  lapse  of  much  time,  that  thou  hast  yet  fully 
discovered  all  that  is  to  be  learned  from  them. 

To  be  of  use  unto  thee,  this  must  be  the  work  of  thine  own  inner  Self—  thine  own,  and  not 
the  work  of  another  that  so  thou  mayest  gradually  attain  to  the  Knowledge  of  the  Divine  Ones. 

CONSECRATION  CEREMONY 

Prepare  the  chamber,  with  a central  Altar  draped  in  black,  with  a red  Cross,  white 
Triangle,  Rose  and  incense,  Cup  and  water,  Lamp,  plate  and  salt,  Rose  Cross,  consecrated  Lotus 
Wand,  white  robe  is  desirable,  the  new  Sword,  Red  cloak  and  Lamen. 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Next: 

An  Invocation  to  Mars  and  Geburah.  An  Astrological  figure  to  show  position  of  Mars  at 
the  time.  In  wording  and  formulating  the  Invocation  to  the  Forces  of  Geburah,  force  and  strength 
are  to  be  specially  requested. 

1)  Place  the  Sword  upon  Altar,  hilt  to  East  near  Incense,  point  to  West  near  Water. 

2)  Take  up  Lotus  Wand  near  Water. 

3)  Stand  at  West  of  Altar,  facing  East. 

4)  Say,  Hekas  Hekas  Este  Bebeloi. 

5)  Take  up  Cup  and  purify  with  Water  sprinkling  to  E.  S.  W.  N. 

6)  Saying,  So  therefore  first  the  Priest  who  governeth  the  works  of  Fire  must  sprinkle 
with  the  Lustral  Water  of  the  loud  resounding  sea. 

7)  Put  down  Cup  on  Altar. 

8)  Take  up  Incense  and  wave  it  as  you  pass  round  E.  S.  W.  N. 

9)  Saying,  And  when  after  all  the  Phantoms  are  vanished  thou  shalt  see  that  holy  and 
formless  Fire,  that  Fire  which  darts  and  flashes  through  the  hidden  depths  of  the 
Universe,  hear  thou  the  voice  of  Fire. 

10)  Put  down  Incense.  Take  up  Wand. 

1 1)  Circumambulate  with  Sun  three  times,  grasping  Wand  by  white  band.  Return  to  West, 
face  East,  say  Adoration: 

Holy  art  Thou  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

Holy  art  Thou  Whom  nature  hath  not  Formed. 

Holy  art  Thou  the  Vast  and  Mighty  One. 

Lord  of  the  Light  and  of  the  Darkness. 

12)  Performing  Lesser  Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram  of  Mars,  holding  the  Wand  by 
White  Band.  Give  Adeptus  Minor  Signs  and  analyse  Key-Word. 

13)  Return  to  West  of  Altar. 

14)  Turn  to  face  the  direction  in  which  you  have  found  Mars  to  be  standing  so  that  the 
Altar  is  between  yourself  and  Mars  for  convenience. 

15)  Describe  in  the  Air  the  Invoking  Pentagram  of  Sign  Mars  is  in. 

16)  Describe  Invoking  Hexagram  of  Mars,  saying:  ELOHIM  GIBOR.  Then  still  holding 
Wand  by  White  Band. 

17)  Recite  your  Invocation  to  the  power  of  GEBURAH  and  the  Forces  of  Mars,  tracing 
the  Sigil  of  each  as  you  read  it. 

O Mighty  Power  who  governeth  GEBURAH,  Thou  strong  and  terrible  Divine 
ELOHIM  GIBOR.  I beseech  Thee  to  bestow  upon  this  Magic  Sword  Power  and 
Might  to  slay  the  evil  and  weakness  I may  encounter.  In  the  Fiery  Sphere  of  MADIM, 
strength  and  fidelity.  May  Thy  Great  Archangel  KAMAEL  bestow  upon  me  courage 
wherewith  to  use  it  aright  and  may  The  Powerful  Angels  of  the  Order  of  SERAPHIM 
scorch  with  their  flames  the  feebleness  of  purpose  which  would  hinder  my  search  for  the 
True  Light. 


34 


VOLUME  FOUR 


18)  Then  trace  in  the  Air,  slowly,  above  Sword,  and  as  if  standing  upon  it,  the  Invoking 
Hexagram  of  Mars.  Do  this  with  the  Lotus  end,  still  holding  the  White  Band. 

19)  Next  trace  over  the  Sword  the  letters  of  the  names  in  the  invocation  and  their  several 
Sigils. 

20)  Put  down  the  Wand. 

21)  Take  up  the  Cup  and  purify  new  Sword  with  Water,  making  Cross  upon  it;  put  down 
Cup. 

22)  Take  up  Incense  and  wave  it  over  new  Sword.  Put  down  Incense. 

23)  Take  up  new  Sword  and  with  it  perform  the  Lesser  Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram 
and  also  trace  the  Invoking  Hexagram  of  Mars,  repeating  ARARITA  and  ELOHIM 
GIBOR. 

24)  Lay  down  Sword. 

25)  With  Cup  purify  Chamber  as  before. 

26)  With  Incense  purify  as  before. 

27)  Reverse  circumambulation  three  times  and  say: 

28)  In  the  Name  of  YEHESHUAH,  I now  set  free  all  Spirits  that  may  have  been 
imprisoned  by  this  Ceremony. 

29)  Perform  with  the  Sword  the  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  Hexagram. 

30)  Perform  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  Pentagram. 

31)  Conclude  with  Qabalistic  Cross. 

32)  Wrap  up  Sword,  white  or  scarlet  silk  or  linen.  Henceforth  no  one  else  may  touch  it. 

THE  FOUR  ELEMENTAL  WEAPONS 
These  are  the  Tarot  Symbols  of  the  letters  of  the  Divine  Name  YHVH  and  of  the 
Elements,  and  have  a certain  bond  and  sympathy  between  them.  So  that  if  even  one  only  is  to  be 
used,  the  others  should  also  be  present,  even  as  each  of  the  Four  Elemental  Tablets  is  divided  in 
itself  into  Four  Lesser  Angles,  representing  the  other  three  elements  bound  together  therewith  in 
the  same  tablet. 

Therefore  also  let  the  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor  remember  that  when  he  works  with  these 
forces,  he  is,  as  it  were,  dealing  with  the  forces  of  the  letters  of  the  Divine  Name,  YHVH. 

Each  implement  must  be  consecrated,  and  when  this  has  been  done  by  an  Adeptus,  no 
one  else  may  touch  it. 

THE  WAND  OF  FIRE 


The  Staff  of  the  Wand  should  be  of  wood,  rounded  and  smooth,  and  perforated  from  end 
to  end,  and  within  it  should  be  placed  a steel  rod,  just  so  long  as  to  project  an  inch  beyond  each 
end  of  the  wood  rod. 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


It  is  often  convenient  to  form  the  Wand  from  cane  which  has  a natural  hollow  through  it. 
If  of  cane  there  should  be  three  natural  lengths  according  to  the  knots,  so  that  these  knots  may  be 
placed  similarly  to  the  manner  in  which  they  are  placed  in  the  figure  which  is  such  as  a turner 
would  produce. 

Eighteen  inches  is  an  extreme  length.  The  magnet  should  be  a strong  one. 

One  end  of  the  Wooden  Rod  should  be  cone-shaped.  The  North  end  of  the  magnet, 
(known  by  its  repelling  the  so-called  North  Pole  of  a compass  needle)  should  be  placed  at  the 
end  of  the  Wand  which  is  plain. 

The  whole  is  coloured  flame  scarlet,  and  divided  into  3 parts  by  Yellow  bands.  The  Cone 
shaped  end  has  also  painted  upon  its  red  surface  three  wavy  flame-shaped  YODS  as  ornaments; 
they  are  painted  in  bright  yellow  as  in  illustration. 

The  Divine  and  Angelic  names  of  the  Element  Fire,  should  be  there  written  in  green  paint 
along  the  Shaft  and  on  the  Cone. 

Their  sigils  should  be  added  with  the  Motto  of  the  Adeptus.  The  green  should  be  bright 
Emerald.  The  wand  must  then  be  consecrated. 

The  Wand  is  to  be  used  in  all  workings  of  the  Nature  of  Fire  and  under  the  Presidency  of 
YOD  and  of  the  Wand  of  the  Tarots.  Sigils  are  not  given.  The  Adeptus  must  work  them  out  for 
himself. 


THE  DAGGER  FOR  AIR 


Any  convenient  dagger  or  knife  or  sword  may  be  adapted  to  this  use,  the  shorter  the 
better.  The  hilt,  pommel  and  guard  are  to  be  coloured  a bright  pure  yellow. 

Upon  this  background,  the  divine  and  angelic  names  should  then  be  written  with  purple 
or  violet  colour,  together  with  their  sigils  from  the  Rose,  and  the  motto  of  the  Adeptus. 

It  is  then  ready  for  consecration. 

When  using  the  Air  Dagger  in  ceremonial  work,  it  may  be  held  in  the  usual  way  of  a 
dagger  — or  as  a knife,  or  as  described  for  the  Wand  or  Sword. 

It  is  to  be  used  in  all  works  of  an  Airy  nature  and  under  the  presidency  of  VAU  and  the 
Sword  of  the  Tarot. 

Let  there  be  no  confusion  between  the  magical  Sword  and  the  Air  Dagger.  They  belong 
to  different  planes  and  any  substitution  of  one  for  the  other  is  harmful. 

The  magical  Sword  is  under  GEBURAH  and  is  for  strength  and  defense.  The  Air  Dagger 
is  for  Air,  for  VAU  of  YHVH,  and  is  to  be  used  with  the  other  three  elemental  weapons. 


36 


VOLUME  FOUR 


THE  CUP  FOR  WATER 


Any  convenient  clear  glass  Cup  may  be  adapted  for  this  use. 

The  bowl  should  somewhat  resemble  the  shape  of  a crocus  flower,  and  must  show  eight 
petals.  Thus  a smooth  glass  cup  is  acceptable,  though  if  it  has  eight  cuts  or  ridges  it  is  preferable. 

These  petals  must  be  coloured  bright  blue,  neither  too  pale  nor  too  dark.  They  must  be 
edged  with  bright  orange  colour  which  must  be  clear  and  correct  — an  exact  complement  of  the 
blue,  adequate  to  produce  a flashing. 

The  petals  may  be  formed  by  paint  or  from  coloured  paper  pasted  on  the  glass.  (This  is 
not  really  practical.  If  water  spills  over  the  rim  of  the  glass,  it  may  spoil  altogether  the  stuck-on- 
paper.  Paint  is  by  far  the  better  medium.  I.R.)  The  proper  Divine  and  Angelic  Names  are  then  to 
be  written  upon  the  petals  in  orange  colour,  together  with  their  Sigils  from  the  Rose.  Then  add 
the  motto  of  the  Adeptus.  The  stem  and  base  may  be  painted  blue  also  — but  there  is  no 
advantage  in  this. 

The  Cup  must  be  consecrated  by  the  appropriate  ceremony. 

When  using  the  Cup,  you  may  sprinkle  with  Water  from  the  Cup  in  the  required 
direction. 

It  is  to  be  used  in  all  workings  of  the  nature  of  Water,  under  the  presidency  of  the  letter 
HEH  and  the  Cup  of  the  Tarot. 


THE  PANTACLE  FOR  EARTH 


The  Pantacle  or  Pentacle  should  be  formed  of  a round  disk  of  wood,  of  about  six  inches 
in  diameter  and  from  half  to  one  inch  in  thickness,  nicely  polished,  and  truly  circular  and  of  even 
thickness. 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


There  should  be  a circular  white  border,  with  a white  Hexagram  upon  each  face  of  the 
disk.  The  space  within  the  white  ring  should  be  divided  saltire-wise  into  four  compartments  by 
two  diameters  at  right  angles. 

The  four  compartments  are  to  be  coloured: 

The  upper  — Citrine  — for  the  Airy  part  of  Earth. 

The  right  — Olive  Green  — for  the  Watery  part  of  Earth. 

The  left  — Russet  Brown  — for  the  Fiery  part  of  Earth. 

The  lower  — Black  — for  the  Earthy  part  of  Earth. 

The  Divine  and  Angelic  names  should  be  written  in  black  within  the  white  border,  each 
name  followed  by  its  sigil  taken  from  the  Rose.  Crosses  may  be  placed  after  each  Sigil.  The 
motto  of  the  Adept  is  to  be  added. 

The  Pantacle  should  be  the  same  on  both  sides  and  should  be  held  in  the  hand  with  the 
Citrine  part  upmost,  unless  there  be  some  special  reason  for  using  one  of  the  other 
compartments. 

The  Pantacle  must  then  be  consecrated  by  the  appropriate  ceremony. 

It  is  to  be  used  in  all  working  of  the  nature  of  Earth,  and  under  the  presidency  of  HEH 
(final),  and  of  the  Pantacle  of  the  Tarot. 

RITUAL  OF  CONSECRATION  OF  THE  FOUR  ELEMENTAL  WEAPONS 


GENERAL  NOTES  ON  THE  CONSECRATION  OF  THE  FOUR  IMPLEMENTS 

The  Adept  is  to  be  robed  in  White,  wear  his  white  sash,  and  Rose  Cross. 

Have  on  hand-the  Lotus  Wand,  Magic  Sword  and  prepare  the  chamber  as  for  Sword. 

All  four  weapons  should  be  present  at  once  on  altar,  with  all  four  symbols  of  the 
Elements. 

Lay  the  Fire  Wand  near  the  Lamp,  the  Cup  near  the  Water,  the  Dagger  near  the  Incense 
and  the  Pantacle  near  the  Salt. 

Each  Elemental  Weapon  must  be  consecrated  at  a time  (24  minutes)  when  the  Tattwa  of 
the  Element  concerned  is  in  course. 

The  consecration  of  each  weapon  is  a separate  ceremony  although  they  may  be  done 
successively. 


38 


VOLUME  FOUR 


The  opening  ceremony  and  the  closing  ceremony  will  suffice  for  one  or  all,  however,  and 
need  not  be  repeated  if  all  are  consecrated  on  one  occasion. 

The  Tattwa  period  is  found  in  practice  to  suffice  for  the  ‘Special  Portion’  of  the 
ceremony. 

Prepare  for  each  Element  by  the  Invocation  to  the  King  and  the  Six  Seniors  from  the 
Elemental  Tablets,  according  to  the  instructions  laid  down  in  the  that  section  of  this  book  dealing 
at  length  with  Enochian  System. 

After  consecration,  each  implement  is  to  be  wrapped  up  either  in  White  silk  or  in  silk  of 
the  colour  proper  to  the  Element. 

NOTE  OF  V.H.  FRATER  N.O.M. 

Before  performing  these  four  ceremonies  it  will  be  found  wise  to  write  out  the  complete 
form,  including  all  pentagrams  and  other  figures  and  sigils  and  invocations,  using  the  notes  here 
following  as  an  outline.  Otherwise,  confusion  will  arise  among  Tablet  names. 

THE  RITUAL  OF  CONSECRATION 

1.  Take  up  the  Lotus  Wand  by  the  Black  portion,  and  say,  Hekas  Hekas  Este  Bebeloi.  Put 
down  the  Wand  and  take  up  the  Magic  Sword  and  with  it  go  to  the  East. 

2.  Perform  the  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram. 

3.  Lay  down  Sword,  and  purify  with  Water,  saying,  So  therefore  first  the  Priest  who 
governeth  the  works  of  Fire  must  sprinkle  with  the  Lustral  Water  of  the  loud-resounding  Sea. 

Consecrate  with  Fire,  saying,  And  when,  after  all  the  Phantoms  are  banished,  thou  shalt 
see  that  Holy  formless  Fire,  that  Fire  which  darts  and  flashes  through  the  hidden  depths  of  the 
Universe,  hear  thou  the  Voice  of  Fire. 

Take  up  the  Lotus  Wand  by  White  portion. 

6.  Circumambulate  with  the  Sun  three  times. 

Repeat  the  Adoration,  salute  with  the  Neophyte  Sign  each  time. 

Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

Holy  art  Thou,  whom  Nature  hath  not  Formed. 

Holy  art  Thou,  the  Vast  and  the  Mighty  One. 

Lord  of  the  Light  and  of  the  Darkness. 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Varying  with  each  Implement  on  different  days,  or  20  minutes  between  each 
commencement,  according  to  Tattwas,  perform  Supreme  Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram  of  the 
particular  elemental  Implement  with  Lotus  Wand,  holding  it  by  apropriate  band  of  the  Kerubic 
Figure. 

With  the  Lotus  Wand  in  hand,  and  standing  by  the  Altar  and  facing  the  Quarter  of  the 
Element  whose  Implement  you  are  consecrating,  describe  in  the  Air  over  the  Implement,  as  if 
standing  upon  it,  the  Invoking  Pentagram  of  that  Implement. 

Invoke  the  Divine  and  Angelic  Names  already  graven  upon  the  Implement,  making  their 
letters  and  Sigils  in  the  Air,  over  the  Implement  with  the  Lotus  Wand. 

0 Thou,  Who  art  from  everlasting,  Thou  Who  hast  created  all  things,  and  doth  clothe 
Thyself  with  the  Forces  of  Nature  as  with  a garment,  by  Thy  Holy  and  Divine  Name,  (For 

Pentacle  vibrate  Adonai,  For  Dagger  vibrate  Yhvh,  For  Cup  vibrate  El,  For  Wand  vibrate 

Elohim)  whereby  Thou  art  known  especially  in  that  Quarter  we  name  (For  Pentacle  and 

Earth  vibrate  Tzaphon  for  the  North,  For  Dagger  and  Air  vibrate  Mizrach  for  the  East, 

For  Cup  and  Water  vibrate  Mearab  for  the  West,  For  Wand  and  Fire  vibrate  Darom  for 

the  South). 

1 beseech  Thee  to  grant  unto  me  strength  and  insight  for  my  search  after  the  Hidden  Fight 
and  Wisdom.  I entreat  Thee  to  cause  Thy  Wonderful  Archangel  (For  Pentacle  vibrate  AURIEF 
Who  govemeth  the  works  of  Earth,  For  Dagger  vibrate  RAPHIEF  Who  govemeth  the  works  of 
Air,  For  Cup  vibrate  GABRIEF  Who  govemeth  the  works  of  Water,  For  Wand  vibrate 
MICHAEF  Who  govemeth  the  works  of  Fire)  to  guide  me  in  the  Pathway;  and  furthermore  to 
direct  Thine  Angel  (For  Pentacle  vibrate  PHORLAKH,  For  Dagger  vibrate  CHASSAN,  For  Cup 
vibrate  TALIAHAD,  For  Wand  vibrate  ARAL)  To  watch  over  my  footsteps  therein. 

May  the  Ruler  of  (name  element)  the  Powerful  Prince  (For  Pentacle  and  Earth  vibrate 
KERUB,  For  Dagger  and  Air  vibrate  ARIEF,  For  Cup  and  Water  vibrate  THARSIS,  For  Wand 
and  Fire  vibrate  SERAPH)  by  gracious  permission  of  the  Infinite  Supreme,  increase  and 
strengthen  the  hidden  forces  and  occult  virtues  of  this  (name  implement)  so  that  I may  be 
enabled  with  it  to  perform  aright  those  Magical  operations,  for  which  it  has  been  fashioned.  For 
which  puipose  I now  perform  this  mystic  rite  of  Consecration  in  the  Divine  Presence  of  (For 
Pentacle  vibrate  ADONAI,  For  Dagger  vibrate  YHVH,  For  Cup  vibrate  EF,  For  Wand  vibrate 
EFOHIM). 

Fay  aside  the  Fotus  Wand. 

Take  up  the  Magic  Sword,  and  read  the  Invocation  to  the  King,  tracing  in  the  Air  the 
Invoking  Pentagram  of  the  Element. 

In  the  Three  Great  Secret  Holy  Names  of  God  borne  upon  the  Banners  of  the,  (For 
Pentacle  and  Earth  — North  vibrate  EMOR  DIAL  HECTEGA,  For  Dagger  and  Air  — East  vibrate 
ORO  IB  AH  AOZPI,  For  Cup  and  Water  - West  vibrate  EMPEH  ARSEF  GAIOF,  For  Wand 
and  Fire  — South  vibrate  OIP  TEAA  PEDOCE). 


40 


VOLUME  FOUR 


I summon  Thee,  Thou  Great  King  of  the,  (For  Pentacle  — North  vibrate  IC  ZOD  HEH 
CHAL,  For  Dagger—  East  vibrate  BATAIVAH,  For  Cup—  West  vibrate  RA  AGIOSEL,  For 
Wand  — South  vibrate  EDEL  PERNAA)  to  attend  upon  this  Ceremony  and  by  Thy  presence 
increase  its  effect,  whereby  I do  now  consecrate  this  Magical  (name  implement).  Confer  upon  it 
the  utmost  occult  might  and  virtue  of  which  Thou  mayest  judge  it  to  be  capable  in  all  works  of 
the  nature  of  (name  implement)  so  that  in  it  I may  find  a strong  defense  and  a powerful  weapon 
wherewith  to  rule  and  direct  the  Spirits  of  the  Elements. 

13.  Still  with  the  Sword,  trace  in  the  Air  over  the  Implement  the  Hexagram  of  Saturn,  and 
read  the  Invocation  to  the  Six  Seniors. 

Ye  Mighty  Princes  of  the  (name  Quadrant)  Quadrangle,  I invoke  you  who  are  known  to 
me  by  the  honourable  title,  and  position  of  rank,  of  Seniors.  Hear  my  petition,  ye  mighty  Princes, 
the  Six  Seniors  of  the  (same  point)  quarter  of  the  Earth  who  bear  the  names  of,  (For  Earth  - 
LAIDROM  ALPHCTGA  ACZINOR  AHMLLICV  LZINOPO  LIIANSA,  For  Air  - HABIORO 
AHAOZPI  AAOZAIF  AVTOTAR  HTMORDA  HIPOTGA,  For  Water  - LSRAHPM  SLGAIOL 
SAIINOR  SONIZNT  LAOAXRP  LIGDISA,  For  Fire  - AAETPOI  AAPDOCE  ADOEOET 
ANODOIN  ALNDVOD  ARINNAP)  and  be  this  day  present  with  me.  Bestow  upon  this 
(nameweapon)  the  Strength  and  purity  whereof  ye  are  Masters  in  the  Elemental  Forces  which  ye 
control;  that  its  outward  and  material  form  may  remain  a true  symbol  of  the  inward  and  spiritual 
force. 

14.  Then  read  the  invocations  of  the  Angels  governing  the  Four  Lesser  Angles.  During 
each,  make  the  Invoking  Pentagram  of  the  Element  whose  implement  is  being  consecrated,  Cup, 
Wand,  Dagger,  or  Pentacle,  according  to  which  lesser  angle  is  in  process,  making  the  Pentagram 
in  the  air  immediately  over  the  Implement  with  the  Sword. 

FIRE  WAND 

Lesser  Angle  of  Fire.  0 Thou  Mighty  Angel  Bziza  who  art  Ruler  and  President  over  the 
Four  Angels  of  the  Fiery  Lesser  Quadrangle  of  Fire,  I invocate  Thee  to  impress  into  this  weapon 
the  force  and  fiery  energy  of  Thy  Kingdom  and  Servants,  that  by  it  I may  control  them  for  all  just 
and  righteous  purposes. 

With  the  Sword,  trace  invoking  Fire  Pentagram  with  Lion  Kerub.  Lesser  Angle  of  Water. 
0 Thou  Mighty  Angel  Banaa,  Ruler  and  President  over  the  Four  Angels  of  fluid  Fire,  I beseech 
Thee  to  impress  into  this  weapon  Thy  magic  power  that  by  it  I may  control  the  Spirits  who  serve 
Thee  for  all  just  and  righteous  purposes. 

With  the  Cup  trace  the  invoking  Fire  Pentagram. 

Lesser  Angle  of  Air.  0 Thou  Mighty  Angel  Bdopa,  Ruler  and  President  over  the  Four 
Angels  and  Governors  of  the  subtle  and  aspiring  Etheric  Fire,  I beseech  Thee  to  bestow  upon  this 
weapon  Thy  strength  and  fiery  steadfastness,  that  with  it  I may  control  the  Spirits  of  Thy  Realm 
for  all  just  and  righteous  purposes. 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Trace  Invoking  Fire  Pentagram  with  the  Dagger. 

Lesser  Angle  of  Earth.  0 Thou  Mighty  Angel  Bpsac,  who  art  Ruler  and  President  over  the 
Four  Angels  of  the  denser  Fire  of  Earth,  I beseech  Thee  to  bestow  upon  this  weapon  Thy  strength 
and  fiery  steadfastness  that  with  it  I may  control  the  Spirits  of  Thy  realm  for  all  just  and 
righteous  purposes. 

Trace  Invoking  Fire  Pentagram  with  Pentacle. 

WATER  CUP 

Lesser  Angle  of  Fire.  0 Thou  Powerful  Angel  Hnlrx,  Thou  who  are  Ford  and  Ruler  over 
the  Fiery  Waters,  I beseech  Thee  to  endue  this  Cup  with  the  Magic  Powers  of  which  Thou  art 
Ford,  that  I may  with  its  aid  direct  the  Spirits  who  serve  Thee  in  purity  and  singleness  of  aim. 

With  Wand  trace  invoking  Water  Pentagram  with  Eagle  Kerub. 

Lesser  Angle  of  Water.  0 Thou  Powerful  Angel  Htdim,  Thou  who  art  Lord  and  Ruler 
over  the  pure  and  fluid  Element  of  Water,  I beseech  Thee  to  endue  this  Cup  with  the  Magic 
Powers  of  which  Thou  art  Ford,  that  I may  with  its  aid  direct  the  Spirits  who  serve  Thee  in  purity 
and  singleness  of  aim. 

With  Sword  trace  invoking  Water  Pentagram. 

Lesser  Angle  of  Air.  0 Thou  Powerful  Angel  Htaad,  Thou  who  art  Lord  and  Ruler  of  the 
Etheric  and  Airy  Qualities  of  Water,  I beseech  Thee  to  endue  this  Cup  with  the  Magic  Powers  of 
which  Thou  art  Lord,  that  I may  with  its  aid  direct  the  Spirits  who  serve  Thee  in  purity  and 
singleness  of  aim. 

With  Dagger  trace  invoking  Water  Pentagram. 

Lesser  Angle  of  Earth.  0 Thou  Powerful  Angel  Hmagl,  Thou  who  art  Lord  and  Ruler  of 
the  more  dense  and  solid  qualities  of  Water,  I beseeh  Thee  to  endue  this  Cup  with  the  Magic 
Powers  of  which  Thou  art  Lord,  that  with  its  aid  I may  direct  the  Spirits  who  serve  Thee  in  purity 
and  singleness  of  aim. 

With  Pentacle  trace  invoking  Water  Pentagram. 

AIR  DAGGER 

Lesser  Angle  of  Fire.  0 Thou  Resplendent  Angel  Exgsd,  Thou  who  governest  the  Fiery 
Realms  of  Air,  I conjure  Thee  to  confer  upon  this  Dagger,  Thy  mysterious  and  magical  Powers, 
that  I thereby  may  control  the  Spirits  who  serve  Thee  for  such  purposes  as  be  pure  and  upright. 

With  the  Wand  trace  invoking  Air  Pentagram  with  Aquarius  as  Kerubic  emblem.  Lesser 
Angle  of  Water.  0 Thou  Resplendent  Angel  Eytpa,  Thou  who  governest  the  Realms  of  Fluid  Air; 
I conjure  Thee  to  confer  upon  this  Dagger,  Thy  Mysterious  Powers  that  by  its  aid  I may  control 
the  Spirits  who  serve  Thee  for  such  purposes  as  be  pure  and  upright. 

With  the  Cup  trace  invoking  Air  Pentagram. 


42 


VOLUME  FOUR 


Lesser  Angle  of  Air.  0 Thou  Resplendent  Angel  Erzla,  Thou  who  rulest  the  Realms  of 
Pure  and  Permeating  Air,  I conjure  Thee  to  confer  upon  this  Dagger  the  Magic  Power  of  which 
Thou  art  Master,  whereby  I may  control  the  Spirits  who  serve  Thee,  for  such  purposes  as  be  pure 
and  upright. 

With  the  Sword  trace  invoking  Air  Pentagram. 

Lesser  Angle  of  Earth.  0 Thou  Resplendent  Angel  Etnbr,  Thou  who  rulest  the  Denser 
Realms  of  Air  symbolised  by  the  Lesser  Angle  of  Earth,!  conjure  Thee  to  confer  upon  this 
Dagger  the  Magic  Powers  of  which  Thou  art  Master,  whereby  I may  control  the  spirits  who  serve 
Thee,  for  such  purposes  as  be  pure  and  upright. 

With  the  Pentacle  trace  invoking  Air  Pentagram. 

" EARTH  PENTACLE 

Lesser  Angle  of  Fire.  0 Thou  Glorious  Angel  Naaom,  Thou  who  governest  the  Fiery 
essences  of  Earth,  I invocate  Thee  to  bestow  upon  this  Pentacle  the  Magic  Powers  of  which  thou 
art  Sovereign,  that  by  its  help  I may  govern  the  Spirits  of  Whom  Thou  art  Lord,  in  all  seriousness 
and  steadfastness. 

With  Wand  over  Russet  part  trace  invoking  Earth  Pentagram  with  Taurus  Kerub. 

Lesser  Angle  of  Water.  0 Thou  Glorious  Angel  Nphra,  Thou  who  governest  the  moist  and 
fluid  essences  of  Earth.  I invocate  Thee  to  bestow  upon  this  Pentacle  the  Magic  Powers  of  which 
Thou  art  Sovereign  that  by  its  help  I may  govern  the  Spirits,  of  whom  Thou  art  Lord,  in  all 
seriousness  and  steadfastness. 

With  Cup  over  Olive  part,  trace  invoking  Earth  Pentagram. 

Lesser  Angle  of  Air.  0 Thou  Glorious  Angel  Nboza;  Thou  who  governest  the  Airy  and 
Delicate  Essense  of  Earth, ! invocate  Thee  to  bestow  upon  this  Pentacle  the  Magic  Powers  of 
which  Thou  art  Master,  that  with  its  help  I may  govern  the  spirits  of  whom  Thou  art  Lord,  in  all 
seriousness  and  steadfastness. 

With  Dagger  over  Citrine  part,  trace  invoking  Earth  Pentagram. 

Lesser  Angle  of  Earth.  0 Thou  Glorious  Angel  Nroam,  Thou  who  governest  the  dense 
and  solid  Earth, ! invocate  Thee  to  bestow  upon  this  Pentacle  the  Magic  Powers  of  which  Thou 
art  Master,  that  with  its  help  I may  govern  the  spirits  of  whom  Thou  art  Lord,  in  all  seriousness 
and  steadfastness. 

With  Sword  over  Black  part,  trace  invoking  Earth  Pentagram. 

Then  take  up  the  newly  consecrated  Implement  and  perform  with  it  the  Supreme 
Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram  of  its  Element  in  the  Four  Quarters,  preceding  each 

Pentagram  with  the  Equilibriating  Pentagram  suitable.  Close  with  Qabalistic  Cross  and 
Prayer.  When  completed  each  Implement  is  to  be  wrapped  in  silk  or  linen,  white,  or  suitable 
colour. 

Purify  with  Water,  repeating  verse  as  in  opening. 

Consecrate  with  Fire,  repeating  the  verse  as  in  opening. 

Reverse  Circumambulation. 

Stand  at  West  of  Altar,  and  say,  In  the  name  of  YEHESHUAH,  I now  set  free  any 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Spirits  that  may  have  been  imprisoned  by  this  ceremony. 

Perform  the  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  Pentagram  in  four  Quarters. 

If  preferred,  the  Supreme  Banishing  Ritual  of  Pentagram  of  special  element,  if  one  or  two 
or  three  Implements  have  been  consecrated  and  not  all  four  at  same  ceremony. 

The  Lotus  Wand 

DIAGRAM  OF  THE  LOTUS  WASH 


THE  LOTUS  WAND 
(Far  Th«  Zelutar  Adeptus  Minot  Grade  I 

This  is  for  general  use  in  Magical  Working.  It  is  to  be  carried  by  the  Z.A.M.  at  all 
meetings  of  the  Second  Order  at  which  he  has  the  right  to  attend. 


44 


VOLUME  FOUR 


1.  It  is  to  be  made  by  himself  unassisted. 

2.  Consecrated  by  himself. 

3.  Used  by  himself  alone. 

4.  Untouched  by  any  other  person. 

5.  Kept  wrapped  in  white  silk  or  linen. 

It  will  thus  be  free  from  external  influences  other  than  his  own,  on  the  human  plane. 
The  Wand  has  the  upper  end  white;  the  lower  is  black,  and  between  there  are  12  colours 
referring  to  the  12  zodiacal  signs  in  the  positive  and  masculine  scale  of  colour.  At  the  upper 
end  of  the  white  is  fixed  a Lotus  Flower  in  three  whorls  of  26  petals;  the  outer  8,  the  middle 
8,  and  the  inner  10  petals.  The  Calyx  has  4 lobes  or  sepals  of  orange  color.  The  flower  centre 
is  orange.  The  wand  should  be  from  24  to  40  inches  long,  of  wood  about  an  inch  in  diameter. 
See  next  page  for  definition  of  XX. 


The  bands  of  white,  twelve  colours,  and  black,  may  be  painted  or  enamelled,  or  formed 
of  coloured  papers  gummed  on.  The  lengths  of  the  band  should  be  such  that  the  white  is  longest, 
then  the  black,  then  the  twelve  colours  in  length.  The  colours  must  be  clean,  brilliant  and  correct. 

They  are  as  follows: 


While 


Aries 

Red 

Taurus 

Red-Orange 

Gemini 

Orange 

Cancer 

Amber 

Leu 

Lemon  Yellow 

Virgo 

Yellow  Green 

Libra 

F.merald 

Scorpio 

Greenish-Blue 

Sagittarius 

Bright  Blue 

Capricorn 

Indigo 

Aquarius 

Violet 

Pisces 

Crimson 

45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Button  is  Black 

The  Lotus  Flower  may  be  of  metal  or  cardboard,  in  three  whorls  of  8,  8,  and  10  petals, 
white  internally,  with  the  tips  curved  inward  a little.  Outside,  the  petals  should  be  olive  green 
with  five  markings,  as  shown  in  diagram. 

The  flower  centre  should  be  of  orange  colour,  or  a brass  bolt  to  keep  all  together  will 
serve  the  same  purpose. 

On  the  white  portion  of  the  wand  the  owner's  motto  may  be  inscribed. 

THE  SYMBOLISM  AND  USE  OF  THE  LOTUS  WAND 

As  a general  rule  use  the  White  end  in  Invocation  but  use  the  black  end  to  Banish.  The 
white  end  may  be  used  to  banish  by  tracing  a banishing  symbol  against  an  evil  and  opposing 
force  which  has  resisted  other  efforts. 

By  this  is  meant,  that  by  whatever  band  you  are  holding  the  wand,  whether  by  white  for 
spiritual  things,  black  for  mundane,  blue  for  Sagittarius,  red  for  fiery  triplicity  etc.  you  are  when 
invoking  to  direct  the  white  band  externally  to  the  quarter  desired.  When  banishing  to  point  the 
black  or  lowest  end  to  the  quarter.  But  the  Wand  is  never  to  be  inverted.  So  when  very  material 
forces  are  concerned,  the  black  end  may  be  most  suitable  for  invocation,  but  with  the  greatest 
caution. 

In  working  on  the  Plane  of  the  Zodiac,  hold  the  wand  by  the  portion  you  refer  to  between 
the  thumb  and  two  fingers.  If  a planetary  working  be  required,  hold  the  wand  by  the  portion 
representing  the  day  or  night-house  of  the  planet,  or  else  by  the  Sign  in  which  the  Planet  is  at  the 
time. 


PLANET 

□ AV-tlOL'SE 

1 NICHf-HOVSF. 

Salurn 

Capricorn 

Aquarius 

Jupilrf 

.S#[iltiri|n 

Pncn 

Mars 

Ari« 

Scorpio 

Venus 

Ljbca 

t nurus 

Mrrcury 

(Gemini 

Virgo 

Sun 

Leo  oni> 

Milan 

Cancer  ooh 

Should  the  action  be  with  the  elements,  one  of  the  signs  of  the  triplicity  of  that  element 
should  be  held  according  to  the  nature  of  the  elements  intended  to  be  invoked. 

Thus  bearing  in  mind  that  the  Kerubic  Emblem  is  the  most  powerful  action  of  the 
element  in  the  triplicity. 

Leo-violent  heat  of  summer. 

Aries-beginning  of  warmth  of  spring. 

Sagittarius-waning  of  heat  in  autumn. 


46 


VOLUME  FOUR 


Hold  the  Wand  by  the  White  portion  for  all  Divine  or  Spiritual  matters,  or  for  Sephirotic 
influences,  and  for  all  the  processes  of  Rising  on  the  Planes. 

Hold  the  wand  by  the  black  part  only  for  material  and  mundane  affairs. 

The  ten  upper  and  inner  petals  refer  to  the  purity  of  the  ten  Sephiroth.  The  middle  8 refer 
to  the  counter-charged  natural  and  spiritual  forces  of  fire  and  air.  The  lowest  and  outer  8 refer  to 
the  powers  of  earth  and  water.  The  central  amber  portion  refers  to  the  Spiritual  Sun.  The  outer 
calyx  of  four  orange  petals  shows  the  action  of  the  Sun  upon  the  elements  perfecting  the  life  of 
things  by  differentiation. 

THE  WAND  SHOULD  NEVER  BE  USED  INVERTED 

The  Lotus  Flower  is  not  to  be  touched  in  working.  In  Sephirotic  and  Spiritual  things 
however  the  flower  is  to  be  inclined  towards  the  forehead.  To  rise  in  the  planes  the  orange 
coloured  centre  is  to  be  fully  directed  to  the  forehead. 

CONSECRATION  OF  A LOTUS  WAND 

First  provide: 

1 . A private  room 

2.  A white  triangle 

3.  A red  cross  of  six  squares 

4.  Incense  and  a rose 

5.  Lamp,  or  a vessel  of  Fire 

6.  Water  in  a vase 

7.  Salt  on  a platter 

8.  Astrologic  figure  of  the  heavens  for  the  time  of  consecration. 

9.  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram 

10.  The  new  Wand 

1 1 . White  linen  or  silk  wrapper 

12.  A table  for  an  altar  with 

13.  Black  cover  and  drapery. 

Second,  find  the  position  of  the  East. 

Third,  prepare  an  invocation  of  the  forces  of  the  Sign  of  the  Zodiac. 

Fourth,  place  the  Altar  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  cover  and  drape  it  with  a black  cloth. 
Fifth,  arrange  upon  it  the  Cross  and  Triangle,  the  Water  at  the  base  of  the  triangle,  the 
Incense  and  Rose  in  the  East  above  the  Cross,  the  Lamp  at  the  South. 

Sixth,  illumine  the  Lamp. 

Seventh,  stand  holding  the  Wand  at  the  West  of  the  Altar  facing  the  East. 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Eighth,  grasp  the  Wand  by  the  Black  portion  and 

Ninth,  say  'Hekas,  Hekas,  este  Bebeloi.' 

Tenth,  perform  the  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram. 

Eleventh,  deposit  the  wand  upon  the  Altar. 

Twelfth,  light  the  Incense  from  the  Lamp. 

Thirteenth,  sprinkle  some  Salt  into  the  Water 

Fourteenth,  purify  the  room,  first  with  water,  and  then  with  fire,  as  in  the  Neophyte  grade, 
repeating  as  you  do  so  these  two  passages  from  the  ritual  of  the  31st  Path:  With  water:  So 
therefore  first  the  Priest  who  governeth  the  works  of  fire,  must  sprinkle  with  the  lustral  waters  of 
the  loud  resounding  sea. 

Fifteenth,  with  fire:  And  when  after  all  the  phantoms  are  banished  thou  shalt  see  that  holy 
and  formless  five,  that  fire  which  darts  and  flashes  through  the  hidden  depths  of  the  Universe, 
hear  thou  the  Voice  of  Fire. 

Take  up  the  Wand  again  by  the  white  portion,  circumambulate  the  room  three  times  and 
at  West,  facing  East  repeat  the  adoration. 

Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  Universe! 

Holy  art  Thou  whom  Nature  hath  not  formed! 

Holy  art  Thou!  the  Vast  and  Mighty  One! 

Lord  of  the  Light  and  of  the  Darkness! 

Sixteenth,  perform  the  Supreme  Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram  at  the  four  quarters  of 
the  room,  tracing  the  proper  pentagram  at  each  quarter. 

Seventeenth,  stand  then  in  the  Eastern  Quarter;  face  the  East;  hold  the  Wand  by  the  white 
portion;  give  the  sign  of  Adeptus  Minor.  Look  upward,  hold  the  Wand  on  high  and  say: 

O Harpocrates,  Lord  of  Silence,  who  art  enthroned  upon  the  Lotus.  Twenty-six  are 
the  Petals  of  the  Lotus  Flower  of  the  Wand.  0 Lord  of  Creation!  They  are  the  number  of 
Thy  Name.  In  the  name  of  YHVH  let  the  Divine  Light  descend. 

Eighteenth,  facing  consecutively  the  quarter  where  each  Sign  is,  repeat  in  each  of  the  12 
directions  the  Invocation  which  follows,  using  the  appropriate  Divine  and  Angelic  Names  and 
Letters  for  each  special  Sign.  Begin  with  Aries.  Hold  the  wand  at  the  appropriate  coloured  part, 
and  in  left  hand  the  element  from  off  the  altar  which  is  referred  to  the  Sign  and  say: 

(For  Aries)  The  Heaven  is  above  and  the  earth  is  beneath,  and  between  the  Light  and 
Darkness  the  Colours  vibrate. 


48 


VOLUME  FOUR 


"1 

Color 

» if  s 

S & S g £ c c Ijl 

v<v  m E i,  U ii  h J ^ J 1, 

asaso<  — >•  o v n £ >u 

< 

rs 

hH 

o 

M _ 

£ & 

Mm  ™ 

H < 

U.  1 

u — 

— _ _.  S — — 

— 4*  *a  >-  4?  — — V 

* 1 ■§  = 1 Bile  sll 

2 * = 2 v ^ ^ e 

c 

r*i 

I * 

£ 4 e 

X « £ 

H - — 

if;  ^ i j i | 

* A fi  ^ T,  9-  5 - 5f  ? 

_ 5 fi  u a ■=  .s  _ ■=■  = -£  ' 

U 4 ^ sc  < £ A k je3 

Ifa 

C 

£ t 

3 1 ± 

C £ V 

[h  * " 

_ P f s 

= 5 S1  4-  _ ^ f 

^e  a £ ti  £ c = £ r — 

^ * ot  ^ vQ  * 3 a *r  M 5 

Mi  “ 

jE  c 

H 5 

s ii 

£ E z 

>x=x>>>x^x>> 

2 ti 

p 0-  O 

^>>>-asx>^>xxs 

-■?  

U 

© 

> 

(jJ 

9-  -a.  e. 

X E 

B — j a-  c « i J £ “ ? c- 

r1  ■%< 

l—i 

J/iayJ3[fla^-j«ci;v 

| E g 

C 

H 

jj  E { S e - ||  £ 5 £ 

1.  ii  £ ’ (T  a ff’.i 

49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


I supplicate  the  powers  and  forces  governing  the  realm  and  place  and  authority  of  the 
Sign  Aries  by  the  Majesty  of  the  Divine  name  YHVH  with  which  in  earth  life  and  language  I 
ascribe  the  letter  Heh,  to  which  is  allotted  the  Symbolic  tribe  of  Gad,  and  over  which  is  the 
Angel  Malchidael,  to  bestow  this  present  day  and  hour  and  confirm  their  mystic  and  potent 
influence  upon  the  Red  band  of  this  Lotus  Wand,  which  I hereby  dedicate  to  purity  and  to  occult 
work.  May  its  grasp  strengthen  me  in  the  work  of  the  character  of  Aries  and  his  attributes. 

Nineteen,  as  this  is  recited,  trace  in  the  air  with  the  Lotus  end  the  invoking  Pentagram  of 
the  Sign  required,  and  hold  the  corresponding  element  from  the  Altar  in  the  left  hand,  while 
facing  in  each  of  the  12  Zodiacal  directions. 

Twenty,  then  lay  the  wand  on  the  Altar,  the  Lotus  pointing  towards  the  East.  Stand  on  the 
West  side  of  the  Altar,  face  the  East  and  say: 

O Isis!  Great  Goddess  of  the  Forces  of  Nature,  let  Thine  influence  descend  and 
consecrate  this  Wand  which  I dedicate  to  Thee  for  the  performance  of  the  works  of  the  Magic  of 
Light. 

Twenty-first,  wrap  up  the  Wand  in  silk  or  linen. 

Twenty-second,  purify  the  room  by  Water  and  by  Fire  as  at  the  first,  then  performing  the 
reverse  circumambulation. 

Twenty-third,  standing  at  the  West  of  the  Altar,  face  the  East  and  recite: 

In  the  Name  of  Yeheshuah  I now  set  free  any  Spirits  that  may  have  been  imprisoned  by 
this  Ceremony. 

Preferably  perform  the  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram. 


THE  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  ROSE  CROSS 

Rays  — White  with  black  letters  and  symbols. 

Air  — yellow  ground  purple  Pentagram  and  symbols. 

Fire  — scarlet  ground  Emerald  Pentagram  and  symbols. 

Water  — blue  ground  Orange  Pentagram  and  symbols. 

White  ground  — Black  Hexagram  and  symbols. 

Earth  Citrine,  Russet,  Olive,  Black,  White  Pentagram  and  symbols 

ROSE  CROSS 

The  Rose  and  Cross  is  for  general  use  in  magical  working  and  is  to  be  worn  by  the 
Zelator  Adeptus  Minor  at  all  meetings  of  the  Second  Order  at  which  he  has  the  right  to  be 
present. 


50 


VOLUME  FOUR 


It  should  be  suspended  from  a yellow  silk  collarette  or  ribbon.  It  is  to  be  made  and 
consecrated  by  him  unassisted  and  when  not  in  use  should  be  wrapped  in  white  silk  or  linen. 

Like  the  Lotus  Wand,  it  should  not  be  touched  by  another  person  after  consecration,  only  by  its 
owner. 

It  is  a complete  synthesis  of  the  Positive,  Masculine,  or  Rainbow  Scale  of  Colour 
attribution,  the  ‘Scale  of  the  King,’  as  it  is  called.  These  colours  may  be  found  in  a Knowledge 
Lecture.  The  four  ends  are  attributed  to  the  Elements,  the  white  portion  to  the  Spirit  and  to  the 
Planets,  the  22  petals  of  the  Rose  to  the  22  paths,  it  is  the  Cross  in  Tiphareth,  the  receptacle  and 
centre  of  the  forces  of  the  Sephiroth  and  the  Paths.  The  extreme  centre  of  the  Rose  is  White,  the 
reflected  spiritual  brightness  of  Kether,  bearing  upon  it  the  Red  Rose  and  Golden  Cross  from 
which  the  second  Order  takes  its  name;  the  symbols  of  the  rescuing  force. 

Around  the  Hexagram  on  the  white  part,  below  the  Rose,  are  placed  the  planets  in  the 
order  which  is  the  Key  of  the  Supreme  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram.  Around  the  Pentagrams  are  the 
symbols  of  the  Spirit  and  the  four  Elements  in  the  order  which  is  the  Key  of  the  Supreme  Ritual 
of  the  Pentagram,  in  each  of  the  floreated  ends  of  the  Cross  itself  are  arranged  the  three 
Alchemical  principles,  but  in  different  order  in  each  element,  and  as  showing  their  operation 
therein. 

The  uppermost  arm  of  the  Cross  allotted  to  Air,  is  of  the  yellow  colour  of  Tiphareth.  in  it 
the  flowing  philosophic  mercurial  nature  is  chief  and  without  hindrance  to  its  mobility,  hence  the 
ever  moving  nature  of  Air.  Its  Suiphurous  side  is  drawn  from  the  part  of  Fire  whence  its 
luminous  and  electrical  qualities,  its  Saline  from  the  Water,  whence  clouds  and  rains,  from  the 
action  of  the  Solar  forces. 

The  lowest  arm  of  the  Cross  allotted  to  Earth  is  of  the  four  colours  of  Malkuth,  the  Earth 
being  of  the  nature  of  a container  and  receiver  of  the  other  influences.  The  Citrine  answers  to  its 
airy  part;  the  Olive  to  the  watery;  the  Russet  to  the  fiery  part;  and  the  Black  to  the  lowest  part, 
earthy  of  the  Earth. 

Here  is  also  the  Mercurial  part  chief,  but  hindered  by  the  compound  nature,  whence  its 
faculty  becomes  germinative,  rather  than  mobile.  While  the  Sulphur  and  the  Salt  are  respectively 
from  the  sides  of  Water  and  Fire,  which  almost  neutralize  their  natural  operation  and  bring  about 
the  fixedness  and  immobility  of  Earth. 

The  extremity  allotted  to  fire  is  of  the  scarlet  colour  of  GEBURAH,  and  in  it  the 
Suiphurous  nature  is  chief,  whence  its  powers  of  heat  and  burning.  The  Salt  is  from  the  side  of 
water,  whence  the  necessity  for  a constant  substantial  pabulum  whereon  to  act;  and  the  Mercury 
is  from  the  side  of  Air,  whence  the  leaping,  lambent  motion  of  flame  especially  when  acted  on 
by  wind. 

The  extremity  allotted  to  Water  is  of  the  blue  color  of  CHESED  and  in  it  the  Salt  nature 
is  chief  as  exemplified  in  the  Salt  nature  of  the  Ocean,  to  which  all  waters  go;  and  thence  also  is 
derived  the  nature  of  always  preserving  the  horizontal  line.  The  Mercury  is  from  Earth  whence 
the  weight  and  force  of  its  flux  and  reflux.  Its  Sulphur  part  is  from  the  Air 


51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


whence  the  effects  of  waves  and  storms;  so  that  the  dispositions  of  these  three  principles  form 
the  key  of  their  alchemical  operation  in  the  elements. 

The  white  rays  issuing  from  behind  the  Rose  at  the  inner  angles  between  the  arms,  are  the 
rays  of  the  Divine  light  issuing  and  corruscating  from  the  reflected  light  of  Kether  in  its  centre. 
The  letters  and  symbols  on  them  refer  to  the  analysis  of  the  Key  Word  of  an  Adeptus  Minor. 

I.N.R.I. 

The  above  is  the  means  by  which  the  opening  of  the  Vault  is  accomplished.  Its 
associations  are  as  follows: 

The  first  I is  attributed  to  Virgo,  as  well  as  L in  (LVX),  the  letter  N is  attributed  to 
Scorpio,  as  well  as  V in  (LVX),  the  letter  R is  attributed  to  the  Sun,  as  well  as  X in  (LVX),  the 
final  I merely  repeats  some  of  the  attributions. 

The  Twelve  letters  of  the  12  outer  petals  follow  the  order  of  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

HEH  that  is  Aries  being  uppermost. 

LAMED  which  is  Libra  being  lowest. 

The  Seven  Double  letters  of  the  middle  row  are  allotted  to  the  Planets  in  order  of  their 
exaltations,  the  planets  being  wanderers,  and  the  stars  fixed  with  respect  to  the  Earth. 

THE  SEVEN  DOl  BEE  TETTERS  ON  THE  ROSE 


7 

Taj 

Salurn 

6 

fttvh 

Sun 

5 

Prh 

Mart 

4 

Kipb 

Jupiitr 

DafelJt 

Venii* 

1 

Gimrl 

Muuji 

t 

Herb 

M*rrurv 

The  Three  Mother  Letters  are  allotted  to  the  Elements,  and  are  so  arranged  that  the  petal 
of  Air  should  be  beneath  the  arm  of  the  Cross  allotted  to  Air.  While  those  of  Fire  and  Water  are 
on  counterchanged  sides  so  that  the  forces  of  the  arms  of  the  Cross  should  not  too  much  over  rule 
the  Planetary  and  Zodiacal  forces  in  the  Rose,  which  might  otherwise  be  the  case  were  the  petal 
of  Fire  placed  on  the  same  side  as  the  arm  of  Fire,  and  that  of  Water  on  the  arm  of  water. 

The  mode  of  Sigil  formation  from  the  Rose  petals  is  taught  in  another  place  in  this 
volume. 

The  back  of  the  Cross  bears  inscriptions  as  shown  as  follows: 


52 


VOLUME  FOUR 


YELLOW 


THE  GOLDEN  DAWN  ROSE  CROSS 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


At  the  top  is  written  in  Latin:  The  Master  Jesus  Christ,  God  and  Man,'  between  four 
Maltese  crosses,  which  represent  the  four  pyramids  of  the  Elements  opened  out. 

This  is  placed  at  the  uppermost  part  because  here  is  affirmed  the  descent  of  the  Divine 
Force  into  Tiphareth,  which  is  the  central  point  between  Supernals  and  Inferiors.  But  at  the 
lowest  part  is  written  the  Motto  of  the  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor,  because  therein  is  the  affirmation 
of  the  elevation  of  the  Human  into  the  Divine. 

But  this  is  impossible  without  the  assistance  of  the  Divine  Spirit  from  Kether,  whence  the 
space  above  Malkuth  is  white  upon  the  front  aspect  of  the  Cross— white  being  the  Symbol  of  the 
Spiritual  rescuing  from  the  material. 

In  the  centre,  between  the  symbols  of  the  Alchemical  Principles  of  which  the  outermost  is 
Sulphur,  the  purgational  fire  of  suffering  and  self-sacrifice  is  written  in  Latin:  'Blessed  be  the 
Lord  our  God  who  hath  given  us  the  Symbol  SIGNUM'and  this  is  a word  of  six  letters,  thus 
representing  the  six  periods  (creative)  in  the  Universe.  And  the  Regimen  of  the  Planets  necessary 
ere  the  Glory  of  the  Sun  can  be  obtained. 

S.R.M.D.  NOTE  OF  MAKING  THE  ROSE  CROSS 

The  Cross  may  be  cut  out  of  cardboard  and  the  coloured  portions  may  be  painted  or 
formed  by  pasting  on  portions  of  coloured  paper  of  the  required  shape.  The  colours  must  be 
correct  and  clear  and  brilliant.  If  they  are  not  the  symbol  is  useless  either  as  a Symbol  or 
insignium.  Actually  evil  effects  may  follow  if  the  colours  are  not  clear  and  brilliant  or  if  they  are 
dirty.  If  this  occurs,  the  whole  should  be  destroyed,  for  faulty  colours  and  shapes  in  Divine 
Symbols  are  a degradation  of  Divine  Things  and  are  practical  blasphemy,  because  it  is 
substituting  the  evil  and  disorderly  for  the  good. 

For  the  petals,  one  pattern  may  be  designed  and  several  cut  at  once  from  it, 
superimposing  several  coloured  papers. 

No  dimensions  are  officially  given  for  the  Rose  Cross  but  pragmatism  dictates  that  it 
should  be  about  7-8  inches  in  length. 

CONSECRATION  OF  THE  ROSE  CROSS 

1.  Prepare  the  chamber,  and  the  invocation  of  Tiphareth. 

2..  Arrange  a central  altar,  draped  in  black. 

3.  Place  on  it  the  Triangle  and  Cross  as  in  the  Neophyte  Grade. 

4.  Place  on  it  the  Rose,  Cup,  Salt,  and  Fire,  but  place  Cup  between  the  Cross  and 
Triangle  as  in  the  Neophyte  Grade,  with  the  Rose  and  incense  at  the  East  side. 

5.  Place  the  new  Rose  Cross  upon  the  Triangle. 

6.  Stand  at  the  West  side  of  the  Altar  and  have  thy  Lotus  Wand  (consecrated)  with  thee. 

7.  Illumine  the  Lamp  and  incense,  and  drop  salt  into  the  water. 

8.  Take  the  Wand  in  the  right  hand. 

.9.  Repeat:  Hekas,  Hekas,  este  Bebeloi. 

10.  Perform  the  lesser  .Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram. 


54 


VOLUME  FOUR 


1 1)  Perform  the  lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram. 

12)  Deposit  the  Wand  upon  the  Altar. 

13)  Purify  the  chamber  with  Water  in  the  four  quarters  So  therefore  first  the  Priest  who 
governeth  the  works  of  fire  must  sprinkle  with  the  lustral  water  of  the  loud 
resounding  sea. 

14)  Purify  the  chamber  with  Fire  in  the  four  quarters  repeating:  When  after  all  the 
phantoms  are  banished  thou  shalt  see  that  holy  and  formless  fire,  that  fire  which  darts 
and  flashes  through  the  hidden  depths  of  the  Universe,  hear  thou  the  Voice  of  Fire. 

15)  Take  up  the  Wand 

16)  Circumambulate  with  the  Sun  three  times. 

17)  Return  to  place  and  repeat  the  Adorations: 

Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  Universe! 

Holy  art  Thou,  Whom  Nature  hath  not  formed! 

Holy  art  Thou,  the  Vast  and  Mighty  One! 

Lord  of  Light  and  of  the  Darkness!' 

Give  sign  of  Neophyte  at  each  adoration  and  sign  of  Silence  at  close. 

18)  Perform  the  Supreme  Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram  at  the  Four  quarters  of  the 
Chamber. 

19)  Stand  West  of  the  Altar,  facing  East,  hold  the  Wand  by  the  White  part. 

20)  Make  over  the  Rose  Cross,  in  the  Air  with  the  Lotus  wand  and  as  if  standing  in  the 
centre  of  the  Rose,  the  symbol  and  invoke  all  the  Divine  and  Angelic  Names  of  the 
Tiphareth  by  a special  form  as  follows: 

Thou  most  sublime  Majesty  on  high,  who  art  at  certain  seasons  worthily 
represented  by  the  Glorious  Sun  of  Tiphareth.  I beseech  Thee  to  bestow  upon  this  symbol 
of  the  Rose  and  Cross,  which  I have  formed  in  Thy  honour,  and  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
Great  Work  in  a spirit  of  purity  and  love,  the  most  excellent  virtues  by  the  divine  name  of 
YHVH,  and  the  great  name  of  ELOAH  VE  DAATH.  Deign  I beseech  thee  to  grant  that  the 
great  Archangel  RAPHAEL  and  the  mighty  angel  MICHAEL  may  strengthen  this  emblem, 
and  through  the  sphere  of  the  splendid  orb  of  SHEMESH  may  confer  upon  it  such  power 
and  virtue  as  to  lead  me  by  it  towards  the  solution  of  the  great  Secret.  (Raising  the  hand  and 
eyes  to  Heaven  during  the  Prayer  and  covering  them  as  you  finish  it.) 

21)  Repeat  these  words  from  Genesis: 

And  a river  NAHAR  went  forth  out  of  Eden  to  water  the  Garden,  and  from  thence 
it  was  parted  and  came  into  four  heads. 

21)  Describe  over  the  white  portion  the  invoking  Hexagrams  of  the  planets  as  if  standing 
upon  it,  repeating  the  necessary  names  and  holding  the  Wand  by  the  white  portion. 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


23.  Describe  the  equilibriating  Pentagrams  of  Spirit,  and  the  words  EXARP — 

BITOM — HCOMA — NANTA  as  previously  laid  down. 

24.  Then  over  the  four  coloured  portions  (arms)  in  turn  describe  the  Invoking 

Pentagrams  of  each  Element,  using  the  Words  and  Grade  Signs  and  repeating  the  verse  of 

Genesis  11,  11-13,  14,  15  referring  to  each.  Holding  the  wand  by  the  part  allotted  to  the 

Kerubic  sign  of  the  Element. 

First  - over  the  red  Fire  arm,  read,  And  the  name  of  the  First  River  is  PISON;  it  is  that 
which  encompasseth  the  whole  land  of  HAVILAH  where  there  is  Gold,  and  the  Gold  of 
that  land  is  good;  there  is  bdellium  and  the  onyx  stone.  Make  invoking  Fire  pentagram 
holding  the  wand  by  Leo,  with  the  Sign  of  Fire  grade. 

Second  - over  the  blue  Water  arm  read,  (Hold  by  Scorpio-Blue  Green)  And  the  name  of 
the  second  River  is  Gihon,  the  same  as  that  which  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Ethiopia. 
Sign  of  Practicus  Grade  and  invoking  Water  Pentagram. 

Third  - over  the  Yellow  Air  arm  read,  (Holding  by  Aquarius-Violet)  And  the  name  of 
the  third  river  is  Hiddekel,  that  is  it  which  goeth  toward  the  East  of  Assyria.  Sign  of 
Theoricus  grade  and  Invoking  Air  Pentagram. 

Fourth  - over  the  black  Earth  arm  read  (holding  by  Taurus-red  orange.)  And  the  fourth 
river  is  Euphrates.  Sign  of  Zelator  with  Invoking  Earth  Pentagram. 

25.  Lastly— holding  the  Wand  again  by  the  white  part,  describe  a circle  from  left  to  right 
over  the  outermost  12  petals  of  the  Rose  pronouncing  the  name  ADONAI  vibrating  it  as  taught. 

26.  Describe  a similar  circle  over  the  seven  middle  petals  pronouncing  the  word 
ARARITA. 

27.  Then  describe  a circle  over  the  three  innermost  petals  say:  YHVH. 

28.  Finally  trace  a perpendicular  line  down  and  say:  EHEIEH. 

29.  Draw  a horizontal  line  from  left  to  right  and  say:  ELOHIM. 

30.  Wrap  up  the  Cross  in  white  silk. 

3 1 . Close  the  Ceremony  by  purification  by  Water. 

32.  Close  the  Ceremony  by  purification  by  Fire. 

33.  Stand  at  West  of  altar,  face  East  and  say:  In  the  name  of  Yeheshuah,  I now  set 
free  any  spirits  that  may  have  been  imprisoned  by  this  Ceremony. 

34.  Perform  the  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram. 


56 


VOLUME  FOUR 


THE  RITUAL  OF  THE  ROSE  CROSS 

1.  Light  a stick  of  Incense.  Go  to  the  South  East  corner  of  the  room.  Make  a 
large  cross  and  circle  thus: 


Then  holding  the  point  of  the  incense  in  the  centre  vibrate  the  word 
Yeheshuah. 

2.  With  arm  outstretched  on  a level  with  the  centre  of  the  cross,  and 
holding  the  incense 

stick,  go  to  the  South  West  corner  and  make  a similar  cross,  repeating  the 

Word. 

3.  Go  to  the  North  West  Corner  and  repeat  the  cross  and  the  Word. 

4.  Go  to  the  North  East  Corner  and  repeat  the  cross  and  the  Word. 

5.  Complete  your  circle  by  returning  to  the  South  East  corner  and  bringing 
the  point  of  the  incense  to  the  central  point  of  the  first  cross  which  you  should 
imagine  astrally  there. 

6.  Holding  the  stick  on  high,  go  to  the  centre  of  the  room,  walking 
diagonally  across  the  room  towards  the  North  West  corner.  In  the  centre  of  the  room, 
above  your  head,  trace  the  cross  and  circle  and  vibrate  the  Name. 

7.  Holding  the  stick  on  high,  go  to  the  North  West  and  bring  the  point  of 
the  stick  down  to  the  centre  of  the  astral  cross  there. 

8.  Turn  towards  the  South  East  and  retrace  your  steps  there,  but  now, 
holding  the  incense  stick  directed  towards  the  floor.  In  the  centre  of  the  room,  make 
the  cross  and  circle  towards  the  floor,  as  it  were,  under  your  feet,  and  vibrate  the 
Name. 

9.  Complete  this  circle  by  returning  to  the  South  East  and  bringing  the 
point  of  the  stick  again  to  the  centre  of  the  Cross,  than  move  with  arm  outstretched 
to  South  West  corner. 

10.  From  the  centre  of  this  cross,  and,  raising  stick  before,  walk 
diagonally  across  the  room  towards  the  North  East  corner.  In  the  centre  of  the 
room,  pick  up  again  the  cross  above  your  head  previously  made,  vibrating  the 
Name.  It  is  not  necessary  to  make  another  cross. 

11.  Bring  the  stick  to  the  centre  of  the  North  East  cross  and  return  to  the 
South  West,  incense  stick  down,  and  pausing  in  the  centre  of  the  room  to  link  up 
with  the  cross  under  your  feet. 

12.  Return  to  the  South  West  and  rest  the  point  of  the  incense  a moment  in 
the  centre  of  the  cross  there.  Holding  the  stick  out,  retrace  your  circle  to  the  North 
West,  link  on  to  the  North  West  Cross  --  proceed  to  the  North  East  cross  and 
complete  your  circle  by  returning  to  the  South  East,  and  the  centre  of  the  first 
cross. 


57 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


13.  Retrace  the  Cross,  but  larger,  and  make  a big  circle,  vibrating  for 
the  lower  half  Yeheshuah,  and  for  the  upper  half  Yehovashah. 

14.  Return  to  the  centre  of  the  room,  and  visualise  the  six  crosses  in 
a net-work  round  you.  This  ceremony  can  be  concluded  by  the  analysis  of 
the  Key- Word  given  as  follows: 


N-F..  F SX. 


ANALYSIS  OF  THE  KEY-WORD 

1.  Stand  with  arms  outstretched  in  the  form  of  a cross.  Face  East. 

2.  Vibrate  these  words: 

I.  N.  R.  I. 

Yod  Nun  Resh  Yod 


58 


VOLUME  FOUR 


The  Sign  of  Osiris  Slain. 

3.  Right  arm  up,  left  arm  extended  out  from  shoulder,  head  bowed  towards 
left  hand.  L --  The  Sign  of  the  Mourning  of  Isis. 

4.  Both  arms  up  in  a V shape. 

V --  The  Sign  of  Typhon  and  Apophis. 

5.  Arms  crossed  on  breast,  head  bowed. 

X --  The  Sign  of  Osiris  Risen. 

6.  Make  the  signs  again  as  you  repeat  L.V.X. 

LUX 

7.  Arms  folded  on  breast,  head  bowed. 

The  Light  of  the  Cross. 

8.  Then  arms  extended  in  Sign  of  Osiris  Slain. 


Virgo  Isis  Mighty  Mother 

Scorpio  Apophis  Destroyer 

Sol  Osiris  Slain  and  Risen 

9.  Gradually  raise  arms. 

Isis  Apophis  Osiris 

10.  Arms  above  head,  face  raised. 

I.  A.  O. 

11.  Except  when  in  the  Vault,  now  vibrate  the  four  Tablet  of  Union  Names  to 
equilibriate  the  Light. 

EX  ARP  HCOMA  NANTA  BITOM 

12.  Aspire  to  the  Light  and  draw  it  down  over  your  head  to  your 
feet.  Let  the  Divine  Light  Descend. 


59 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  USE  OF  THE  ROSE  CROSS  RITUAL 

1.  It  encloses  the  aura  with  a protection  against  outside  influences.  It  is 
like  a veil.  The  Pentagrams  protect,  but  they  also  light  up  the  astral  and  make  entities 
aware  of  you.  They  are  more  positive  for  magical  working.  When  much  distracted, 
use  the  Pentagrams  to  banish  and  the  Rose-cross  to  maintain  peace. 

2.  It  is  a call  to  another  mode  of  your  consciousness  and  withdraws  you 
from  the  physical.  It  is  a good  preparation  for  meditation  and,  combined  with  the 
Key-Word,  a form  of  invocation  of  the  Higher  Wisdom  which  is  helpful  when  solving 
problems  or  preparing  for  a difficult  interview,  or  in  order  to  be  calm  and  strong  to 
help  another. 

3.  When  you  are  quite  familiar  with  the  Ritual,  but  most  certainly  not 
before,  it  can  be  done  in  imagination  while  resting  or  lying  down.  Part  of  yourself 
goes  out,  and  you  get  all  the  sensation  of  walking  around  your  own  quiescent  body. 
Used  thus,  with  rhythmic  breathing,  it  will  withdraw  your  mind  from  pain  (if  it  be  not 
too  severe)  and  release  you  for  sleep.  You  can  do  the  analysis  of  the  Key-Word 
standing  behind  your  physical  head,  and  you  can  call  down  the  Divine  White 
Brilliance,  watching  it  flow  over  your  body  and  smooth  out  the  tangles  in  the  etheric 
double,  bringing  peace  and  rest. 

4.  You  can  do  the  Ritual  with  intention  to  help  others  in  pain  or 
difficulty.  For  this  purpose,  you  build  up  an  astral  image  of  the  person,  in  the 
centre  of  the  room,  and  call  down  the  Light  upon  him,  after  surrounding  him  with 
the  six  crosses.  When  the  ceremony  is  done,  command  the  astral  shape  you  have 
made  to  return  to  the  person,  bearing  with  it  the  peace  of  Yeheshuah. 

5.  It  is  a protection  against  psychic  invasion  from  the  thoughts  of  others 
or  from  disturbed  psychic  conditions,  such  as  there  might  be  in  a place  charged  with 
fear,  where  terrible  things  had  happened. 

(N.  B.  This  does  not  appear  to  be  an  original  Order  document.  It  was  probably 
composed  and  written  by  Dr.  R.  Felkins,  during  the  Stella  Matutina  period.  I.R.) 


60 


VOLUME  FOUR 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  FIVE 


MAGICAL  FUNDAMENTALS 


UZ, 


VOLUME  FOUR 


63 


VOLUME  FIVE 


VOLUME  FIVE 


MAGICAL  FUNDAMENTALS 


THE  GEOMANTIC  TALISMANIC  SYMBOLS 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  S.R.M.D. 


PUER 

AniSsiO 

ALSUS 

PoPUwiS 

* 

s 

2 

§ 

Via 

Fort.  MAX 

foKT.  miu. 

n*eu-A 

I 

? 

A 

t 

RuB£us 

AMHisino 

CARcek. 

g 

? 

$ 

9 

IflETlTlA 

comutK.no 

223^3 

naaa 

8 

I 

T 

i 

1 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


On  examining  the  number  of  points  of  which  the  sixteen  (16)  figures  of  Geomancy 
are  composed,  it  is  at  once  evident  that  they  vary  from  four  (4)  points  the  least  to  eight  (8) 
points  the  greatest  number  contained  in  one  figure. 

Only  one  figure  contains  eight  (8)  points  --  that  is  plus  --  the  number  of  the  letters  of 
the  name  YHVH  ADNI. 

Four  figures  consist  each  of  7 points,  the  number  of  the  28  Mansions  of  the  Moon  in 
the  Zodiac:  Rubeus,  Albus,  Tristitia  and  Laetitia. 

Six  (6)  figures  contain  six  points  each  --  the  number  of  the  36  Decans  of  the 
Zodiac:  Career,  Conjunctio,  Fortuna  Major  and  Minor,  Amissio  and  Acquisitio. 

Four  (4)  figures  consist  of  five  (5)  points  each  --  the  number  of  the  Sephiroth  in 
two  aspects  (positive  and  negative)  and  of  the  word  YOD  spelled  out  in  full,  thus:  Y - 10,  Vau  - 
6,  Daleth  - 4,  making  20.  Puer,  Puella,  Caput  and  Cauda  Draconis. 

Only  one  (1)  figure  consists  of  4 points,  Via,  the  number  of  the  letters  of  the  Name 
-YHVH. 

The  total  of  all  the  points  in  all  the  figures,  8 + 28  + 36  + 20  + 4 equals  96.  8x12  equals 
the  name  of  8 letters  multiplied  through  the  12  divisions  of  the  Zodiac.  The  number  of  the 
classes  of  the  figures  according  to  their  points,  as  above  given,  will  be  five  (5),  answering  to 
the  points  of  the  Pentagram. 


fofULUS 


Also,  the  total  number  96  will  further  show  16  (times)  6 or  the  geomantic  figures 
multiplied  in  the  Hexagram.  This  development  of  the  figures  according  to  the  number  of 
the  points  may  be  classified  and  summed  up  in  the  annexed  diagrams. 


2 


VOLUME  FIVE 


In  addition,  the  16  figures  are  classed  among  the  four  (4)  Elements  so  that  4 shall 
belong  to  each  Element.  To  EARTH  belong  3 figures  of  6 points  and  1 of  5 equals  23 
points:  Career,  Amissio,  Conjunctio  and  Caput  Draconis. 


3 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


To  AIR  belong  2 figures  of  7 points,  1 of  six  and  1 of  5 points  equals  25  points: 

Tristitia,  Puella,  Albus,  and  Fortuna  Minor. 

To  FIRE  belong  2 figures  of  6,  and  2 of  5 equals  22  points:  Acquisitio,  Puer, 
Fortuna  Major,  and  Cauda  Draconis. 

To  WATER  belong  1 figure  of  8,  2 of  7,  and  1 of  4 points  equals  26  points: 

Laetitia,  Rubeus,  Populus,  and  Via. 

The  Geomantic  Tree  of  Life  is  formed  by  arranging  the  16  figures  according  to 
their  Planetary  attributions  in  the  Sephiroth  to  which  the  Planets  correspond,  as  represented 
in  the  accompanying  diagram.  There,  Saturn  represents  the  three  Supernal  Sephiroth  -- 
tether,  Chokman  and  Binah  --  while  Caput  and  Cauda  Draconis  are  referred  to  the  10th 
Sephirah  of  Malkuth 


KETHER 


D 


MALKUTH 


CAPUT 


CAUDA 

CAUDA 


4 


VOLUME  FIVE 


The  following  important  characters  --  letters  of  the  Angelic  or  Enochian  Alphabet  -- 
are  attributed  to  the  Seven  Planetary  Rulers  in  the  Twelve  Signs  and  the  Sixteen  Figures  in 

Geomancy. 


(N.B.  In  the  Introduction  to  Crowley's  Vision  and  the  Voice,  [Sangreal's  edition]  I 
noted  some  difficulty  in  following  Crowley's  attributions  of  the  30  Aethyrs  to  the 
Enochian  Alphabet.  A correspondent  wrote  calling  my  attention  to  the  Enochian 
attributions  here  which  solves  the  problems.  He  deserves  acknowledgement  --  if  only  to 
reaffirm  my  claim  that  Crowley  was  a Golden  Dawn  "graduate”.  He  stored  his  Order 
knowledge  in  the  Unconscious,  whence  it  could  emerge  into  his  every  day  field  of  activity. 
The  correspondent  is  Mr.  K.  Campos  of  Seattle  Washington.  I.R.) 


Signifies  Muriel  and  Populus,  a figure  of  Chasmodai  or  Luna  in  Cancer 
increasing. 


Signifies  Muriel  and  Via,  a figure  of  Chasmodai  and  Luna  in  Cancer  decreasing. 


Signifies  Verchiel  and  Fortuna  Major,  a figure  of  Sorath  or  the  Sun  in  Northern 
declination. 


Signifies  Verchiel  and  Fortuna  Minor,  a figure  of  Sorath  or  the  Sun  in  Southern 
declination. 


1 

L 

y 

i 

a 

L 

b 


Signifies  Hamaliel  and  Conjunctio,  a figure  of  Taphthartharath  or  Mercury  in 
Virgo. 

Signifies  Zuriel  and  Puella,  a figure  of  Kedemel  or  Venus  in  Libra. 

Signifies  Barchiel  and  Rubeus,  a figure  or  Bartzabel  or  Mars  in  Scorpio. 
Signifies  Advachiel  and  Acquisitio,  a figure  of  Hismael  or  Jupiter  in  Sagittarius. 
Signifies  Hanael  and  Career,  a figure  of  Zazel  or  Saturn  in  Capricorn. 

Signifies  Cambriel  and  Tristitia,  a figure  of  Zazel  or  Saturn  in  Aquarius 
Signifies  Amnitziel  and  Laetitia,  a figure  of  Hismael  or  Jupiter  in  Pisces. 
Signifies  Zazel  and  Bartzabel  in  all  their  ideas,  being  Cauda  Draconis. 


Signifies  Hismael  and  Kedemel  in  all  their  ideas,  being  a figure  of  Caput 
Draconis. 


5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


V 

1 


Signifies  Melchidael  and  Puer,  a figure  of  Bartzabel  or  Mars  in  Aries. 

Signifies  Asmodel  and  Amissio,  a figure  of  Kedemel  or  Venus  in  Taurus. 
Signifies  Ambriel  and  Albus,  a figure  of  Taphthartharath  or  Mercury  in  Gemini. 


QUALITIES  OF  THE  FIGURES 

(These  qualities  of  the  figures  have  been  extrapolated  by  S.R.M.D.  from 
Heydon's  Theomagia.  The  rest  is  from  the  ancient  Golden  Dawn  cypher  manuscripts.) 

Here  follow  the  special  qualities  of  the  16  Geomantic  Figures.  It  is  to  be  noted 
that  all  which  have  more  points  above  than  below  are  entering  in  except  Tristitia.  And 
those  which  have  more  points  below  than  above  are  going  out  and  evil,  except  Laetitia. 
Those  which  have  as  many  above  as  below  are  medium,  except  Career.  That  is  to  say, 
that  such  is  their  natural  signification. 

Good  for  a voyage  and  quick:  Acquisitio,  Caput  Draconis,  Fortuna  Major, 
Fortuna  Minor,  Laetitia. 

Good  by  land:  Populus,  Laetitia,  Albus,  Conjunctio,  Via. 

Good  by  Water:  Populus,  Laetitia,  Puella,  Albus,  Acquisitio. 

Slow  for  a voyage,  but  profitable:  Puella. 

Evil  for  the  Way:  Rubeus,  Conjunctio,  Populus,  Tristitia. 

Robbing  by  the  Way:  Cauda  Draconis,  Rubeus. 

Evil  for  Fear:  Conjunctio,  Acquisitio,  Rubeus,  Caput  Draconis,  Fortuna  Major, 
Albus.  Good  for  Honour  and  Integrity:  Acquisitio,  Fortuna  Major,  Fortuna  Minor, 
Laetitia,  Albus,  Caput  Draconis,  Conjunctio. 

Evil  for  Honour:  Amissio,  Via,  Rubeus,  Puella,  Tristitia. 

Good  to  have  Liberty  and  come  out  of  Prison:  Fortuna  Minor,  Via,  Cauda 
Draconis,  Puer,  Amissio,  Laetitia. 

Evil  to  come  out  of  Prison:  Acquisitio,  Fortuna  Major,  Tristitia, 

Career.  Mean  to  come  out  of  Prison:  Rubeus,  Puella,  Albus. 

Good  for  Body:  Populus,  Conjunctio,  Fortuna  Minor. 

Mean  for  Body:  Fortuna  Major,  Albus,  Puella,  Puer. 

Evil  for  Body:  Career,  Rubeus,  Amissio. 

Good  for  Woman  (pregnant):  Amissio,  Fortuna  Minor,  Via,  Laetitia. 

Child  will  die:  Tristitia. 

Mean  for  Childbirth:  Amissio,  Fortuna  Major,  Cauda  Draconis, 

Populus.  Better  than  before:  Via,  Cauda  Draconis,  Laetitia,  Tristitia. 

Marriage  Good:  Fortuna  Major,  Laetitia,  Caput  Draconis. 

Best:  Tristitia. 

Mean:  Cauda  Draconis,  Career. 


6 


VOLUME  FIVE 


Marriage  Evil:  Fortuna  Major,  Amissio,  Via,  Fortuna  Minor,  Rubeus. 

Good  for  Dread  and  Fear:  Amissio,  Via,  Cauda  Draconis,  Puer,  Fortuna 
Minor.  Good  for  Woman's  Love:  Laetitia,  Caput  Draconis,  Puer,  Fortuna  Major. 

Evil  for  Woman's  Love:  Amissio,  Via,  Rubeus,  Cauda  Draconis. 

Good  to  Recover  things  stolen:  Acquisitio,  Caput  Draconis,  Conjunctio,  Career,  Puer, 
Tristitia. 

Medium:  Puella. 

Evil  for  things  stolen:  Fortuna  Minor,  Laetitia,  Caput  Draconis,  Populus, 

Via.  Good  for  Shipping:  Acquisitio,  Laetitia,  Fortuna  Major,  Fortuna  Minor, 

Via.  Medium:  Cauda  Draconis. 

Evil  for  shipping,  for  they  shall  be  drowned:  Conjunctio,  Populus,  Amissio, 
Tristitia.  Good  to  Remove:  Fortuna  Major,  Cauda  Draconis,  Laetitia,  Caput  Draconis, 
Acquisitio. 

Medium  to  Remove:  Albus,  Conjunctio,  Puer,  Amissio. 

Evil  Figures  signifying  Evil:  Via,  Career,  Puer,  Tristitia,  Caput  Draconis,  Rubeus, 
Amissio. 

Medium:  Conjunctio. 

Figures  of  Chastity  and  Virginity:  Albus,  Fortuna  Major,  Laetitia,  Career,  Caput 
Draconis,  Tristitia,  Puella. 

Figures  of  Incontinence  and  Lechery:  Puer,  Cauda,  Amissio,  Rubeus,  Populus, 
Conjunctio,  Via,  Acquisitio,  Fortuna  Minor. 

Figures  showing  NO  theft;  all  others  show  theft:  Acquisitio,  Fortuna  Major,  Albus, 
Caput  Draconis,  Laetitia. 

Figures  signifying  War:  Tristitia,  Rubeus,  Puer,  Cauda  Draconis,  Fortuna  Minor, 
Amissio. 

Figures  signifying  Peace:  Fortuna  Major,  Acquisitio,  Caput  Draconis,  Laetitia, 
Albus,  Puella. 

Figures  signifying  Loss:  Career,  Conjunctio,  Albus,  Laetitia,  Populus,  Via, 
Amissio,  Puer,  Rubeus,  Fortuna  Minor,  Cauda  Draconis. 

Figures  of  Gain:  Acquisitio,  Fortuna  Major,  Tristitia,  Puella,  Caput  Draconisi. 
Figures  of  Nobility:  Acquisitio,  Laetitia,  Puella,  Fortuna  Major,  Fortuna  Minor,  Caput 
Draconis. 

Figures  of  Ignobility:  Tristitia,  Career,  Via,  Cauda  Draconis,  Conjunctio. 

Figures  of  Life:  Albus,  Fortuna  Major,  Laetitia,  Puella,  Acquisitio,  Populus,  Caput 
Draconis,  Via. 

Figures  of  Death  if  in  the  8th  house:  Tristitia,  Cauda  Draconis,  Career,  Rubeus, 
Puer,  Conjunctio,  Acquisitio,  Amissio,  Fortuna  Minor. 

Figures  of  Liberality:  Amissio,  Cauda  Draconis,  Fortuna  Minor,  Via. 

Figures  of  Avarice  and  Covetousness:  Tristitia,  Career,  Conjunctio,  Fortuna 
Major.  Figure  of  Justice:  Puer. 

Figure  of  Prudence:  Acquisitio. 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Figure  of  Fortitude:  Amissio. 

Good  to  buy  Cattle:  Puella,  Populus,  Caput  Draconis.  Loss  to  buy  Cattle:  Tristitia, 

Carter. 

Figure  of  Temperance:  Conjunctio. 


TALISMANS  AND  FLASHING  TABLETS 
By 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 

In  construction  of  a talisman,  symbolism  should  be  exact  and  in  harmony  with  universal 

forces. 

A Flashing  Tablet  is  one  made  in  the  complementary  colors  (i.e.  in  the  Scale  of  the 

King.) 

A flashing  color  then  is  the  Complementary  Color,  which,  if  joined  to  the  original, 
enables  it  to  attract  to  a certain  extent  the  Akasic  current  from  the  atmosphere  and  partly  from 
yourself  --  thus  forming  a vortex  which  can  attract  its  flashing  light  from  the  atmosphere. 
The  complementary  colors  are: 

White  to  Black  and  Grey 
Red  to  Green 
Blue  to  Orange 
Yellow  to  Violet 
Olive  to  Orange 
Blue-green  to  Russet 
Violet  to  Citrine 
Reddish-orange  to  Greenish  blue 
Deep  Amber  to  Indigo 
Lemon  Yellow  to  Violet 
Yellow  green  to  Crimson 

NATURE  AND  METHOD  OF  FORMATION  OF  THE  TELESMA. 

1.  Not  always  just  and  right  to  make  a talisman  with  the  idea  of  completely 
changing  the  current  of  another's  Karma. 

2.  That  which  assists  in  material  things  is  often  a hindrance  spiritually,  seeing 
that  for  a force  to  work  it  must  attract  elemental  forces  of  the  proper  descriptions,  which  may 
thus  to  an  extent  endanger  your  spiritual  nature. 

3.  In  making  a telesma  for  a person,  isolate  yourself  entirely  from  them;  i.e. 
banish  love,  hate,  irritations,  etc. 

4.  See  that  you  are  in  harmony  with  the  effect  you  wish  to  produce. 


8 


VOLUME  FIVE 


5.  In  actual  consecration,  a good  aid  is  to  purify  the  room  using  the 
banishing  ritual  of  Pentagram. 

6.  Better  to  finish  a Telesma  at  one  sitting. 

7.  Where  Talismans  or  Symbols  have  done  their  work,  they  should  be 
carefully  decharged  and  then  destroyed.  Decharge  with  Pentagram  or  Hexagram 
according  as  it  partakes  of  planetary  or  zodiacal  nature.  These  remarks  apply  to  Flashing 
Tablets  as  well.  May  be  done  astrally. 

8.  Any  flashing  tablets  in  two  colors  should  be  nearly  balanced  in  proportion  of 
color  as  possible,  the  ground  one  color,  the  charge  another. 

There  is  also  a mode  in  which  3 colors  can  be  used  in  planetary  talismans,  by  placing 
the  seven  colors  of  the  Heptagram  and  drawing  two  lines  to  the  points  exactly  opposite 
which  would  yield  2 flashing  colors. 

9.  Mode  of  charging  and  consecrating  should  be  suitable  to  the 
operation.  Certain  words  and  letters  are  to  be  invoked  in  the  charging  of  a tablet, 
viz.  the  letters  governing  the  signs  under  which  the  operation  falls,  together  with  the 
planet  associated  therewith  (the  latter  only  for  planetary  talisman).  Thus  in 
elemental  operations  you  take  the  letters  of  the  appropriate  triplicity,  adding  AL 
thereto,  thus  forming  an  Angelic  name,  which  is  the  expression  of  the  force. 
Hebrew  names  as  rule  represent  the  offices  of  certain  forces,  while  the  Enochian 
Tablets  represent  a species  of  more  particular  ideas.  Both  classes  of  names  should 
be  used  in  these  operations. 

After  preparing  room  first  formulate  towards  the  quarters  the  Supreme  Ritual  of 
the  Pentagram  as  taught.  Then  invoke  the  Divine  Names  turning  towards  the  quarter  of 
the  Element.  Then  being  seated  or  standing  before  the  Tablet  and  looking  in  the  requisite 
directions,  i.e.,  in  the  direction  of  the  force  you  wish  to  invoke,  take  several  deep 
inspirations,  close  the  eyes  and  holding  the  breath,  mentally  pronounce  the  letter  of  the 
forces  invoked.  Do  this  several  times  until  with  the  eyes  closed  you  can  positively  feel  the 
element  involved.  Having  done  this  formulate  the  letters  several  times  as  if  you  breathed 
upon  the  tablet,  pronouncing  them  in  the  vibratory  manner.  Then  rising  make  the  sign  of 
the  Rose  and  the  Cross  over  the  Tablet.  Repeating  the  requisite  formula  or  any  other 
appropriate  words,  first  describe  around  the  telesma  to  be  consecrated,  a circle  with  the 
proper  magical  implements  and  then  make  the  Invoking  Pentagram  appropriate  five  times 
over  it,  as  if  it  (the  pentagram  upright)  were  standing  upon  it.  vibrating  the  letters  of  the 
Triplicity  involved  with  AL  added,  e.g.  for  Fire  (Halsael)  and  (SheHalsael).  Then  solemnly 
read  any  invocations  required  --  making  the  proper  sigils  from  the  Rose  as  you  pronounce 
the  names. 

The  first  Operation  is  to  initiate  the  Whorl  from  yourself.  The  second,  to  attract  the 
force  in  the  atmosphere  into  the  vortex  you  have  formed.  Then  read  the  Elemental  Prayer 
as  in  the  Grade  rituals  (if  for  Fire,  that  of  the  Salamanders)  and  close  work  with  the  sign  of 
the  Circle  and  Cross  --  after  performing  the  necessary  Banishing  Ritual.  But  do  not  banish 
over  newly  consecrated  telesma. 

Wrap  telesma  carefully  up  in  silk  or  linen,  preferably  white. 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Talismanic  symbols  — or  Telesmatic  Emblems  as  they  are  sometimes  called  — are  formed 
from  the  Geomantic  Figures  by  drawing  various  lines  from  point  to  point  of  each. 

These  characters  are  then  attributed  to  their  ruling  Planets  and  Ideas.  For  example,  the  most 
simple  forms  will  be: 


Here  follows  a complete  table  of  all  the  Talismanic  Figures  classed  under  the  Planets  and  Signs. 
The  characters  of  Saturn  and  Zazel  taken  from  Career  equals  Capricorn. 


• • 

• • 


The  characters  of  Saturn  and  Zazel  taken  from  Tristitia  equals  Aquarius. 


• • 

• • 

• • 


T \7 


10 


VOLUME  FIVE 


The  characters  of  Jupiter  and  Hismael  taken  from  Acquisitio  equals  Sagittarius. 

• • 

• • 

The  characters  of  Jupiter  and  Hismael  taken  from  Laetitia  equals  Pisces. 

• • 

• • 

SGAAS 

The  characters  of  Mars  and  Bartzabel  taken  from  Rubeus  equals  Scorpio. 

• • 

• • 

sassA 

The  characters  of  Mars  and  Bartzabel  taken  from  Puer  equal  Aries. 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  characters  of  Sol  and  Sorath  taken  from  Fortuna  Major  equals  Leo. 

• • 

• • 


The  characters  of  Sol  and  Sorath  taken  from  Fortuna  Minor  equals  Leo. 

• • 

• • 


IAASifi$S 


The  characters  of  Venus  and  Kedemel  taken  from  Amissio  equals  Taurus. 


The  characters  of  Venus  and  Kedemel  taken  from  Puella  equals  Libra. 


12 


VOLUME  FIVE 


• • 

The  characters  of  Mercury  and  Taphthartharath  taken  from  Albus  equals  Gemini 

• • 

• • 

SS921? 

The  characters  of  Mercury  and  Taphthartharath  taken  from  Conjunctio  equals  Virgo. 


• • 

• • 

ssx©®Yi$xs:ffl[i 

The  characters  of  Luna  and  Chasmodai  taken  from  Populus  equals  Cancer. 

• • 

• • 

• • 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  characters  of  Luna  and  Chasmodai  taken  from  Via  equals  Cancer. 

I 

The  characters  of  Caput  Draconis  are: 

• • 

¥ ¥¥  V VI 

The  characters  of  Cauda  Draconis  are: 

kk  iA/kl 

MODE  OF  FORMATION  OF  TALISMANS  AND  PANTACLES 

The  mode  of  using  these  Talismanic  Characters  drawn  from  the  Talismanic  Figures  in  the 
construction  of  a Talisman  or  Pantacle,  is  to  take  those  formed  by  the  figures  under  the  Planet  required, 
and  to  place  them  either  at  the  opposite  ends  of  a wheel  of  eight  radii  as  shown,  or  to  place  them  in  the 
compartments  of  a Square.  A versicle  suitable  to  the  matter  is  then  to  be  written  within  the  double  line. 


14 


VOLUME  FIVE 


THE  LINEAL  FORMS  OF  THE  NAMES  OF  THE  SEPHIROTH 
ON  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE 

In  the  early  days  of  the  Order,  this  paper  had  appended  to  it  a note  by  Dr.  Westcott, 
using  his  Order  name  of  Non  Omnis  Moriar.  He  said  that  this  paper  was  only  for  those 
members  of  the  Inner  Order  who  had  mastered  the  Pentagram  and  Hexagram  Rituals  and 
consecrated  their  elemental  weapons. 

The  original  document  here  given  gave  the  names  of  the  Sephiroth  in  Hebrew. 
Since  these  Hebrew  Names  were  previously  given  in  Hebrew  in  an  early  Knowledge 
Lecture,  I have  for  the  sake  of  convenience  transliterated  them  into  English.  The  number 
of  letters  used  to  describe  the  appropriate  lineal  figure  refers  to  the  number  of  Hebrew 
letters,  not  English.  It  is  important  for  the  student  to  keep  this  in  mind,  otherwise  he  will 
get  thoroughly  confused. 

I would  also  urge  the  student  not  to  permit  first  impressions  of  complexity  disturb  his 
peace  of  mind,  forcing  him  to  neglect  the  study  of  this  paper.  It  is  really  worth\giving  a good 
deal  of  attention  to.  Admittedly  it  is  purely  speculative  and  an  exercise  in  intellectual 
virtuosity.  The  end  result  rather  as  with  the  use  of  a Zen  Koan  is  the  product  of  a higher 
level  of  perception.  The  use  of  the  Koan  may  result  in  a swing  over  to  the  same  level  of 
perception  experienced  by  whoever  it  was  that  developed  it  originally.  This  study  of  lineal 
figures  and  the  various  divine  names  bears  many  resemblances  to  the  processes  just 
described. 

I give  these  Sephirotic  Names  in  English.  On  an  earlier  page  will  be  found  the 
equivalent  Hebrew  spelling. 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


In  examining  the  number  of  Hebrew  letters  in  the  Sephirotic  names  on  the  Tree  of  Life,  it  will  be 
observed  that  Kether  consists  of  three  letters  whose  equivalent  then  is  the  Triangle  among  the  lineal 
figures.  Chokmah  and  Binah  each  of  four  letters,  as  also  Yesod;  the  actual  lineal  figure  is  then  the  Square. 
Gedulah,  Geburah,  Tiphareth  and  Malkuth  have  five  letters  each,  equivalent  to  the  Pentagram.  While 
Chesed,  Pachad,  Netzach  and  Hod  have  each  three  like  Kether,  as  also  Daath. 

The  total  number  of  letters  in  these  names  on  the  Tree  will  then  be  50,  the  number  of  the  Gates  of 
the  Understanding,  as  is  laid  down  in  the  Qabalah. 

Then  in  the  ensuing  translations  of  the  Names  of  the  Sephiroth  into  lineal  symbols,  what  is  at 
once  evident  is  the  absolutely  harmonious  balance  of  forms  which  results.  Pachad  is  a correspondence  of 
Geburah  and  means  Fear.  Gedulah  is  a correspondence  of  Chesed  and  means  Magnificence. 


16 


VOLUME  FIVE 


The  Supernal  Triangle  (Triad)  will  then  be  represented  by  a Triangle  surmounting  the  two 
Squares. 


The  Sephiroth  may  thus  be  summed  up  in  three  classes,  the  Triangle,  Square  and  Pentagram,  the 
respective  lineal  equivalents  of  Chesed,  Binah,  and  Geburah,  six  under  the  Triangle  in  Kether,  Pachad, 
Chesed,  Netzach,  Hod  and  Daath.  Three  under  the  Square,  Chokmah,  Binah  and  Yesod.  Four  under  the 
Pentagram:  Gedulah,  Geburah,  Tiphareth,  and  Malkuth.  Now,  if  as  in  the  diagram,  we  draw  lines 
connecting  those  Sephiroth  which  are  represented  by  the  same  lineal  equivalents,  we  shall  find  that  the 
lines  number  Twenty 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Two,  that  is,  the  number  of  the  Paths  in  the  Tree.  For  you  require  13  lines  to  join  initially  those 
Sephiroth  under  the  Triangle,  3 for  those  under  the  Square,  and  6 for  those  under  the  Pentagram  which 
adds  to  22. 


18 


VOLUME  FIVE 


The  letters  of  each  Sephirotic  Name  may  then  be  translated  into  the  lineal  symbols  of  the 
Sephiroth  to  which  their  numerical  value  is  referred  by  the  Qabalah  of  the  Nine  Chambers. 


19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


If  these  Letters  be  again  translated  into  their  Yetziratic  attribution  and  this  combined  with  the 
former,  we  shall  obtain  an  analysis  compounded  of  both  scales  of  interpretation. 

In  the  diagram,  the  lineal  figures  of  the  tens  and  hundreds  are  distinguished  from  those  of  the 
units  by  being  encircled  with  either  one  or  two  rays,  according  as  to  tens  or  hundreds  are  implied.  If  these 
be  further  placed  within  the  Lineal  Figure  of  the  Whole  Name,  a species  of  Hieroglyphic  Form  of  each 
Sephirah  will  result;  which  may  again  be  represented  by  a cognate  Angelic  form,  as  taught  in  the  paper  on 
the  Formation  of  Sigils  from  the  Rose. 


«SISh 

ciia  ' " 


20 


VOLUME  FIVE 


We  shall  then  find  from  the  Qabalah  of  Nine  Chambers  that  the  numerical  values  of  the  22  paths 


are  thus  allotted  under  the  Sephiroth: 

AIQ 

Kether 

1, 10, 

100  Air,  Virgo,  Pise 

BKR 

Chokmah 

2,  20,  200 

Mercury,  Jupiter,  Sun 

GLSh 

Binah 

3,  30,  300 

Moon,  Libra,  Fire 

DMT 

Chesed 

4,  40,  400 

Venus,  Water,  Saturn 

HN 

Geburah 

5,  50 

Aries,  Scorpio 

VS 

Tiphareth 

6,  60 

Taurus,  Sagittarius 

ZO 

Netzach 

7,  70 

Gemini,  Capricorn 

ChP 

Hod 

8,  80 

Cancer,  Mars 

TTz 

Yesod 

9,  90 

Leo,  Aquarius 

This  classification  may,  then,  be  again  referred  to  the  lineal  figures  thus: 


Air,  Virgo,  Pisces 
Mercury,  Jupiter,  Sun 
Luna,  Libra,  Fire 
Venus,  Water,  Saturn 
Aries,  Scorpio 
Taurus,  Sagittarius 
Gemini,  Capricorn 
Cancer,  Mars 
Leo,  Aquarius 


Point  within  a circle 

Cross 

Triangle 

Square 

Pentangle 

Hexangle 

Heptangle 

Octangle 

Enneangle 


POLYGRAMS  AND  POLYGONS 
THE  TRIANGLE 


The  Triangle  is  the  only  Lineal  Figure  into  which  all  surfaces  can  be  reduced,  for  every  Polygon 
can  be  divided  into  Triangles  by  drawing  lines  from  its  angles  to  its  centre.  Thus  the  Triangle  is  the  first 
and  simplest  of  all  Lineal  Figures. 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


We  refer  to  the  Triad  operating  in  all  things,  to  the  3 Supernal  Sephiroth,  and  to  Binah  the 
3rd  Sephirah.  Among  the  Planets  it  is  especially  referred  to  Saturn;  and  among  the  Elements  to 
Fire.  As  the  colour  of  Saturn  is  black  and  the  Triangle  that  of  Fire,  the  Black  Triangle  will 
represent  Saturn,  and  the  Red  Fire. 

The  3 Angles  also  symbolize  the  3 Alchemical  Principles  of  Nature,  Mercury,  Sulphur,  and  Salt. 

As  there  are  3600  in  every  great  circle,  the  number  of  degrees  cut  off  between  its  angles  when 
inscribed  within  a Circle  will  be  120°,  the  number  forming  the  astrological  Trine  inscribing  the  Trine 
within  a circle,  that  is,  reflected  from  every  second  point. 

?Q  ° 


The  Square  is  an  important  lineal  figure  which  naturally  represents  stability  and  equilibrium.  It 
includes  the  idea  of  surface  and  superficial  measurement. 

It  refers  to  the  Quaternary  in  all  things  and  to  the  Tetrad  of  the  Letter  of  the  Holy  Name 
Tetragrammaton  operating  through  the  four  Elements  of  Fire,  Water,  Air,  and  Earth.  It  is  allotted  to 
Chesed,  the  4th  Sephirah,  and  among  the  Planets  it  is  referred  to  Jupiter.  As  representing  the  4 Elements  it 
represents  their  ultimation  with  the  material  form.  The  4 angles  also  include  the  ideas  of  the  2 extremities 
of  the  Horizon,  and  the  2 extremities  of  the  Median,  which  latter  are  usually  called  the  Zenith  and  the 
Nadir:  also  the  4 Cardinal  Points. 

The  number  of  degrees  of  a great  circle  cut  off  between  its  angles  will  be  900  the  number  forming 
the  astrological  Quartile  or  Square  Aspect,  potent  and  evil. 

There  is  only  one  way  of  inscribing  a Square  within  a Circle,  that  is,  reflected  from  every  second 

point. 


22 


VOLUME  FIVE 


THE  PENTAGON 


setnir 

© 


The  Pentagon,  first  form,  reflected  from  every  second  point. 

The  Pentangle  can  be  traced  in  two  ways:  reflected  from  every  second  point,  when  it  is  called  the 
Pentagon;  and  reflected  from  every  third  point,  when  it  is  called  the  Pentagram. 

The  Pentangle  as  a whole  is  referred  to  the  5th  Sephirah  Geburah.  The  Pentagon  naturally 
represents  the  power  of  the  Pentad  operating  in  nature  by  the  dispersal  of  the  Spirit  and  the  4 Elements 
through  it.  The  number  of  degrees  of  a great  circle  cut  off  between  its  Angles  is  72°  the  number  forming 
the  astrological  Quintile  aspect,  good  in  nature  and  operation. 

It  also  answers  to  the  dispersal  force  of  the  5 letters  YEHESHUAH. 

It  is  not  so  consonant  to  the  Nature  of  Mars  as  the  Pentagram,  and  as  a general  rule  the  Pentagon 
is  not  so  powerful  a symbol  as  the  Pentagram. 

THE  PENTANGLE 

Kemfi- 


The  Pentangle  - The  Pentagram,  second  form;  reflected  from  every  3rd  point. 

The  Pentagram  with  a single  point  uppermost  is  called  the  “Sign  of  the  Microcosm”  and  is  a good 
symbol  representing  man  with  his  arms  and  legs  extended  adoring  his  Creator,  and  especially  the 
dominion  of  the  Spirit  over  the  4 Elements  and  consequently  of  Reason  over  Matter. 


But  with  the  single  point  downwards  it  is  a very  evil  symbol,  the  head  of  the  Goat,  or  demon’s 
head,  representing  the  abasement  of  Reason  beneath  the  blind  forces  of  Matter,  the  elevation  of  anarchy 
above  order,  and  of  conflicting  forces  driven  by  chance  above  God. 

It  represents  the  concentrated  force  of  the  Spirit  and  the  4 Elements  governed  by  the  5 letters  of 
the  name  of  the  Restorer  of  all  things  YEHESHUAH,  and  also  the  ten  Sephiroth  classified  into  5 odd  and 
5 even  numbers.  It  is  especially  attributable  to  the  Planet  Mars.  It  also  shows  the  Kerubim  and  the  Wheel 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


of  the  Spirit.  It  is  a Symbol  of  tremendous  force,  and  of  HEH,  the  letter  of  the  Great  Supernal  Mother, 
AIMAH. 


THE  HEXANGLE 


The  Hexagon,  first  form,  reflected  from  every  second  point. 

The  Hexangle  can  be  traced  in  two  ways  as  a complete  symbol:  reflected  from  every  second 
point,  when  it  is  called  the  Hexagon:  and  reflected  from  every  third  point,  when  it  is  called  the  Hexagram. 
There  is  also  a third  form,  called  the  pseudo-Hexagram. 

The  Hexangle  as  a whole  is  referred  to  the  6th  Sephirah,  Tiphareth. 

The  Hexagon  naturally  represents  the  power  of  the  Hexad  operating  in  nature  by  the  dispersal  of 
the  rays  of  the  Planets  and  the  Zodiac  emanating  from  the  central  Sun.  The  number  of  degrees  of  a great 
circle  cut  off  between  its  Angles  is  60°  forming  the  astrological  Sextile  aspect,  powerful  for  good. 

It  is  not  so  consonant  to  the  solar  nature  as  the  Hexagram.  Remember  then  that  the  Hexagon 
signifieth  the  dispersion,  distribution,  and  radiation  of  a force  but  the  Hexagram  concentration.  Hence 
thou  shah  use  the  Hexagon  for  the  spreading,  and  the  Hexagram  for  the  concentrating  and  sealing.  Thus 
when  there  is  need,  thou  canst  compare,  interpose  and  combine  them;  but  the  “Gon  initiateth  the  whirl.” 

The  nature  of  the  “whirl”  is  described  in  a document  relating  to  the  Vibratory  Formula  of  the 
Middle  Pillar,  and  the  formation  of  the  Telesmatic  Images. 


24 


VOLUME  FIVE 


Kem&z- 

ChoK*\f\  H 


THE  HEXANGLE 


The  Hexangle,  second  form,  reflected  from  every  3rd  point. 

The  Hexagram  with  a single  point  uppermost  is  called  the  “Sign  of  the  Macrocosm,”  or  greater 
world,  because  its  six  angles  fitly  represent  the  six  days  or  periods  of  creation  evolved  from  the 
manifestation  of  the  Triune.  Its  synthesis  forms  the  seventh  day  or  period  of  rest  summed  up  in  the 
hexagonal  centre. 

It  represents  especially  the  concentrated  force  of  the  Planets  acting  through  the  Signs  of  the 
Zodiac,  and  thus  sealing  the  Astral  Image  of  nature  under  the  presidency  of  the  Sephiroth;  and  also  the 
Seven  Palaces  of  the  same.  It  is  especially  attributable  to  the  Sun.  It  is  a Symbol  of  great  strength  and 
power,  forming  with  the  Cross  and  the  Pentagram,  a triad  of  potent  and  good  symbols  which  are  in 
harmony  with  each  other. 


THE  HEXANGLE 


The  Pseudo-Hexagram  or  irregular  third  form. 

The  pseudo-Hexagram  an  irregular  third  form,  sometimes  employed  to  denote  the  presidency  of 
the  Sun  and  Moon  over  the  4 Elements  united  in  and  proceeding  from  the  Spirit. 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  HEPT ANGLE 


The  Heptagon,  first  form,  reflected  from  every  second  point. 

The  Heptangle  can  be  traced  in  three  ways  reflected  from  every  second  point  when  it  is  called  the 
Heptagon;  and  as  the  Heptagram  is  reflected  from  every  third  point,  and  from  every  fourth  point. 

The  Heptangle  as  a whole  is  referred  to  the  Seventh  Sephirah,  Netzach. 

The  Heptagon  naturally  represents  the  dispersal  of  the  powers  of  the  Seven  Planets  through  the 
week  and  through  the  year.  The  number  of  degrees  of  a Great  Circle  cut  off  between  its  angles  is  51-3/7°. 

It  further  alludes  to  the  power  of  the  Septenary  acting  through  all  things,  as  exemplified  by  the 
seven  colours  of  the  Rainbow. 

It  is  not  so  consonant  to  the  nature  of  Venus  as  the  Heptagram  reflected  from  every  fourth  point. 

THE  HEPTANGLE 


The  Heptagram,  second  form;  reflected  from  every  third  point. 

The  Heptagram  reflected  from  every  third  point,  yieldeth  Seven  Triangles  at  the  apices  thereof; 
fitly  representing  the  Triad  operating  in  each  Planet;  and  the  Planets  themselves  in  the  week  and  in  the 
year. 

The  weekly  order  of  the  Planets  is  formed  from  their  natural  order  by  following  the  lines 


26 


VOLUME  FIVE 


Of  this  Heptagram;  as  hath  been  already  shown  in  the  2nd  point  of  the  Grade  of  Zelator. 
It  is  not  so  consonant  to  the  nature  of  Venus  as  the  next  form. 


THE  HEPT ANGLE 


The  Heptagram,  third  form;  reflected  from  every  fourth  point. 

This  Heptagram  is  the  Star  of  Venus  and  is  especially  applicable  to  her  nature.  As  the  Heptagram 
is  the  lineal  figure  of  the  Seven  Planets,  so  is  Venus,  as  it  were,  their  Gate  or  Entrance,  the  fitting  symbol 
of  the  Isis  of  nature,  and  of  the  7 lower  Sephiroth  of  the  Bride. 

Study  this  reference  in  connection  with  the  Venus  door  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts,  described  in 
the  Adeptus  Minor  grade. 


THE  OCTANGLE 


The  Octagon,  first  form;  reflected  from  every  second  point. 

The  Octangle  can  be  reflected  in  three  ways;  reflected  from  every  second  point  when  it  is  called 
the  Octagon;  and  as  the  Octagram  reflected  from  every  third,  and  from  every  fourth  point. 

The  Octangle  naturally  representeth  the  power  of  the  Ogdoad.  The  Octagon  showeth  the  Ogdoad 
operating  in  nature  by  the  dispersal  of  the  rays  of  the  Elements  in  their  dual  aspect  under  the  presidency 
of  the  8 letters  of  the  name  Yod  Heh  Vau  Heh  and  Aleph  Daleth  Nun  Yod. 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  number  of  degrees  of  a Great  Circle  cut  off  between  its  angles  is  450;  forming  the 
astrological  weak  Semi-Quartile  aspect,  evil  in  nature  and  operation. 

The  Octagon  is  not  so  consonant  to  the  nature  of  Mercury  as  the  Octagram  reflected  from  every 
fourth  point. 


THE  OCTANGLE 


The  Octagram,  second  form,  reflected  from  every  third  point. 

The  Octagram  reflected  from  every  third  point  yieldeth  eight  Triangles  at  the  apices  thereof,  fitly 
representing  the  Triad  operating  in  each  Element  in  its  dual  form,  i.e.,  of  Positive  and  Negative,  under  the 
powers  of  the  name  of  Tetragrammaton  Adonai:  or  as  it  is  written  bound  together,  Yod  Aleph  Heh  Daleth 
Vau  Nun  Heh  Yod. 

It  is  not  so  consonant  to  the  nature  of  Mercury  as  the  next  form.  It  is  composed  of  two  Squares 
united  within  a circle. 


THE  OCTANGLE 


The  Octagram,  third  form;  reflected  from  every  fourth  point. 

This  Octogram  is  the  Star  of  Mercury,  and  is  especially  applicable  to  his  nature.  It  is  further  a 
potent  symbol  representing  the  binding  together  of  the  concentrated  Positive  and  Negative  forces  of  the 
Elements  under  the  name  of  YHVHADNI.  And  forget  not  that  ADNI  is  the  key  of  YHVH. 

THE  ENNEANGLE 


28 


VOLUME  FIVE 


Ho° 


The  Enneangle,  first  form,  reflected  from  every  second  point. 

The  Enneangle  can  be  traced  in  four  ways  reflected  from  every  second  point  when  it  is  called  the 
Enneagon;  and  as  the  Enneagram  reflected  from  every  third,  every  fourth,  and  every  fifth  point. 

The  Enneangle  as  a whole,  is  referred  to  the  ninth  Sephirah  Yesod. 

The  Enneangle  naturally  representeth  the  power  of  the  Ennead.  The  Enneagram  showeth  the 
Ennead  operating  in  nature  by  the  dispersal  of  the  rays  of  the  Seven  Planets  and  of  the  Head  and  Tail  of 
the  Dragon  of  the  Moon. 

The  number  of  degrees  of  a Great  Circle  cut  off  between  its  angles  is  40°.  The  Enneagon  is  not  so 
consonant  to  the  nature  of  the  Moon  as  the  Enneagram  reflected  from  every  fifth  point. 


THE  ENNEANGLE 


The  Enneagram,  second  form;  reflected  form  every  third  Point.  The  Enneagram  reflected  from 
every  third  point  representeth  the  Triple  Ternary  operating  both  in  the  Seven  Planets  with  the  Head  and 
Tail  of  the  Dragon  of  the  Moon,  and  with  their  Aichemical  principles  countercharged  and  interwoven. 

It  is  not  as  consonant  to  the  nature  of  the  Moon  as  the  Enneagram  reflected  from  every  fifth  point. 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  ENNEANGLE 


The  Enneagram,  third  form,  reflected  from  every  fourth  point. 

The  Enneagram  reflected  from  every  fourth  point  is  composed  of  three  Triangles  united  within  a 
Circle,  and  alludes  to  the  Triple  Ternary  of  the  Three  Aichemical  principles  themselves.  It  is  not  so 
consonant  to  the  nature  of  the  Moon  as  the  next  form. 


THE  ENNEANGLE 

KETHER 


The  Enneagram,  fourth  form,  reflected  from  every  fifth  point. 

This  Enneagram  is  the  Star  of  the  Moon  and  is  especially  applicable  to  her  nature.  It  represents 
her  as  the  administrator  to  the  Earth  of  the  virtues  of  the  Solar  System  under  the  Sephiroth. 


30 


VOLUME  FIVE 


THE  DEKANGLE 


The  Dekagon,  first  form,  reflected  from  every  second  point. 

The  Dekangle  can  be  traced  in  four  ways;  reflected  from  every  second  point  when  it  is  called  the 
Dekagon  and  as  the  Dekagram  reflected  from  every  third,  every  fourth,  and  every  fifth  point. 

The  Dekangle  as  a whole  is  referred  to  the  Tenth  Sephirah,  Malkuth. 

The  Dekangle  naturally  represents  the  power  of  the  Dekad.  The  Dekagon  showeth  the  Dekad 
operating  in  nature  by  the  dispersal  of  the  rays  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  therein. 

The  number  of  degrees  of  a Great  Circle  cut  off  between  its  angles  is  36°;  the  half  of  the  Quintile 
astrological  aspect. 


THE  DEKANGLE 


The  Dekagram,  second  form;  reflected  from  every  third  point. 

The  Dekagram  reflected  from  every  third  point  is  especially  consonant  to  Malkuth  and  shows  the 
Triad  operating  through  each  angle  of  the  two  Pentagons  within  a circle,  of  which  it  is  composed.  It 
alludes  to  the  combination  of  the  3 Aichemical  principles  with  the  Spirit  and  the  4 Elements  in  their 
Positive  and  Negative  form,  under  the  presidency  of  the  10  Sephiroth  themselves. 


31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  DEKANGLE 


The  Dekagram,  third  form,  reflected  from  every  fourth  point. 

This  form  of  the  Dekagram  especially  alludes  to  the  concentrated  and  continuous  operations  of 
the  Ten  Sephiroth  in  nature.  It  is  continuously  reflected  from  every  fourth  point. 


THE  DEKANGLE 


The  Dekagram,  fourth  form,  reflected  from  every  fifth  point. 

The  Dekagram  reflected  from  every  fifth  point  is  composed  of  two  Pentagrams  within  a Circle.  It 
shows  the  operation  of  the  duplicated  HEH  of  the  Tetragrammaton  and  the  concentration  of  the  Positive 
and  Negative  forces  of  the  Spirit  and  the  four  Elements  under  the  presidency  of  the  Potencies  of  the  Five 
in  Binah,  the  Revolutions  of  the  forces  under  A1MA,  the  Great  Mother. 


32 


VOLUME  FIVE 


THE  ENDEKANGLE 


CONFtR.M£tH  NoTfHe 
U/Ofvps  OF  THE-  LftW 


MM<ETH 

SWV&R*1fH  £*.**£■ 

J__ 


Lieth  w ith  H-iS 

in  law  / 

LiETH  with  HiS  5 tS-rcR_  / 


(WeTMTHE 
Blind  to  w/wog?_. 
Ouroe-'TME  ItIMj 


PeUVERtX-  THE  JUPC,EM£NT- 

LtLT«  wir.c  HISPftntf&WifE 


Tift. 

\ Lierrt  WITH  A*W  3EAST 


The  Endekagram,  first  form,  reflected  from  every  second  point. 

The  Endekangle  can  be  traced  in  five  ways:  reflected  from  every  second  point,  when  it  is  called 
the  Endekagon;  and  as  the  Endekagram  reflected  from  every  third,  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  points. 

The  Endekangles  as  a general  whole  are  referred  to  the  Qliphoth.  Of  its  forms,  however,  the  one 
reflected  from  every  fourth  point  represents  their  restriction,  and  therefore  it  is  not  altogether  to  be  classed 
with  those  which  represent  their  operation  in  nature,  wherefore  it  is  here  separated  from  them  and  placed 
by  itself  at  the  end  of  the  book. 

The  Endekangle  naturally  represents  the  evil  and  imperfect  nature  of  the  Endekad.  The 
Endekagon  represents  the  dispersal  of  the  Eleven  Curses  of  Mount  Ebal  through  the  Universe.  Though 
they  are  paragraphed  as  12  in  the  English  version  of  the  Bible,  in  the  Hebrew  they  are  paragraphed  as  1 1, 
two  being  classed  together. 

The  number  of  degrees  of  a great  circle  cut  off  between  its  angles  is  32-8/  110. 

THE  ENDEKANGLE 


The  Endekagram,  second  form;  reflected  from  every  third  point. 

The  Endekagram  reflected  from  every  third  point,  represents  the  concentrated  action  of  evil  in  the 
Averse  Triad,  symbolized  by  the  Eleven  Dukes  of  Edom,  the  horns  of  the  Red  Dragon  when  he  ariseth. 
This  is  a reference  to  one  of  the  Altar  Diagrams,  the  Garden  of  Eden  after  the  Fall. 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  ENDEKANGLE 


The  fourth  form;  reflected  from  every  fifth  point. 

It  is  a curious  fact  that  the  Endekagram  which  can  be  formed  reflected  from  every  fourth  point  is 
not  so  evil  as  the  rest,  and  represents  the  restraining  of  the  evil  ones.  This  abhorance  of  and 
incompatibility  with  the  number  four  is  another  mark  of  the  imperfect  nature  of  the  Endekad  when 
applied  to  the  symbolism  of  the  Qliphoth;  for  by  the  same  that  they  are  shown,  so  is  their  restriction 
shown.  Yet  even  the  Endekangle  reflected  from  every  fourth  point  is  not  good  in  operation,  but  simply 
declareth  the  restriction  of  evil  as  will  be  shown  hereafter. 

The  Endekagram  reflected  from  every  fifth  point  represents  the  concentrated  force  of  the  averse 
and  evil  Sephiroth. 

THE  ENDEKANGLE 


6RW»sh  Coming 

fROHtitersuR,^ 


/V£SHiMlRQrt 

tITTLE  EVIL  WOmEM 

CHETHHLIROti 


VOLUME  FIVE 


The  Endekagram,  fifth  form,  reflected  from  every  sixth  point. 

Unto  this  form  of  the  Endekagram  are  attributed  the  12  Princes  of  the  Qliphoth  who  are  the  heads 
of  the  Evil  operating  in  the  months  of  the  year. 


THE  DODEKANGLE 


The  Dodekangle,  first  form,  reflected  from  every  second  point. 

The  Dodekangle  can  be  traced  in  five  ways;  reflected  from  every  second  point,  when  it  is  called 
the  Dodekagon;  and  as  the  Dodekagram  reflected  from  every  third,  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  point. 

The  Dodekangle  as  a general  whole  is  referred  to  the  Zodiac,  and  naturally  represents  the  powers 
of  the  Dodekad.  The  Dodekagon  shows  the  dispersal  of  the  influence  of  the  Zodiac  through  nature. 

The  number  of  degrees  of  a great  circle  cut  off  between  its  angles  is  300  forming  the  weak 
astrological  semi-Sextile  Aspect,  good  in  nature  and  operation. 

THE  DODEKANGLE 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Dodekagram,  second  form,  reflected  from  every  third  point. 

The  Dodekagram  reflected  from  every  third  point,  is  formed  of  two  Hexagons  within  a Circle, 
and  represents  the  dispersal  and  concentration  of  the  Zodiac  in  masculine  and  feminine  signs.  The 
masculine  being  Aries,  Gemini,  Leo,  Libra,  Sagittarius  and  Aquarius;  and  the  feminine  Taurus,  Cancer, 
Virgo,  Scorpio,  Capricorn  and  Pisces.  As  this  Dodekagram  is  composed  of  twelve  triangles,  so  do  these 
allude  to  the  3 decanates,  faces,  or  sets  of  100  of  each  Sign. 

THE  DODEKANGLE 


angular. 


AN&UUR. 


The  Dodekagram,  third  form,  reflected  from  every  fourth  point 

This  Dodekagram  is  formed  of  three  Squares,  representing  the  three  Quaternions  of  Angular, 
Succedent,  Cadent  and  Movable,  Fixed  and  Common. 


THE  DODEKANGLE 


36 


VOLUME  FIVE 


The  Dodekagram,  fourth  form;  reflected  from  every  fifth  point. 

The  Dodekagram  reflected  from  every  fifth  point  is  formed  of  four  Triangles  within  Circle,  and 
refers  to  the  concentrated  force  of  the  four  Triplicities  of  the  Zodiac  operating  through  nature. 


THE  DODEKANGLE 


The  Dodekagram,  fifth  form;  reflected  from  every  sixth  point. 

The  Dodekagram  reflected  from  every  sixth  point  is  a continuous  figure;  and  symbolizes  the  24 
Thrones  of  the  schema  established  over  the  Positive  and  Negative  potencies  of  the  Elements  in  the 
Zodiac;  and  over  the  24  hours  in  the  day. 


THE  ENDEKANGLE 


The  Endekagram  third  form;  reflected  from  every  fourth  point. 

Symbolizing  the  restriction  of  the  Qliphoth,  Esther  IX,  vs.  3 is  “Vehachashdrapanim,’'  signifying 
lieutenants  or  deputy  governors  of  provinces. 

Deut.  I,  vs.  2.  “There  are  eleven  days  journey  from  Horeb  by  the  way  of  Mount  Seir  unto  Kadesh 
Barnea.” 

Deut.  XXXII,  vs.  37  is  VeOmar  Ai  Elohim  Tzur  Chasyahbah.  “And  he  shall  say  ‘Where  are  their 
Gods,  their  rock  wherein  they  trust?'  or  ‘Eleven  are  their  Gods,'  etc.,  or  Ai  are  their  Gods  (Elohim).” 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  CROSS  WITHIN  THE  CIRCLE 


© 

The  Point  within  the  Circle  represents  the  operation  of  Kether  in  general;  and  the  Cross  within  the 
Circle  that  of  Chokmah,  for  therein  are  the  roots  of  Wisdom.  When  using  these  Lineal  Figures  in  the 
formation  of  Talismans  under  the  Sephiroth  remember  that: 

The  Point  within  the  Circle  is  Kether. 

The  Cross  within  the  Circle  is  Chokmah. 

The  Triangle  within  the  Circle  is  Binah. 

The  Square  within  the  Circle  is  Chesed. 

The  remaining  Sephiroth  should  have  the  double,  or  triple,  or  quadruple,  forms  of  their  lineal 
figures  bound  together  in  their  talismans;  e.g.,  in  the  Heptangle  for  Netzach,  the  Heptagon  and  the  two 
forms  of  the  Heptagram  should  be  united  in  the  same  Talisman,  the  extremities  of  the  angles  coinciding. 

The  Endekangle  is  appropriate  to  the  Qliphoth. 

The  Dod  ekangle  is  appropriate  to  the  Zodiacal  forces  in  Malkuth.  Kether  that  of  the  Primum 
Mobile;  Chokmah  the  Sphere  of  the  Zodiac  in  command;  and  Malkuth  that  of  the  Elements. 

And  many  other  meanings  are  bound  together  in  the  lineal  figures  besides  those  which  are  given 
in  this  book.  Two  or  more  different  forms  may  be  bound  together  in  the  same  Talisman. 


38 


VOLUME  FIVE 


SIGILS  FROM  THE  ROSE 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 

In  the  Opening  Ceremony  of  the  grade  of  Adeptus  Minor  the  complete  Symbol  of  the  Rose  and 
Cross  is  called  the  ‘Key  of  Sigils  and  of  Rituals.’  It  is  further  said  that  it  represents  the  Forces  of  the  22 
Letters  in  Nature,  as  divided  into  a Three,  a Seven,  and  a Twelve. 

The  inner  Three  Petals  of  the  Rose  symbolise  the  active  Elements  of  Air,  Fire,  and  Water, 
operating  in  the  Earth,  which  is  as  it  were  the  recipient  of  them,  their  container  and  ground  of  operation. 
They  are  coloured,  as  are  all  the  other  petals,  according  to  the  hues  of  the  Rainbow  in  the  masculine  scale. 
The  seven  next  Petals  answer  to  the  Letters  of  the  Seven  Planets,  and  the  Twelve  Outer  to  the  Twelve 
Signs  of  the  Zodiac. 


If  thou  wilt  trace  the  Sigil  of  any  word  or  name  either  in  the  Air,  or  written  upon  paper,  thou  shalt 
commence  with  a circle  at  the  point  of  the  initial  letter  on  the  Rose,  and  draw  with  thy  magical  weapon  a 
line  from  this  circle  unto  the  place  of  the  next  letter  of  the  name.  Continue  this,  until  thou  hast  finished  the 
word  which  the  letters  compose.  If  two  letters  of  the  same  sort,  such  as  two  Beths  or  Gimels,  come 
together,  thou  shalt  represent  the  same  by  a crook  or  wave  in  the  line  at  that  point. 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


And  if  there  be  a letter,  as  Resh  in  Metatron,  through  which  the  line  passeth  to  another  letter  and 

which  yet  formeth  part  of  the  name,  thou  shalt  make  a noose  in  the  line  at  that  point  thus:  ( 0 ) to 

make  the  same. 

If  thou  art  drawing  the  Sigil  thou  mayest  work  it  in  the  respective  colours  of  the  letters  and  add 
these  together  to  form  a synthesis  of  colour.  Thus  the  Sigil  of  Metatron  shall  be: 

blue,  greenish-yellow,  orange,  red-orange,  and  greenish-blue:  the  synthesis  will  be  a reddish- 

citron. 


KU>H1M 


Now  we  will  discuss,  for  example,  the  Sigils  of  the  Forces  under  Binah,  the  Third  Sephirah.  The 
Sigils  for  the  plane  of  a Sephirah  are  always  worked  out  on  this  system  in  this  order: 

First:  Sigil  of  the  Sephirah  - Binah. 

Second:  Sigil  of  the  Divine  Name,  representing  the  force  of  the  Sephirah  in  the  World  of  Atziluth. 
For  Binah,  YHVH  ELOHIM. 

Third:  The  Sigil  of  the  Archangel,  representing  the  force  of  the  Sephirah  in  Briah 

TZAPHQIEL. 

Fourth:  Sigil  of  the  Choir  of  Angels,  representing  the  force  of  the  Sephirah  in  Yetzirah 

ARALIM. 

Fifth:  The  Sigil  of  the  Sphere  of  the  Planet  representing  the  force  of  the  Sephirah  in  Assiah  - 

SHABBATHAI. 

Finally,  the  Sigils  of  any  other  names  whose  numbers  have  some  relation  to  the  powers  of  the 
Sephirah  or  its  Planet.  Yet  these  latter  (the  Sigils  of  the  Intelligence  and  Spirit)  are  more  usually  taken 
from  the  Magical  Kamea  or  Square  of  the  Planets  according  to  a slightly  different  system  as  will  be 
shown  hereafter. 


40 


VOLUME  FIVE 


SIGILS  AND  KAMEAS 

This  ancient  mode  of  forming  Sigils  was  through  the  medium  of  the  Kameas  of  the 
Planets  or  the  magical  squares.  Wallis  Budge  believes  that  the  word  Kamea  is  derived  from 
the  same  root  as  our  English  cameo.  Magical  squares  are  arrangements  of  numbers  and  or 
letters  arranged  in  such  a manner  as  to  yield  the  same  number  when  added  horizontally, 
vertically  or  diagonally.  The  sum  of  all  the  numbers  in  the  Kamea  is  one  of  special 
significance  to  the  Planet  to  which  that  square  is  attributed. 

The  method  of  forming  Sigils  from  these  squares  is  very  simple  — so  simple  as 
sometimes  to  be  confusing.  The  method  of  using  the  magical  Rose  is  very  useful  and  certainly 
the  most  convenient  --  but  it  has  no  roots  in  antiquity.  This  however  is  certainly  no  argument 
against  using  it,  anachronism  though  it  may  be  . Barrett  gives  the  Kameas  in  his  book  The 
Magus, 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


and  Wallis  Budge  also  reproduces  them  in  his  Amulets  And  Superstitions,  though 
his  are  copied  from  a text  on  Magic  written  by  Papus  towards  the  close  of  the  last  century. 

Those  in  The  Magus  are  replete  with  multiform  errors,  as  is  the  execrable  Hebrew 
that  Barrett  uses.  Most  of  these  errors  are  readily  correctable.  However  some  basic 
knowledge,  such  as  is  given  in  the  Knowledge  Lectures,  of  Hebrew  and  Qabalistic  numerical 
manipulations  is  necessary  in  order  to  trace  these  Sigils  on  the  Kameas.  One  of  the  most 
important  tools  is  the  Qabalah  of  Nine  Chambers,  or  AIQ  BEKER.  It  has  been  reproduced 
earlier  in  these  pages.  By  this  method,  the  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet  are  grouped  together 
according  to  the  similarity  of  their  numbers  — since  Hebrew  letters  are  sounds  and  numbers  at 
the  same  time.  As  you  will  see  from  the  diagram  Aleph  - 1,  Yod  - 10,  and  Qoph  - 100  are 
grouped  together  in  the  first  space  or  chamber  because  they  are  all  variables  of  1.  So  also  in 
the  third  chamber,  Gimel  - 3,  Lamed  - 30,  and  Shin  - 300  are  likewise  grouped  together  since  3 
is  their  constant.  The  same  rule  applies  to  all  the  others  --  forming  nine  groupings  or 
chambers. 

In  order  to  trace  the  Sigil  of  any  Name  --  and  do  remember  that  Sigil  simply  means 
signature  — one  must  reduce  the  letters  of  the  Name  to  tens  or  units  as  found  in  the  Square. 
TIRIEL  one  of  the  Mercurial  names  is  one  which  previously  defied  tracing  because  of 
errors  in  the  numbering  of  the  square  and  the  careless  transposition  of  the  shape  of  the  Sigil 
in  older  works.  However,  Teth  - 9,  Yod  - 10  and  can  be  used  as  such  or  reduced  to  1,  Resh  - 
200  but  must  be  reduced  to  20,  Yod  - 10,  Aleph  - 1,  and  Lamed  - 30.  To  trace  the  Sigil,  one 
starts  at  the  lower  left  hand  corner,  moves  directly  diagonally  to  10  or  1,  then  again  almost 
diagonally  downwards  to  either  20  or  2 (they  are  in  the  same  pathway),  back  to  10  or  1, 
loops  the  line  because  one  must  return  to  Aleph  - 1,  then  somewhat  downwards  to  the  left 
for  Lamed  - 30  (3  is  in  the  same  pathway  but  lower  down.) 

It  sounds  complex  but  a little  practice  will  demonstrate  its  simplicity.  The  resultant 
shape  may  he  somewhat  different  from  that  given  here  --  but  the  difference  is  slight  and  may 
be  put  down  to  artistic  license. 

The  Seal  or  Sigil  of  the  Planet  is  a symmetrical  form  so  designed  that  its  traced 
lines  touch  every  number  on  the  Kamea.  Thus  the  seal  becomes  an  epitome  or  synthetic 
figure  of  the  Kamea. 

In  a small  book  I wrote  some  years  ago  How  to  Make  and  Use  Talismans  I 
demonstrated  a technique  whereby  ordinary  names  --  not  necessary  Qabalistic  ones  --  may 
be  used  in  order  to  initiate  a particular  current  of  force  thought  to  be  necessary  at  a given 
time.  Thus  the  names  Joe  Brown  or  Bill  Green,  to  use  crude  examples,  may  be  translated  by 
means  of  Pythagorean  numerology  into  numbers  that  can  be  traced  in  a Kamea.  If  for 
example,  the  student  of  Magic  --  say  Joe  Brown  --  felt  sickly,  he  could  make  a sigil  of  his 
name  and  number  by  using  the  Kamea  of  the  Sun  or  Jupiter,  etc.  etc.  There  are  many  changes 
that  can  be  rung  on  this  simple  theme. 


42 


VOLUME  FIVE 


KAMEA  OF  SATURN 


SEAL  OF  THE 
PLANET 


SPIRIT 

ZAZEL 


INTELLIGENCE 

AGIEL 


KAMEA  OF  JUPITER 


H 

1*1 

IS 

/ 

r 

7 

f> 

17 

5 

H 

1 o 

8 

16 

2 

3 

SEAL  OF  THE 
PLANET 


>1 

SPIRIT 

HISMAEL 


INTELLIGENCE 

YOPHIEL 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


KAMEA  OF  MARS 


II 

Vi 

7 

Z 0 

3 

9 

n 

IS 

8 

iL 

n 

s 

IS 

2/ 

9 

10 

18 

1 

19 

zz 

23 

(o 

19 

a 

IS 

SEAL  OF  PLANET 


KAMEA  OF  SOL 


(o 

3Z 

3 

3y 

35 

/ 

7 

ll 

27 

29 

8 

Jo 

If 

•9 

Ho 

IS 

23 

zV 

18 

2j> 

IX 

2f 

/7 

/3 

25 

79 

to 

9 

Z6 

IZ 

3b 

5 

33 

4 

2. 

a 

SEAL  OF  PLANET 


44 


VOLUME  FIVE 


KAMEA  OF  VENUS 


CHOIR  OF  ANGELS 
BENI  SERAPHIM 


KAMEA  OF  MERCURY 


% 

S8 

59 

H 

a 

63 

/ 

Hi 

15 

IH 

52 

S3 

fl 

IO 

96 

H! 

25 

zz 

Hf 

VS 

if 

/* 

V8 

3t 

3 H 

35 

29 

29 

39 

jy 

ZS 

Ho 

26 

27 

37 

36 

30 

3/ 

33 

17 

HI 

76 

2P 

V 

VS 

n 

Z7 

H 

55 

sV 

12 

<3 

51 

5o 

/6 

— 

Z. 

LI 

6/ 

6® 

6 

lL 

S7 

INTELLIGENCE 

URIEL 


45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


KAMEA  OF  LUNA 


37 

IS 

19 

_ 

7o 

U 

C.1 

FT 

5 

6 

39 

L 

77 

So 

1! 

u 

L.  ... 

63 

If 

% 

V 

1 

37 

SO 

31 

71 

13 

55 

IS 

H* 

[* 

io 

r/ 

3t 

a 

. 

2/ 

sb 

57 

n 

77 

7 

HI 

73 

33 

bS 

23 

%b 

S 9 

z7 

IS 

So 

' 

Hi 

Vf 

3Y 

7S 

bb 



5? 

IO 

SI 

Z 

H3 

35 

iH 

bo 

u 

Si 

3 

< 

74 

29 

(A 

2 o 

u 

IZ. 

53 

H 

HS 

1 & 2 INTELLIGENCE  OF  THE 

INTELLIGENCES  OF  THE  MOON: 

MALCAH  BETARSHISIM 

VE-AD  RUACHOTH  HA-SCHECHALIM 

3 SEAL  OF  THE  PLANET 

4 SPIRIT:  CHASHMODAI 

5 SPIRIT  OF  THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  MOON: 

SHAD  BARSCHEMOTH  HA-SCHARTATHAN 


46 


VOLUME  FIVE 


NAMES  AND  SIGILS  OF  OLYMPIC  PLANETARY  SPIRITS 


b a*atho\ 

^ BETHOT^ 


cfPH/U-EGH 


O OCH. 


HA&lTH. 


0 OPH^EL 


2)PKU** 


pyui 

U-iRriJ 


So  far  as  concerns  the  foregoing  Sigils,  tradition  has  it  that  the  Spirits  are  evil,  the 
Intelligences  good.  The  Seals  and  Names  of  the  Intelligences  should  be  used  on  all  Talismans 
for  a good  effect.  Those  of  the  Spirits  of  the  Planets  serve  for  evil,  and  should  therefore  not 
be  used  in  any  operation  of  a beneficial  kind.  The  tradition  however  implies  usually  by  an 
evil  force,  such  as  the  Spirits  of  the  planets,  a blind  force,  which  contrary  to  popular  notion 
can  be  used  to  good  and  beneficial  ends. 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


TELESMATIC  FIGURES 

There  is  a mode  whereby,  combining  the  letters,  the  colours,  the  attributions  and 
their  Synthesis,  thou  mayest  build  up  a telesmatic  Image  of  a Force.  The  Sigil  shall  then 
serve  thee  for  the  tracing  of  a Current  which  shall  call  into  action  a certain  Elemental 
Force. 

Know  thou  that  this  is  not  to  be  done  lightly  for  thine  amusement  or  experiment, 
seeing  that  the  Forces  of  Nature  were  not  created  to  be  thy  plaything  or  toy.  Unless  thou 
doest  thy  practical  magical  works  with  solemnity,  ceremony  and  reverence,  thou  shalt  be 
like  an  infant  playing  with  fire,  and  thou  shalt  bring  destruction  upon  thyself. 

Know,  then,  that  if  thou  essay  in  the  imagination  to  form  an  astral  image  from  the 
Names,  the  first  letter  shall  be  the  head  of  the  Figure  or  Form,  and  the  final  letters  shall  be 
its  feet.  The  other  letters  shall  be,  and  represent  in  their  order,  its  body  and  members. 

AGIEF,  for  example,  shall  give  thee  an  Angelic  Form  of  the  following  nature  and 
appearance. 

AFEPFI,  Air.  The  head  winged,  and  of  a golden  colour,  with  long  floating  golden 
hair.  GIMEF,  Funa.  Crowned  blueish  silver  cresent,  and  with  face  like  that  of  grave  and 
beautiful  woman  with  a blueish  halo. 

YOD,  Virgo.  The  body  of  a maiden  clothed  in  a grass  green  robe. 

AFEPH,  Air.  Golden  wings  of  a large  size,  partly  covering  the  lower  part  of  the 
figure.  LAMED,  Libra.  Feet  and  limbs  well-proportioned  and,  either  in  the  hand  of  the 
figure  or  lying  at  its  feet,  the  sword  and  scales  of  Justice  in  bright  green. 

Playing  around  the  figure  will  be  a greenish  light  the  colour  of  its  synthesis.  The  keys 
of  the  Tarot  may  help  thee  in  the  form. 

See  well  also  that  thou  makest  the  Image  as  pure  and  beautiful  as  possible,  for  the 
more  impure  or  common  the  figure,  the  more  dangerous  is  it  unto  thee.  (N.B.  I suggest 
that  before  you  build  up  this  figure  in  your  imagination,  you  make  a rough  sketch  on  a 
large  sheet  of  paper  and  keep  it  aside  for  several  days  constantly  making  improvements  in 
its  appearance.  When  finished  this  is  the  time  to  transfer  it  to  the  imagination.  I.R.) 

Write  upon  the  breast  its  Sigil,  upon  the  girdle  its  Name,  and  place  clouds  below  the 
feet.  And  when  thou  has  done  this  with  due  solemnity  and  rigid  correctness  of  symbolism, 
shunning  as  thou  wouldst  shun  death  any  suggestion  of  coarseness  or  vulgarity  in  an 
Angelic  symbol,  then  hear  what  it  shall  say  unto  thee. 

SERAPHIM  will  give  thee  an  Angelic  Figure  like  a Warrioress  with  Flame  playing 
about  her,  and  a countenance  glorious  like  the  Sun,  and  beneath  her  feet  the  stormy  Sea  and 
thunder  clouds,  and  lightning  about  her,  and  a glow  as  of  Flame.  She  has  a triangular 
helmet  or  head-dress  of  Flame  like  the  symbol  of  Fire. 

GRAPHIEL  will  give  thee  a Great  Angel  like  a Female  Warrior  with  a most  glorious 
countenance,  crowned  with  the  Crescent  and  flashing  with  Light,  and  surrounded  by 
Flame  and  Lightening  and  with  Four  Wings. 


48 


VOLUME  FIVE 


The  termination  EL  always  gives  to  Angelic  Forms  the  Wings  and  Symbols  of 
Justice.  The  ending  YAH  will  make  the  Figures  like  enthroned  Kings  or  Queens,  and  with 
flaming  glory  at  their  feet. 

FURTHER  ON  TELESMATIC  FIGURES 

The  Names  of  all  Angels  and  Angelic  forces  terminate,  with  few  exceptions,  in  either 
AL  or  YAH.  The  Divine  Name  AL  belongs  to  CHESED  and  it  represents  a good, 
powerful,  and  mighty  force,  but  of  somewhat  milder  operation  than  the  Name  YAH. 

Since  not  only  the  Angels  but  even  devils  are  said  to  draw  their  force  and  power 
directly  from  the  prolific  source  of  the  divine  energies,  therefore  frequently  to  the  names 
of  evil  spirits,  is  AL  added.  The  Name  YAH  is  added  to  the  name  of  an  Angel  or  Spirit 
who  exercises  only  a good  and  somewhat  beneficent  office. 

This  being  understood,  these  two  terminations  being  rather  in  the  nature  of 
incidental  attributions  than  of  essential  distinction,  they  need  not  be  taken  too  much  notice 
of  in  the  construction  of  a telesmatic  image. 

In  building  up  such  an  image,  you  can  either  imagine  it  astrally  before  you,  or  paint 
the  actual  resemblance.  Care  should  however  be  taken  to  pronounce  the  Divine  Names 
belonging  to  the  world  under  which  the  telsmatic  image  under  course  of  construction 
would  fall.  Thus  to  ATZILUTH  are  allotted  Deific  Names.  To  BRIAH,  Archangelic  and  so 
on.  It  is  also  useful  to  employ  the  Sephirotic  Names  which  are  comprised  in  the  special 
world  to  which  the  Telesmatic  Image  is  allotted. 

It  is  well  to  note  that  the  four  Worlds  themselves  formulate  the  Law  involved  in 
the  building  up  or  expression  of  any  material  thing.  The  world  of  ATZILUTH  is  purely 
archetypal  and  primordial,  and  to  it,  as  before  said,  Deific  Names  are  applied.  BRIAH  is 
creative  and  originative,  and  to  it  certain  Great  Gods  called  Archangels  are  allotted. 
YETZIRAH  is  formative  and  Angelic  Orders  are  allotted  thereunto.  ASSIAH  which  is  the 
material  world  consists  of  the  great  Kingdoms  of  the  Elements,  human  beings,  and  in  some 
cases  of  the  Qlippoth  --  though  these  latter  really  occupy  the  planes  below  ASSIAH. 

From  these  remarks  it  will  be  seen  that  a Telesmatic  Image  can  hardly  apply  to 
ATZILUTH;  that  to  BRIAH  it  can  only  do  so  in  a restricted  sense.  Thus  a Telesmatic 
Image  belonging  to  that  world  would  have  to  be  represented  with  a kind  of  concealed  head, 
possessing  a form  shadowy  and  barely  indicated.  Telesmatic  Images,  then  really  belong  to 
YETZI  RAH.  Therefore  it  would  be  impossible  to  employ  the  telesmatic  image  of  a Divine 
Name  in  ATZILUTH,  for  it  would  not  represent  that  in  the  world  of  ATZILUTH,  but 
rather  its  correlation  in  YETZIRAH.  In  ASSIAH  you  would  get  Elemental  forms. 

The  sex  of  the  figure  depends  upon  the  predominance  of  the  masculine  or  the  feminine 
in  the  total  of  the  letters  together,  but  a jumble  of  the  sexes  should  be  avoided  in  the  same 
form.  The  Image  built  up  should  be  divided  into  as  many  parts  as  there  are  letters, 
commencing  at  the  upper  part  and  so  on  in  order. 


49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


In  addition  to  this  method  of  determining  the  sex  of  the  Telesmatic  Image  of  a Name, 
certain  Names  are  inherently  masculine,  others  feminine,  and  some  epicene,  irrespective  of  the 
mere  testimony  of  the  letters. 

SANDALPHON,  for  instance  is  thus  analysed: 

Samekh  is  Male,  Nun  is  Male,  Daleth  is  Female,  Lamed  is  Female,  Peh  is  Female,  Vau 
is  Male,  and  Nun  is  Male. 

Therefore  masculine  predominates,  and  if  it  were  an  ordinary  Name  you  would  make  a 
masculine  Form  out  of  it.  But  this  Name  is  especially  applied  to  the  feminine  Kerub,  it  is  an 
exception  to  the  rule;  it  is  an  Archangelic  Name,  belonging  to  the  BRIAT1C  world  and  not 
merely  an  Angelic  Name  relating  to  YETZIRAH. 

SAN  DALPHON  is  also  called  Yetzer,  meaning  'left',  and  its  letters  are:  female, 
female  and  male,  so  that,  in  this  case,  it  may  be  any  of  these. 

The  Seven  Letters  composing  the  Name  SANDALPHON  are  thus  adapted  to  the 
Telesmatic  Image. 

Samekh  is  the  Head.  Would  represent  a beautiful  and  active  face  rather  thin  than 
fat.  Nun  is  the  Neck,  would  be  admirably  full. 

Daleth  is  the  Shoulders  of  a beautiful  woman. 

Lamed  is  the  Heart  and  Chest,  the  latter  perfectly  proportioned. 

Peh  is  the  Hips  strong  and  full. 

Yau  is  the  Legs  massive. 

Nun  (final)  Feet  sinewy  and  perhaps  winged. 

Should  you  desire  to  build  up  an  elemental  form  out  of  this  Name  a very  peculiar 
figure  would  result: 

Samekh  — Head  fierce,  but  rather  beautiful.  Blue. 

Nun  — Neck  with  eagle's  wings  from  behind.  Blue- 
green.  Daleth  - Shoulders  feminine,  rather  beautiful.  Green- 
blue.  Lamed  — Chest  of  woman.  Emerald. 

Peh  — Strong  and  shaggy  hips  and  thighs.  Red. 

Vau  — Legs  of  a Bull.  Red-orange. 

Nun  (final)  — Feet  of  an  Eagle.  Green-blue. 

This  it  will  be  seen,  is  almost  a synthetical  Kerubic  Figure.  This  figure  may  be 
represented,  as  it  were,  with  its  feet  on  the  Earth,  and  its  head  in  the  clouds.  The  colours  in  the 
scale  of  the  King  would  synthesize  as  a delicate  and  sparkling  green. 

The  uncovered  parts  of  the  body  would  be  blue,  the  countenance  belonging  to 
Sagittarius  would  be  almost  that  of  a horse.  The  whole  form  would  be  like  that  of  a goddess 
between  Hathor  and  Neith  holding  a bow  and  arrows,  that  is  if  represented  as  an  Egyptian 
symbol. 


50 


VOLUME  FIVE 


If  again,  we  endeavour  to  translate  this  Name  into  symbols  on  a Tattwic  Plane,  we  get 
the  following: 


Samekh  comes  under  FIRE 

Nun  comes  under  WATER 

Daleth  comes  under  WATER  OF  EARTH 

Lamed  comes  under  AIR 

Peh  comes  under  FIRE 

Nun  comes  under  WATER. 

These  would  be  synthesized  thus:  A silver  crescent  on  a red  triangle  placed  over  a 
yellow  square.  All  three  would  be  charged  and  enclosed  within  a large  silver  crescent. 

Now,  taking  another  example,  the  Telesmatic  Image  appertaining  to  the  Letter 
ALEPH.  This  on  the  BRIATIC  Plane,  would  be  rather  masculine  than  feminine  and  would 
be  resumed  by  a spiritual  figure  hardly  visible  at  all,  the  head-dress  winged,  the  body 
cloud-veiled  and  wrapped  in  mist,  as  if  clouds  were  rolling  over  and  obscuring  the  outline, 
and  scarcely  permitting  the  legs  and  feet  to  be  seen.  It  represents  the  Spirit  of  Ether.  In  the 
YETZIRATIC  World,  it  would  be  like  a Warrior  with  winged  helmet,  the  face  angelic  but 
rather  fierce,  the  body  and  arms  mailed  and  bearing  a child  --  the  legs  and  feet  with  mailed 
buskins  and  wings  attached  to  them. 

In  ASSIAH,  this  same  letter  ALEPH  is  terrific  energy  and  represents,  as  it  were, 
mad  force  (the  shape  of  the  Letter  is  almost  that  of  a Swastika).  On  the  human  plane,  it 
would  represent  a person  who  was  a lunatic  and  at  times  given  to  frightful  fits  of  mania. 
Translated  to  the  elemental  plane,  it  would  represent  a form  whose  body  fluctuated  between 
a man  and  an  animal,  and  indeed,  the  ASSIATIC  form  would  be  a most  evil  type  with  a force 
something  like  that  compounded  of  that  of  a bird  and  that  of  a demon  --  an  altogether 
horrible  result. 

The  Letter  ALEPH  represents  spirituality  in  high  things,  but  when  translated  to  the 
plane  contiguous  to  or  below  ASSIAH  is  usually  something  horrible  and  unbalanced, 
because  it  is  so  opposed  to  matter  that  the  moment  it  is  involved  therein,  there  is  no 
harmony  between  them.  This  notion  is  most  important  and  permeates  all  forms  of  the 
Order's  magical  procedures. 

Radiating  forces  of  Divine  Light,  otherwise  called  Angelic  Forms,  have  not  gender  in 
the  grosser  acceptation  of  the  term,  though  they  can  be  classed  according  to  the  masculine 
and  feminine  sides.  As,  for  example,  in  the  human  figure,  sex  is  not  so  strongly  marked  in 
the  upper  part,  the  head,  as  in  the  body,  while  yet  the  countenance  can  be  distinctly  classed  as 
of  a masculine  or  a feminine  type.  So,  also,  on  quitting  the  material  plane,  sex  becomes  less 
marked,  or  rather  appreciable  in  a different  manner,  though  the  distinction  of  masculine  or 
feminine  is  retained.  And  herein  is  the  great  error  of  the  phallic  religions  --  that  they  have 
transferred  the  material  and  gross  side  of  sex  to  Divine  and  Angelic  planes,  not 
understanding  that  it  is  the  lower  that  is  derived  from  the  higher  by  correlation  in  material 


51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


development,  and  not  the  higher  from  the  lower.  Gender,  in  the  usual  meaning  of  the  term, 
belongs  to  the  Elemental  Spirits,  Kerubic  Forms,  Fays,  Planetary  Spirits  and  Olympic  Spirits  -- 
also  to  the  Qliphoth  in  its  most  exaggerated  and  bestial  aspects,  and  this  is  a ratio  increasing  in 
proportion  to  the  depths  of  their  descent.  Also,  in  certain  of  the  evil  elemental  spirits  it  would  be 
exaggerated  and  repulsive. 

But  in  the  higher  and  angelic  natures,  gender  is  correlated  by  forms,  either  steady  and 
firm,  or  rushing.  Firmness  like  that  of  a rock  or  pillar  is  the  nature  of  the  Feminine; 
restlessness  and  movement,  that  of  the  Masculine.  Therefore,  let  this  be  clearly  understood  in 
ascribing  gender  to  angelic  forms  and  images.  Our  tradition  classes  all  forces  under  the  heads 
of  vehement  and  rushing  force,  and  firm  and  steady  force.  Therefore  a figure  representing 
the  former  would  be  a masculine  and  that  representing  the  latter,  a feminine  form. 

But  for  convenience  in  the  formation  of  Telesmatic  images  of  ordinary  occult  names 
and  words,  the  letters  are  arranged  in  masculine  and  feminine  classification.  This  classification 
is  not  intended  to  affirm  that  the  letters  have  not  in  themselves  both  natures  (seeing  that  in 
each  letter  as  in  each  Sephirah  is  hidden  the  dual  nature  of  masculine  and  feminine)  but  shows 
more  their  tendency  as  regards  the  distinction  of  force  beforementioned. 

Those,  then,  are  rather  masculine  than  feminine  to  which  are  allotted  forces  more  rapid 
in  action.  And  those,  again,  are  rather  feminine  than  masculine  which  represent  a force  more 
firm  and  steady  whence  all  letters  whose  sound  is  prolonged  as  if  moving  forward  are  rather 
masculine  than  feminine.  Certain  others  are  epicene,  yet  incline  rather  to  one  nature  than  to 
another.  (By  G.H.  Frater  D.D.C.F.) 

TELESMATIC  ATTRIBUTIONS  OF  THE  LETTERS  OF  THE  HEBREW  ALPHABET 


ALEPH.  Spiritual.  Wings  generally,  epicene,  rather  male  than  female,  rather  thin  type. 
BETH.  Active  and  slight.  Male. 

GIMEL.  Grey,  beautiful  yet  changeful.  Feminine,  rather  full  face  and  body. 

DALETH.  Very  beautiful  and  attractive.  Feminine.  Rather  full  face  and  body. 

HEH.  Fierce,  strong,  rather  fiery;  feminine. 

VAU.  Steady  and  strong.  Rather  heavy  and  clumsy,  masculine. 

ZAYIN.  Thin,  intelligent,  masculine. 

CHETH.  Full  face,  not  much  expression,  feminine. 

TETH.  Rather  strong  and  fiery.  Feminine. 

YOD.  Very  white  and  rather  delicate.  Feminine. 

CAPH.  Big  and  strong,  masculine. 


52 


VOLUME  FIVE 


LAMED.  Well-proportioned;  feminine. 

MEM.  Reflective,  dream-like,  epicene,  but  female  rather  than  male. 

NUN.  Square  determined  face,  masculine,  rather  dark. 

SAMEKH.  Thin  rather  expressive  face;  masculine. 

AYIN.  Rather  mechanical,  masculine. 

PEH.  Fierce,  strong,  resolute,  feminine. 

TZADDI.  Thoughtful,  intellectual,  feminine. 

QOPH.  Rather  full  face,  masculine. 

REST!.  Proud  and  dominant,  masculine. 

SHIN.  Fierce,  active,  epicene,  rather  male  than  female. 

TAU.  Dark,  grey,  epicene;  male  rather  than  female. 

(These  genders  are  only  given  as  a convenient  guide.) 

SUMMARY 

In  the  vibration  of  Names  concentrate  first  upon  the  highest  aspirations  and  upon  the  whiteness  of 
Kether.  Astral  vibrations  and  material  alone  are  dangerous.  Concentrate  then  upon  your  Tiphareth,  the 
centre  about  the  heart,  and  draw  down  into  it  the  White  Rays  from  above.  Formulate  the  letters  in  White 
Light  in  your  heart.  Inspire  deeply,  and  then  pronounce  the  letters  of  the  Name,  vibrating  each  through 
your  whole  system— as  if  setting  into  vibration  the  Air  before  you,  and  as  if  that  vibration  spread  out  into 
space. 

The  Whiteness  should  be  brilliant. 

The  Sigils  are  drawn  from  the  lettering  of  the  Rose  upon  the  Cross,  and  these  are  in  Tiphareth, 
which  corresponds  to  the  heart.  Draw  themas  if  the  Rose  were  in  your  heart. 

In  vibrating  any  Name,  pronounce  it  as  many  times  as  it  has  letters.  This  is  the  Invoking  Whirl. 

Example:  The  Vibration  of  ADONAI HA-ARETZ. 

Perform  the  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram  in  the  four  quarters  of  your  room,  preceded  by  the 
Qabalistic  Cross.  Then  in  each  quarter  give  the  Signs  of  the  Adeptus  Minor,  saying  IAO  and  LVX, 
making  the  symbol  of  the  Rose-Cross  as  taught  in  the  paper  describing  the  Rose-Cross  Ritual. 

Pass  to  the  centre  of  the  Room,  and  face  East.  Then  formulate  before  you  in  brilliant  white 
flashings  the  Letters  of  the  Name  in  the  form  of  a Cross  — i.e.  both  perpendicular  and  horizontal,  as  seen 
in  the  diagram  below 


n 

s 

"i 

r 


53 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


There  is  another  method  of  assigning  gender  based  upon  whether  or  not  the  sound  of  the 
HEBREW  Letter  is  arrested  or  prolonged.  If  the  former  it  is  masculine,  if  the  latter  it  is  feminine  — as 
follows: 


Aleph-broad  A 
Vau-U,V,  00 
Caph-K,  Kh 
Samekh-S 
Qoph-Q,  Qh 
Shin-Sh,  S 


SOUND  PROLONGED 
(MASCULINE) 

Beth-B-Bh 

Zayin-Z 

Nun-N 

Ayin-O,  Ngh,  Au 
Resh-R 


Gimel-G,  Gh 
Heh-H 
Teth-T 
Lamed-L 
Peh-P,  Ph 
Tau-T,  Tb. 


SOUND  ARRESTED 
(FEMININE) 

Daleth-D,  Dh 
Cheth-Ch  (gutteral) 
Yod-I,  J,  Y. 
Mem-M 
Tzaddi-Tz 


These,  then,  are  two  processes:  The  INVOKING  WHIRL  related  to  the  Heart.  The  EXPANDING 
WHIRL  related  to  the  Aura. 

ADNI  makes  the  figure  from  head  to  waist;  HA-ARTZ  from  waist  to  feet.  The  whole  Name  is 
related  to  Malkuth,  Matter,  and  Zelatorship. 

ALEPH.  Winged,  white,  brilliant,  radiant  Crown. 

DALETH.  Head  and  neck  of  a woman,  beautiful  but  firm,  hair  long,  dark  and  waving. 

NUN.  Arms  bare,  strong,  extended  as  a cross.  In  the  right  hand  are  ears  of  corn,  and  in  the  left  a 
golden  Cup.  Large  dark  spreading  Wings. 

YOD.  Deep  yellow-green  robe  covering  a strong  chest  on  which  is  a square  lamen  of  gold  with  a 
scarlet  Greek  Cross  — in  the  angles  four  smaller  red  crosses. 

In  addition  a broad  gold  belt  on  which  ADONAI  HA  - ARETZ  is  written  in  Enochian  or  Hebrew 
characters. 

The  feet  are  shown  in  flesh  colour  with  golden  sandals.  Long  yellow  green  drapery  rayed  with 
olive  reaches  to  the  feet.  Beneath  are  black  lurid  clouds  with  patches  of  colour.  Around  the  figure  are 
lightning  flashes,  red.  The  crown  radiates  White  Light.  A Sword  is  girt  at  the  side  of  the  figure. 


54 


VOLUME  FIVE 


THE  VIBRATORY  MODE  OF  PRONOUNCING  THE  DIVINE  NAMES 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 

In  vibrating  the  Divine  Names,  the  Operator  should  first  of  all  rise  as  high  as 
possible  towards  the  idea  of  the  Divine  White  Brilliance  in  KETHER  --  keeping  the 
mind  raised  to  the  plane  of  loftiest  aspiration.  Unless  this  is  done,  it  is  dangerous  to 
vibrate  only  with  the  astral  forces,  because  the  vibration  attracts  a certain  force  to 
the  operator,  and  the  nature  of  the  force  attracted  rests  largely  on  the  condition  of 
mind  in  which  the  operator  is. 

The  ordinary  mode  of  vibrating  is  as  follows:  Take  a deep  and  full  inspiration 
and  concentrate  your  consciousness  in  your  heart,  which  answers  to  Tiphareth. 
(Having  first,  as  already  said,  ascended  to  your  Kether,  you  should  endeavour  to 
bring  down  the  white  Brilliance  into  your  heart,  prior  to  centering  your 
consciousness  there.) 

Then  formulate  the  letters  of  the  Name  required  in  your  heart,  in  white,  and 
feel  them  written  there.  Be  sure  to  formulate  the  letters  in  brilliant  white  light,  not 
merely  in  dull  whiteness  as  the  colour  of  the  Apas  Tattwa.  Then,  emitting  the 
breath,  slowly  pronounce  the  Letters  so  that  the  sound  vibrates  within  you,  and 
imagine  that  the  breath,  while  quitting  the  body,  swells  you  so  as  to  fill  up  space. 
Pronounce  the  Name  as  if  you  were  vibrating  it  through  the  whole  Universe,  and  as 
if  it  did  not  stop  until  it  reached  the  further  limits. 

All  practical  occult  work  which  is  of  any  use  tires  the  operator  or  withdraws 
some  magnetism,  and  therefore,  if  you  wish  to  do  anything  that  is  at  all  important, 
you  must  be  in  perfect  magnetic  and  nervous  condition,  or  else  you  will  do  evil 
instead  of  good. 

When  you  are  using  a Name  and  drawing  a Sigil  from  the  Rose,  you  must 
remember  that  the  Sephirah  to  which  the  Rose  and  Cross  are  referred,  is  Tiphareth, 
whose  position  answers  to  the  location  of  the  heart,  as  if  the  Rose  were  therein. 

It  is  not  always  necessary  to  formulate  before  you  in  space  the  telesmatic 
angelic  figure  of  the  Name. 

As  a general  rule,  pronounce  the  Name  as  many  times  as  there  are  letters 

in  it. 

(N.B.  One  of  the  things  that  affords  me  much  gratification  is  hearing  from  a 
student  here  and  there  who  has  been  working  the  Golden  Dawn  system 
satisfactorily.  Every  now  and  then  someone  calls  my  attention  to  a pamphlet  or 
book  written  by  a student  who  found  techniques  of  considerable  worth  in  this 
system.  For  example,  a few  months  ago  my  attention  was  directed  to  ANGELIC 
IMAGES  by  a Frater  A.  H.E.H.O.  in  England.  It  is  a beautifully  written  little  manual 
on  the  use  of  the  Telesmatic  Images.  As  the  author  states,  the  technique  is  nowhere 
to  be  found  save  in  the  Golden  Dawn,  yet  this  is  strange,  that  so  formidable  a 
technique  has  received  no  further  commentary.  He  proposed  to  remedy  the 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


deficiency,  and  indeed  has  succeeded  so  well  that  I strongly  recommend  the 
little  book.  It  may  be  purchased  from  the  Sorcerer's  Apprentice,  in  Leeds, 
Yorkshire. 

AHEHO's  description  of  the  technique  is:  As  the  sapphire  is  drawn  from  the 
earth,  rugged  and  of  crude  appearance,  so  do  we  find  these  two  Papers  --  archaicly 
written,  disjointed,  seemingly  in  places  to  be  worthless;  but,  as  the  gem  is  cut  and 
polished  to  a gleaming  splendour,  so  do  these  Papers,  when  studied  and  worked 
upon,  synthesize  into  a gleaming  gem,  a radiant  sapphire,  the  reflected  Light 
through  which  may  serve  to  illuminate  the  dark  pathways  of  the  Cosmos.  I.R.) 

AN  ALTERNATE  METHOD  OF  VIBRATING  THE  DIVINE  NAMES 

By 

V.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 

Not  long  ago,  1 came  across  a technique  which,  while  not  essentially  Golden 
Dawn,  is  so  intrinsically  in  harmony  with  fundamental  principles  that  I 
experimented  with  it  to  ascertain  whether  it  could  be  used  magically.  It  could,  so  I 
discovered.  And  a good  deal  else  beside. 

It  also  provides  a good  basis  for  understanding  — if  one  was  not  aware  of  it 
before  — the  nature  of  the  effect  in  one's  own  organism  of  the  vibration  of  the  Divine 
Names.  One  developes  a great  deal  of  respect  for  the  method  itself.  The  latter  was 
reported  by  a metaphysician  by  the  name  of  Brown  Landone  in  a brochure  entitled 
The  Great  Spiritual  Responsiveness  of  Body  and  Awakening  the  Brain  of  Spirit.  It  is 
a formidable  title  — and  the  principal  content  is  formidable  also.  Landone  describes 
a simple  experiment  which  is  essential  to  anyone  wishing  to  employ  this  method 
intelligently. 

Before  describing  this,  let  me  repeat  once  more  the  instructions  given  in  Z. 
1.  The  Symbolism  of  the  Ceremony  of  the  Opening  of  the  Neophyte  Grade.  Let 

the  Adept,  standing  upright,  his  arms  stretched  out  in  the  form  of  a Calvary  Cross, 
vibrate  a Divine  Name,  bringing  with  the  formulation  thereof  a deep  inspiration  into 
his  lungs.  Let  him  retain  the  breath,  mentally  pronouncing  the  Name  in  his  Heart,  so 
as  to  combine  it  with  the  forces  he  desires  to  awaken  thereby.  Thence  sending  it 
downwards  through  his  body  past  Yesod,  but  not  resting  there.  Taking  his  physical 
life  for  a material  basis,  send  it  on  into  his  feet.  There  he  shall  again  momentarily 
formulate  the  Name.  Then  bringing  it  rushing  upwards  into  the  lungs,  thence  shall 
he  breathe  it  forth  strongly,  while  vibrating  that  Divine  Name.  He  will  send  his 
breath  steadily  forward  into  the  Universe  so  as  to  awaken  the  corresponding  forces 
of  the  Name  in  the  outer  world.  Standing  with  arms  out,  in  the  form  of  a cross,  when 
the  breath  has  been  imaginatively  sent  to  the  feet  and  back,  bring  the  arms  forward 
in  the  sign  of  the  Enterer  while  vibrating  the  name  out  into  the  Universe.  On 
completing  this,  make  the  Sign  of  Silence  and  remain  still,  contemplating  the  Force 
you  have  invoked.' 


56 


VOLUME  FIVE 


The  alternative  method  to  be  described  here  is  not  too  fundamentally  different.  In  fact, 
it  is  identical  save  in  one  respect.  Before  describing  that  one  fact,  let  me  describe  the 
experiment  recommended  by  Brown  Landone. 

Take  an  ordinary  piece  of  dining  flatware  --  a long  spoon  or  knife  or  fork,  or  what  not. 

It  makes  no  difference.  So  long  as  it  is  a metal  and  can  transmit  vibrations  readily,  that  is  all 
that  is  required.  Now  take  a long  piece  of  ordinary  string,  about  forty  inches  long.  Wrap  the 
middle  of  this  string  securely  around  the  spoon  (or  whatever),  leaving  the  ends  free.  Hold 
each  end  between  thumb  and  forefinger  --  one  end  in  both  right  and  left  hands,  and  leaning 
over,  swing  the  spoon  against  the  edge  of  a table.  Listen  to  the  sound  it  makes.  Depending  on 
the  flatware  and  the  table,  a certain  sound  will  be  struck.  Take  note  of  it. 

Having  done  this,  take  one  end  of  the  string  and  wrap  it  around  the  middle  phalange 
of  the  index  finger.  Do  this  on  both  the  right  and  left  sides.  Then  insert  the  tips  of  the  fingers 
involved  into  the  ear,  lightly.  Repeat  the  same  experiment  of  swinging  the  spoon  so  that  it  hits 
against  a table  or  desk.  Now  determine  what  kind  of  sound  this  spoon  makes  in  the  ear.  I must 
confess  it  rather  surprised  me  when  I first  performed  this  little  experiment. 

The  resultant  sound  bears  little  relation  to  the  first  sound.  It  is  more  like  the  pealing 
of  cathedral  bells.  Repeat  this  several  times,  so  that  your  impression  is  most  clear,  and  hence 
can  be  recalled. 


It  is  this  sound,  suggests  Mr.  Landone,  which  is  made  whenever  we  speak,  talk  or  pray. 
It  is  this  sound  which  is  made  when  we  hum.  And  it  is  humming  that  Landone  recommends  in 
conjunction  with  various  prayers  etc.  that  he  prescribes.  It  is  this  inner  vibration  of  which 


57 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


we  are  not  normally  aware  that  vibrates  throughout  the  whole  organism.  It  must  have 
an  effect  on  every  molecule  in  every  cell,  so  that  all  vibrate  in  unison  with  the  divine  name 
being  intoned. 

I am  not  suggesting  prayers  of  any  kind  actually.  It  is  solely  my  recommendation  that 
the  humming  be  employed  with  the  Order's  method  of  vibrating  the  divine  Names,  knowing 
full  well  from  this  experiment  what  the  full  effect  of  the  formula  produces.  In  all  other 
instances  of  intoning  the  various  names  --  as  in  the  Pentagram  and  Hexagram  rituals  -- 
follow  all  the  rules  and  methods  described  in  this  paper  by  the  Order.  But  when  breathing  out 
the  Name,  as  described  above,  hum  it  out  . Do  not  try  to  pronounce  or  vibrate  the  Name 
clearly.  Hum  the  Name.  But  as  you  hum,  clearly  visualize,  or  have  the  mental  intention  that 
such  and  such  a Name  is  being  vibrated  while  you  hum. 

For  instance,  if  the  name  METATRON  or  SANDALPHON  is  to  be  used,  as 
recommended  in  this  document,  it  should  be  hummed  on  the  outgoing  breath.  The  Name  in 
Hebrew  letters  riding  on  the  breath,  as  it  were,  should  be  visualized  as  per  the  relevant 
instructions.  When  the  instruction  advises  that  you  should  imagine  that  the  breath,  when 
quitting  the  body,  swells  you  up  so  that  you  fill  up  all  space,  it  should  not  be  too  difficult  to 
conceive  of  the  fact  that  the  sound  made  within,  while  humming,  is  doing  precisely  that.  It 
may  of  course  require  a good  deal  of  practice,  but  I fancy  that  you  will  find  it  is  worth  the 
effort. 

Over  my  many  years  of  use  of  the  vibratory  formula  there  are  a couple  of  suggestions 
I would  like  to  offer  the  student  just  beginning  to  work  with  it.  The  first  one  is  to  draw  the 
name  of  the  God  or  Archangel  one  proposes  to  work  with  on  a large  board  or  piece  of  paper. 
Write  it  with  a soft-tipped  marking  pen,  and  make  the  letters  very  large.  Place  it  about  six  to 
ten  feet  away  from  where  you  are  working  so  that  it  is  within  easy  vision.  So  that  when 
attempting  to  visualize  the  Name,  it  will  be  made  easier  by  looking  at  the  board  first.  With  a 
little  practice  it  will  be  easy  to  visualize  with  the  eyes  open.  If  not,  open  them  periodically, 
casting  a swift  glance  at  the  name  on  the  board.  This  is  an  aid  to  visualization. 

The  second  tip  is  that  if  your  are  not  accustomed  to  being  hyperventilated,  proceed 
slowly.  Stand  at  the  foot  of  a bed,  or  have  a mattress  placed  on  the  floor  where  you  are 
working.  The  idea  is  that  this  practice  results  in  hyperventilation,  producing  dizziness  and 
unsteadiness  on  one's  legs  so  that  more  often  than  not  you  can  fall  and  I would  rather  you  fall 
on  a relatively  soft  surface  than  a hard  one  and  injure  yourself.  Please  take  this  warning 

seriously. 

Practice  the  method  --  with  both  the  board  and  the  bed  --  several  times  before 
attempting  to  use  it  in  full  ceremonial  work  in  your  Temple.  Develop  some  expertise  first, 
so  that  in  your  Temple  you  will  not  fall  because  of  hyperventilation. 

If  you  are  not  familiar  with  the  concept  of  hyperventilation,  read  Undoing  Yourself 
with  Energized  Meditation  and  Other  Devices,  by  Christopher  S.  Hyatt,  Falcon  Press, 
1982.  Also  my  book  on  the  vegetotherapy  of  Wilhelm  Reich  to  be  published  in  1984  by 
Falcon  Press,  will  provide  an  extensive  discussion  of  the  subject. 


58 


VOLUME  FIVE 


GEOMANCY 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 

ONE 

The  figures  of  Geomancy  consist  of  various  groupings  of  odd  and  even  points  in  4 lines.  Of  these 
the  greatest  possible  number  of  combinations  is  16.  Therefore  these  sixteen  combinations  of  odd  and  even 
points  arranged  on  four  lines  are  the  sixteen  figures  of  Geomancy.  These  are  again  classed  under  the  heads 
of  the  Elements,  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  and  the  Planets.  Two  figures  are  attributed  to  each  of  the  Seven 
Planets,  while  the  remainder  are  attributed  to  Caput  and  Cauda  Draconis  the  Head  and  Tail  of  the  Dragon, 
or  the  North  and  South  Nodes  of  the  Moon.  Furthermore,  to  each  Planet  and  Sign  certain  ruling  Genii  are 
attributed. 

TWO 

Roughly  speaking,  the  mode  of  obtaining  the  first  four  Geomantic  figures,  from  which  the 
remainder  of  the  Divination  is  calculated,  is  by  marking  down  at  random  on  paper  with  a pencil  held  by  a 
loosely  tensed  hand  16  lines  of  points  or  dashes,  without  counting  the  number  placed  in  each  line  during 
the  operation.  It  should  be  done  very  rapidly.  All  the  time  think  fixedly  of  the  subject  of  the  question. 
When  the  16  lines  are  completed,  the  number  of  points  in  each  line  should  be  added  up,  and  if  the  result  be 
odd  a single  point  or  cross  should  be  made  in  the  first  of  the  three  compartments  to  the  right  of  the  paper. 
If  even,  two  points  or  crosses.  These  16  lines  are  represented  below. 


59 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


These  yield  four  Geomantic  figures.  The  results,  odd  and/or  even,  of  lines  ito  4 inclusive 
comprise  the  first  figure,  of  Fortuna  Minor.  Of  lines  5 to  8 the  second  figure;  of  lines  9 to  12  the  third;  of 
lines  13  to  16,  the  4th  figure,  as  shown  in  the  diagram. 


60 


VOLUME  FIVE 


15  points  odd 

15  points  odd 

16  points  even 

14  points  even 

12  points  even 

6 points  even 

9 points  odd 

7 points  odd 

15  points  odd 

16  points  even 
15  points  odd 
14  points  even 

10  points  even 

11  points  odd 
10  points  even 
10  points  even 


PLAN  OF  GEOMANTIC  DIVINATION 


• • 

• • 

• • 

• • 


Fortuna  Minor 


Fortuna  Major 


• • 

• • 

• • 

• • 

• • 


Amissio 


Rubeus 


The  symbol  of  a Pentagram  either  within  or  without  a circumscribed  circle  should  be  made  at  the 
top  of  the  paper  on  which  the  dashes  are  made.  The  paper  itself  should  be  perfectly  clean  and  should 
have  never  been  previously  used  for  any  other  purpose.  If  a circle  be  used  with  the  Pentagram,  it  should 
be  drawn  before  the  latter  is  described.  The  Pentagram  should  always  be  of  the  “invoking”  type,  as 
described  in  the  Pentagram  Ritual.  Since  the  Pentagram  concerns  the  element  of  Earth,  it  should 
therefore  be  drawn  beginning  at  the  top  point  descending  to  the  lower  left  hand  point,  carefully  closing 
the  angle  at  the  finish.  While  slowly  tracing  the  Pentagram,  the  divine  name  associated  with  Earth  should 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


be  intoned  or  vibrated  ADONAI  ha-ARETZ.  It  could  be  intoned  two  or  three  times  before  proceeding 
with  the  drawing  of  the  Sigil.  This  will  help  to  concentrate  the  mind  and  to  elevate  it  to  the  highest 
notion  compatible  with  the  method.  Do  remember  that  in  one  of  the  Ritual  obligations,  the  aspirant 
swears  that  in  all  his  magical  workings  he  will  always  invoke  the  highest  divine  names  that  he  knows. 
Thus  he  will  always  be  working  under  the  aegis  of  the  divine.  Within  the  centre  of  the  Pentagram,  the 
Sigil  of  the  “Ruler”  to  which  the  matter  of  the  question  specially  refers,  should  be  placed. 

If  the  question  be  of  the  Nature  of  Saturn,  such  as  agriculture,  sorrow,  death,  etc.,  the  Sigil  of 
Zazel  should  be  placed  in  the  Pentagram.  If  of  Jupiter,  concerning  good  fortune,  feasting,  church 
preferment,  etc.,  the  Sigil  of  Hismael.  If  of  Mars,  war,  fighting,  victory,  etc.,  the  Sigil  of  Bartzabel.  If  of 
the  Sun,  power,  magistracy,  success,  etc.,  the  Sigil  of  Sorath.  If  of  Venus,  love,  music,  pleasure,  etc.,  the 
Sigil  of  Kedemel.  If  of  Mercury,  such  as  science,  learning,  knavery,  etc.,  the  Sigil  of  Taphthartharath, 
etc.,  If  of  travelling,  fishing,  etc.,  under  Luna,  then  the  Sigil  of  Chasmodai.  In  the  diagram  appended,  the 
Sigil  of  Hismael  is  employed. 

During  the  marking  down  of  the  points,  the  attention  should  be  fixed  upon  the  Sigil  within  the 
Pentagram,  and  the  mind  should  carefully  consider  the  question  proposed. 

A good  idea  to  to  repeat  out  loud  the  name  of  the  Ruler  as  if  to  invoke  him.  This  should  also  be 
followed  by  a short  statement  repeated  again  and  again  concerning  the  topic  of  divination.  The  hand 
should  not  be  removed  from  the  paper  until  all  16  lines  of  points  have  been  finished. 

For  example  if  you  wished  to  ask  a question  concerning  the  acquisition  of  wealth  you  would  use 
the  Sigil  relating  to  Jupiter,  Hismael.  You  would  then,  while  making  the  random  dots,  repeat  three  or 
four  times  the  name  of  Hismael,  followed  by,  “Will  I acquire,  such  and  such  amount  of  money?” 
(Specify  time  period.  The  phrasing  of  the  question  should  be  very  definite  and  specific.)  The  whole 
phrase  should  be  repeated  frequently  until  all  16  lines  of  dots  have  been  completed. 


62 


VOLUME  FIVE 


GEOMANTIC  ATTRIBUTIONS 


sign 

Ruler 

Planet 

Sign 

Bartzabel 

Mars 

Aries 

<5? 

Kedemel 

Venus 

Taurus 

7 

T aphthartharath 

Mercury 

Gemini 

5 

Chasmodai 

Luna 

Cancer 

a 

Sorath 

Sol 

Leo 

T 

Taphthartharath 

Mercury 

Virgo 

Kedemel 

Venus 

Libra 

'“O 

Bartzabel 

Mars 

Scorpio 

Hismael 

Jupiter 

Sagittarius 

Zazel 

Saturn 

Capricorn 

Zazel 

Saturn 

Aquarius 

H. 

Hismael 

Jupiter 

Pisces 

Zazel 

Saturn 

Cauda  Draconis 

^ — ) 

Bartzabel 

Mars 

Cauda  Draconis 

M. 

Hismael 

Venus 

Caput  Draconis 

<?> 

Kedemel 

Jupiter 

Caput  Draconis 

fS 

Sorath 

Sun 

Leo 

3 

Chasmodai 

Luna 

Cancer 

63 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Element 


Fire 

Earth 

Air 

Water 

Fire 

Earth 

Air 

Water 

Fire 

Earth 

Air 

Water 

Fire 

Earth 

Fire 

Water 


Figure 


Nan^  and  Meaning  of  Figure 


Puer,  a boy  yellow  and  beardless 

Amissio,  loss  from  without 

Albus,  white,  fair 

Populus,  people  gathering  together 

Fortuna  major,  greater  fortune,  aid,  entering 

Conjunctio,  assembly,  union 

Puella,  a girl,  beautiful 

Rubeus,  red,  reddish 

Acquisitio,  obtaining,  comprehended  within 
Career,  a prison,  bound 
Tristitia,  sadness,  damned,  cross 
Laetitia,  joy,  laughing,  healthy,  bearded 
Cauda  Draconis,  the  lower  threshold,  going  out 


Caput  Draconis,  heart,  upper  threshold,  entering 


Fortuna  minor,  lesser  fortune,  aid,  going  out 
Via,  way,  journey 


64 


VOLUME  FIVE 


A pencil  is  preferable  to  a pen  for  this  task  of  tracing  the  dots.  Otherwise,  use  a contemporary 
felt  pen  or  marking  pen  which  is  ideal  for  this  purpose.  It  is  practically  more  convenient  to  draw  or  rule 
four  lines  across  the  paper  beforehand  to  mark  off  the  space  for  such  four  lines  composing  a Geomantic 
Figure  as  shown  on  the  previous  page. 

The  first  four  Geomantic  figures  formed  directly  from  the  16  lines  of  points  are  called  The  Four 
Mothers.  It  is  from  them  that  the  remaining  figures  necessary  to  complete  the  Geomantic  scheme  of 
direction  are  derived. 

These  should  now  be  placed  in  a row  from  right  to  left,  for  the  greater  convenience  of  the 
necessary  calculation  though  much  practice  may  render  this  unnecessary.  The  first  figure  will  be 
attributed  to  the  South,  the  Second  to  the  East,  the  Third  to  the  North,  and  the  Fourth  to  the  West. 


THE  FOUR  MOTHERS 

4th 

3rd 

2nd 

1st 

• • 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

• 

• • 

• • 

Rubeus 

Fort.  Maj. 

Amissio 

Fort.  Minor 

From  these  Four  Mothers,  four  resulting  figures  called  the  Four  Daughters  are  now  to  be 
derived,  thus:  The  uppermost  points  of  the  First  Mother,  will  be  the  uppermost  points  of  the  First 
Daughter.  The  corresponding,  that  is  the  first  line  of,  points  of  the  Second  Mother  will  be  the  second 
points  of  the  First  Daughter.  The  same  line  of  points  of  the  Third  Mother  will  constitute  the  third  points 
of  the  First  Daughter.  The  same  points  of  the  Fourth  Mother  willl  be  the  fourth  points  of  the  First 
Daughter.  The  same  rule  applies  to  all  the  figures. 

The  second  line  of  points  of  the  four  Mother  figures  will  comprise  the  Second  Daughter.  The 
third  line  of  points  of  the  Four  Mothers  will  comprise  the  Third  Daughter,  and  the  fourth  line  of  points  of 
the  Four  Mothers  will  comprise  the  Fourth  Daughter  and  so  on. 

Applying  the  above  rule  throughout,  the  following  will  represent  the  Four  Daughters: 


4th 

3rd 

2nd 

1st 

l • 

• • 

• 

• 

ft  • 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

ft  • 

• • 

• 

• • 

Albus 

Conjunctio 

Career 

Fortuna  Minor 

65 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


These,  again  for  the  convenience  of  the  beginner,  are  now  to  be  placed  on  the  left  hand  of  the 
Four  Mothers  in  a single  line  from  right  to  left. 

Four  Daughters  Four  Mothers 


8th 

7th 

6th 

5th 

4th 

3rd 

2nd 

1st 

• 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• • 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

Albus 

Con- 

Career 

Fort. 

Rubeus 

Fort. 

Amissio 

Fort. 

junctio 

Minor 

Major 

Minor 

These,  again  for  the  convenience  of  the  beginner  are  now  to  be  placed  on  te  left  hand  of  the  four 
Mothers  in  a single  line  from  right  to  left. 


Four  Daughters 


Four  Mothers 


8th 

7th 

6th 

5th 

4th 

3rd 

2nd 

1st 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• 

• • 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

Albus 

Con- 

Career 

Fort. 

Rubeus 

Fort. 

Amissio 

Fort. 

junctio 

Minor 

Major 

Minor 

From  these  eight  figures,  four  others  are  now  to  be  calculated  which  may  be  called  the  Four 
Resultants,  or  the  Four  Nephews.  These  will  be  the  9th,  10th,  11th,  and  12th  figures  of  the  whole 
scheme.  The  Ninth  figure  is  formed  from  the  points  of  the  first  and  second  figures  compared  together. 
The  Tenth  from  the  3rd  and  4th  figures;  the  1 1th  from  the  5th  and  6th  figures,  the  12th  from  the  7th  and 
8th  figures.  The  rule  is  to  compare  or  add  together  the  points  of  the  corresponding  lines.  If,  for  instance, 
the  first  line  of  the  First  Mother  consists  of  one  point,  and  the  first  line  of  the  Second  Mother  also 
consists  of  one  point,  these  two  are  added  together,  and  since  they  form  an  even  number  two  points  are 
marked  down  for  the  first  line  of  the  Resultant.  If  the  added  points  are  odd,  only  one  point  is  marked  for 
the  resulting  figure.  The  Ninth  figure  of  Conjunctio  is  thus  formed. 

First  Figure  Second  Figure  Conjunctio 


• • 

• • 


• • 


Now  the  first  figure  has  one  point  at  the  top,  the  second  figure  has  one  point  at  the  top-together 
they  make  two,  an  even  number,  thus  making  2 points  for  the  new  figure.  The  first  figure  has  one  point 
on  the  second  line,  and  the  second  figure  has  two  points  on  the  second  line.  Together  they  make  three 
points,  an  odd  number,  therefore  represented  by  one  point  in  the  new  figure.  The  rest  follow  similarly 
and  is  represented  again  by  the  figure  below. 


66 


VOLUME  FIVE 


• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

CONJUNCTIO 

The  other  Resultants  are  calculated  in  precisely  the  same  way: 

Four  Daughters 

Four  Mothers 

8th  7th 

6th  5th 

4th  3rd 

2nd 

1st 

• • • • 

• • 

• # • • 

• 

• 

• • • 

• • • 

• • • 

• • 

• 

• • 

• • • • 

• • • 

• • 

• 

• • • • 

• • • 

• • • 

• • * 

• 

Albus  Con- 

Career  Fort. 

Rubeus  Fort. 

Amissio 

Fort. 

junctio 

Minor 

Major 

Minor 

In  this  way  are  yielded  the  four  Resultants: 

12th 

llth 

10th 

9th 

• • 

• • 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• • 

• • 

• 

• 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Rubeus 

Acquisitio 

Caput  Drac. 

Conjunctio 

And  thus  the  Twelve  Principal  Figures  of  the  Geomantic  scheme  of  Divination  are  completed. 
These  again  correspond  to  the  12  Astrological  Flouses  of  Heaven,  with  which  they  will  later  on  be 
compared. 

THREE 

For  the  greater  assistance  of  the  Diviner  in  forming  a judgment  upon  the  general  condition  of  the 
scheme  of  12  figures  thus  far  obtained,  it  is  usual  to  deduce  from  them  three  other  subsidiary  figures. 
These  three  are  of  less  importance  than  the  twelve  previous 


67 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


figures,  and  are  not  to  be  considered  at  all  in  the  light  of  component  figures  of  the  scheme,  but  only  as 
aids  to  the  general  judgment.  These  other  figures  are  known  as  the  Right  Witness,  Left  Witness,  and  the 
Judge. 

The  two  witnesses  are  without  significance  in  the  divination,  except  as  they  are  the  roots  from 
which  the  figure  known  as  the  Judge  is  derived.  The  Right  Witness  is  formed  from  the  9th  and  10th 
figures  by  comparing  the  points  in  the  manner  before  shown  in  the  formation  of  the  Resultants.  That  is 
the  corresponding  lines  of  points  in  the  two  figures  are  compared  together,  and  the  addition,  whether  odd 
or  even,  comprises  the  points  of  the  Witness.  The  Left  Witness  represents  the  combination  in  a similar 
manner  to  the  1 1th  and  12th  figures.  The  Judge  again  is  formed  in  precisely  the  same  way  from  the  Two 
Witnesses,  and  is  therefore  a synthesis  of  the  whole  figure. 

If  he  be  good,  the  figure  is  good  and  the  judgment  will  be  favourable;  and  vice  versa.  From  the 
nature  of  the  formation  of  the  15th  figure,  the  Judge,  it  should  always  consist  of  an  even  number  of 
points,  and  never  of  odd.  That  is,  adding  together  the  four  lines  of  points,  comprising  the  Judge,  the 
result  should  be  an  even  number.  For  if  the  Judge  were  a figure  of  odd  points  it  would  show  that  a 
mistake  had  been  made  somewhere  in  the  calculation. 

The  Reconciler  is  a 16th  figure  sometimes  used  for  aiding  the  Judgment  by  combining  the  Judge 
with  the  Figure  in  the  Particular  House  signifying  the  thing  demanded.  Thus,  in  the  preceding  scheme, 
the  Judge  formed  is  Populus,  and  the  Second  Figure,  being  Amissio,  their  combination  also  yields 
Amissio. 

In  order  to  discover  where  The  Part  of  Fortune  will  fall,  add  together  all  the  points  of  the  first 
twelve  figures.  Divide  that  number  by  twelve,  and  place  the  Part  of  Fortune  with  the  figure  answering  to 
the  remainder.  If  there  is  no  remainder  it  will  fall  on  the  12th  figure.  The  Paid  of  Fortune  is  a symbol  of 
ready  money,  money  in  cash  belonging  to  the  Querent,  and  is  of  the  greatest  importance  in  all  questions 
of  money. 

FOUR 

The  following  is  the  signification  of  the  12  Houses  of  Heaven,  in  brief: 

First  House  (Ascendant) 

Life,  health,  querent,  etc. 

Second  House 

Money,  property,  personal  worth. 

Third  House 

Brothers,  sisters,  news,  short  journeys,  etc. 


68 


VOLUME  FIVE 


Fourth  House 

Father,  landed  property,  inheritance.  The  grave,  the  end  of  matter. 

Fifth  House 

Children,  pleasure,  feasts,  speculation. 

Sixth  House 

Servants,  sickness,  uncles  and  aunts,  small  animals. 

Seventh  House 

Love,  marriage,  husband  or  wife.  Partnerships  and  associations,  public  enemies,  law  suits. 

Eighth  House 

Deaths,  wills,  legacies;  pain,  anxiety.  Estate  of  deceased. 

Ninth  House 

Long  journeys,  voyages.  Science,  religion,  art,  visions,  and  divinations. 

Tenth  House 

Mother.  Rank  and  honour,  trade  or  profession,  authority,  employment,  and  worldly  position  generally. 

Eleventh  House 

Friends,  hopes  and  wishes. 

Twelfth  House 

Sorrows,  fears,  punishments,  secret  enemies,  hospitals  or  prisons,  unseen  dangers,  restrictions. 

The  Twelve  figures  of  the  Geomantic  scheme  as  previously  calculated  are  to  be  attributed  to  a map  of  the 
12  houses  of  heaven  to  be  placed  therein  thus: 

The  first  figure  goes  in  the  10th  house. 

The  second  figure  goes  in  the  1st  house. 

The  third  figure  goes  in  the  4th  house. 

The  fourth  figure  goes  in  the  7th  house. 

The  fifth  figures  goes  in  the  11th  house. 

The  sixth  figure  goes  in  the  2nd  house. 

The  seventh  figure  goes  in  the  5th  house. 

The  eighth  figure  goes  in  the  8th  house. 

The  ninth  figure  goes  in  the  12th  house. 

The  tenth  figure  goes  in  the  3rd  house. 

The  eleventh  figure  goes  in  the  6th  house. 

The  twelfth  figure  goes  in  the  9th  house. 


69 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Thus  the  figures  derived  by  the  calculations  provided  in  the  example  given  previously 
Geomantic  map  as  follows: 


would  occupy  a 


Herein  follows  a set  of  general  Tables  of  the  Sixteen  figures  in  the  Twelve  Houses  for  the  better 
convenience  of  forming  a general  judgment  of  the  Scheme.  Under  the  head  of  each  figure  separately  is  given  its 
general  effect  in  whatever  House  of  the  Map  of  the  Heavens  it  may  be  located.  Thus,  by  taking  the  House 
signifying  the  end  or  result  of  the  matter,  the  Fourth  House,  etc.,  and  by  noting  what  figures  fall  therein,  the  student 
may  find  by  these  tables  the  general  effect  in  that  position. 

ACQUISITIO 

Generally  good  or  profit  and  gain. 

Ascendant  - Happy,  success  in  all  things. 

Second  House  - Very  prosperous. 

Third  House  - Favour  and  riches. 

Fourth  House  - Good  fortune  and  success. 

Fifth  House  - Good  success, 

Sixth  House  - Good,  especially  if  it  agrees  with  the  5th. 

Seventh  House  - Reasonably  good. 

Eighth  House  - Rather  good,  but  not  very.  The  sick  shall  die. 

Ninth  House  - Good  in  all  demands. 

Tenth  House  - Good  in  suits.  Very  prosperous. 

Eleventh  House  - Good  in  all. 

Twelfth  House  - Evil,  pain  and  loss. 


70 


VOLUME  FIVE 


AMISS  10 

Good  for  loss  of  substance  and  sometimes  for  love;  but  very  bad  for  gain. 
Ascendant  - III  in  all  things  but  for  prisoners. 

Second  House  - Very  ill  for  money,  but  good  for  love. 

Third  House  - 111  end,  except  for  quarrels. 

Fourth  House  - 111  in  all. 

Fifth  House  - Evil  except  for  agriculture. 

Sixth  House  - Rather  evil  for  love. 

Seventh  House  - Very  good  for  love,  otherwise  evil. 

Eighth  House  - Excellent  in  all  questions. 

Ninth  House  - Evil  in  all  things. 

Tenth  House  - Evil  except  for  favour  with  women. 

Eleventh  House  - Good  for  love,  otherwise  bad. 

Twelfth  House  - Evil  in  all  things. 


FORTUNA  MAJOR 


Good  for  gain  in  all  things  where  a person  has  hopes  to  win. 
Ascendant  - Good  save  in  secrecy. 

Second  House  - Good  except  in  sad  things. 

Third  House  - Good  in  all. 

Fourth  House  - Good  in  all,  but  melancholy. 

Fifth  House  - Very  good  in  all  things. 

Sixth  House  - Very  good  except  for  debauchery. 

Seventh  House  - Good  in  all. 

Eighth  House  - Moderately  good. 

Ninth  House  - Very  good. 

Tenth  House  - Exceedingly  good.  Go  to  superiors. 

Eleventh  House  - Very  good. 

Twelfth  House  - Good  in  all. 


71 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


FORTUNA  MINOR 

Good  in  any  matter  in  which  a person  wishes  to  proceed  quickly. 
Ascendant  - Speed  in  victory  and  in  love,  but  choleric. 

Second  House  - Very  good. 

Third  House  - Good,  but  wrathful. 

Fourth  House  - Haste;  rather  evil  except  for  peace. 

Fifth  House  - Good  in  all  things. 

Sixth  House  - Medium  in  all. 

Seventh  House  - Evil  except  for  war  or  love. 

Eighth  House  - Evil  generally. 

Ninth  House  - Good,  but  choleric. 

Tenth  House  - Good,  except  for  peace. 

Eleventh  House  - Good,  especially  for  love. 

Twelfth  House  - Good,  except  for  alteration,  or  for  suing  another. 

LAETITIA 

Good  for  joy,  present  or  to  come. 

Ascendant  - Good,  except  in  war. 

Second  House  - Sickly. 

Third  House  - III. 

Fourth  House  - Mainly  good. 

Fifth  House  - Excellent. 

Sixth  House  - Evil  generally. 

Seventh  House  - Indifferent. 

Eighth  House  - Evil  generally. 

Ninth  House  - Very  good. 

Tenth  House  - Good,  rather  in  war  than  in  peace. 

Eleventh  House  - Good  in  all. 

Twelfth  House  - Evil  generally. 


72 


VOLUME  FIVE 


TRISTITIA 

Evil  in  almost  all  things. 

Ascendant  - Medium,  but  good  for  treasure  and  fortifying. 
Second  House  - Medium,  but  good  to  fortify. 

Third  House  - Evil  in  all. 

Fourth  House  - Evil  in  all. 

Fifth  House  - Very  evil. 

Sixth  House  - Evil,  except  for  debauchery. 

Seventh  House  - Evil  for  inheritance  and  magic  only. 
Eighth  House  - Evil,  but  in  secrecy  good. 

Ninth  House  - Evil  except  for  magic. 

Tenth  House  - Evil  except  for  fortifications. 

Eleventh  House  - Evil  in  all. 

Twelfth  House  - Evil.  But  good  for  magic  and  treasure. 

PUELLA 

Good  in  all  demands,  especially  in  those  relating  to  women. 
Ascendant  - Good  except  in  war. 

Second  House  - Very  good. 

Third  House  - Good. 

Fourth  House  - Indifferent. 

Fifth  House  - Very  good,  but  notice  the  aspects. 

Sixth  House  - Good,  but  especially  so  for  debauchery. 
Seventh  House  - Good  except  for  war. 

Eighth  House  - Good. 

Ninth  House  - Good  for  music.  Otherwise  only  medium. 
Tenth  House  - Good  for  peace. 

Eleventh  House  - Good,  and  love  of  ladies. 

Twelfth  House  - Good  in  all. 


73 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


PUER 

Evil  in  most  demands,  except  in  those  relating  to  War  or  Love. 

Ascendant  - Indifferent.  Best  in  War. 

Second  House  - Good,  but  with  trouble. 

Third  House  - Good  fortune. 

Fourth  House  - Evil,  except  in  War  and  Love. 

Fifth  House  - Medium  good. 

Sixth  House  - Medium. 

Seventh  House  - Evil,  save  in  War. 

Eighth  House  - Evil,  save  for  Love. 

Ninth  House  - Evil  except  for  War. 

Tenth  House  - Rather  evil.  But  good  for  Love  and  War. 

Eleventh  House  - Most  other  things  medium. 

Twelfth  House  - Medium;  good  favour.  Very  good  in  all. 

RUBEUS 

Evil  in  all  that  is  good  and  Good  in  all  that  is  evil. 

Ascendant  - Destroy  the  figure  if  it  falls  here!  It  makes  the  judgment  worthless. 
Second  House  - Evil  in  all  demands. 

Third  House  - Evil  except  to  let  blood. 

Fourth  House  - Evil  except  in  War  and  Fire. 

Fifth  House  - Evil  save  for  love,  and  sowing  seed. 

Sixth  House  - Evil  except  for  blood-letting. 

Seventh  House  - Evil  except  for  war  and  fire. 

Eighth  House  - Evil. 

Ninth  House  - Very  evil. 

Tenth  House  - Dissolute.  Love,  fire. 

Eleventh  House  - Evil,  except  to  let  blood. 

Twelfth  House  - Evil  in  all  things. 


74 


VOLUME  FIVE 


ALBUS 

Good  for  profit  and  for  entering  into  a place  or  undertaking. 
Ascendant  - Good  for  marriage.  Mercurial.  Peace. 

Second  House  - Good  in  all. 

Third  House  - Very  good. 

Fourth  House  - Very  good  except  in  War. 

Fifth  House  - Good. 

Sixth  House  - Good  in  all  things. 

Seventh  House  - Good  except  for  War. 

Eighth  House  - Good. 

Ninth  House  - A messenger  brings  a letter. 

Tenth  House  - Excellent  in  all. 

Eleventh  House  - Very  good. 

Twelfth  House  - Marvellously  good. 

CONJUNCTIO 

Good  with  good,  or  evil  with  evil.  Recovery  of  things  lost. 
Ascendant  - Good  with  good,  evil  with  evil. 

Second  House  - Commonly  good. 

Third  House  - Good  fortune. 

Fourth  House  - Good  save  for  health;  see  the  8th. 

Fifth  House  - Medium. 

Sixth  House  - Good  for  immorality  only. 

Seventh  House  - Rather  good. 

Eighth  House  - Evil;  death. 

Ninth  House  - Medium  good. 

Tenth  House  - For  love;  good.  For  sickness,  evil. 

Eleventh  House  - Good  in  all. 

Twelfth  House  - Medium.  Bad  for  prisoners. 


75 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


CARCER 

Generally  evil.  Delay,  binding,  bar,  restriction. 

Ascendant  - Evil  except  to  fortify  a place. 

Second  House  - Good  in  Saturnine  questions;  else  evil. 

Third  House  - Evil. 

Fourth  House  - Good  only  for  melancholy. 

Fifth  House  - Receive  a letter  within  three  days.  Evil. 

Sixth  House  - Very  evil. 

Seventh  House  - Evil. 

Eighth  House  - Very  evil. 

Ninth  House  - Evil  in  all. 

Tenth  House  - Evil  save  for  hidden  treasure. 

Eleventh  House  - Much  anxiety. 

Twelfth  House  - Rather  good. 

CAPUT  DRACONIS 

Good  with  evil;  evil  with  evil.  Gives  a good  issue  for  gain. 
Ascendant  - Good  in  all  things. 

Second  House  - Good. 

Third  House  - Very  good. 

Fourth  House  - Good  save  in  war. 

Fifth  House  - Very  good. 

Sixth  House  - Good  for  immorality  only. 

Seventh  House  - Good  especially  for  peace. 

Eighth  House  - Good. 

Ninth  House  - Very  good. 

Tenth  House  - Good  in  all. 

Eleventh  House  - Good  for  the  church  and  ecclesiastical  gain. 
Twelfth  House  - Not  very  good. 


76 


VOLUME  FIVE 


CAUDA  DRACONIS 

Good  with  evil,  and  evil  with  good.  Good  for  loss,  and  for  passing  out  of  an  affair. 
Ascendant  - Destroy  figure  if  it  falls  here!  Makes  judgment  worthless. 

Second  House  - Very  evil. 

Third  House  - Evil  in  all. 

Fourth  House  - Good  especially  for  conclusion  of  the  matter. 

Fifth  House  - Very  evil. 

Sixth  House  - Rather  good. 

Seventh  House  - Evil,  war,  and  fire. 

Eighth  House  - No  good,  except  for  magic. 

Ninth  House  - Good  for  science  only.  Bad  for  journeys.  Robbery. 

Tenth  House  - Evil  save  in  works  of  fire. 

Eleventh  House  - Evil  save  for  favours. 

Twelfth  House  - Rather  good. 

VIA 

Injurious  to  the  goodness  of  other  figures  generally,  but  good  for  journeys  and  voyages. 
Ascendant  - Evil  except  for  prison. 

Second  House  - Indifferent. 

Third  House  - Very  good  in  all. 

Fourth  House  - Good  in  all  save  love. 

Fifth  House  - Voyages  good. 

Sixth  House  - Evil. 

Seventh  House  - Rather  good,  especially  for  voyages. 

Eighth  House  - Evil.. 

Ninth  House  - Indifferent.  Good  for  journeys. 

Tenth  House  - Good. 

Eleventh  House  - Very  good. 

Twelfth  House  - Excellent. 

POPULUS 

Sometimes  good  and  sometimes  bad;  good  with  good,  and  evil  with  evil. 

Ascendant  - Good  for  marriage. 

Second  House  - Medium  good. 

Third  House  - Rather  good  than  bad. 

Fourth  House  - Good  in  all  but  love. 

Fifth  House  - Good  in  most  things. 

Sixth  House  - Good. 

Seventh  House  - In  war  good;  else  medium. 

Eighth  House  - Evil. 

Ninth  House  - Look  for  letters. 

Tenth  House  - Good. 

Eleventh  House  - Good  in  all. 

Twelfth  House  - Very  evil. 


77 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


SIX 

By  essential  dignity  is  meant  the  strength  of  a Figure  when  found  in  a particular  House.  A figure 
is,  therefore,  strongest  when  in  what  is  called  its  house,  very  strong  when  in  its  exaltation,  strong  in  its 
Triplicity,  very  weak  in  its  Fall;  weakest  of  all  in  its  Detriment.  A figure  is  in  its  Fall  when  in  a House 
opposite  to  that  of  its  Exaltation,  and  in  its  Detriment  when  opposite  to  its  own  house. 

The  Geomantic  figures,  being  attributed  to  the  planets  and  Signs,  are  dignified  according  to  the 
rules  which  obtain  in  Astrology.  Thatis  to  say  they  follow  the  dignities  of  their  ruling  Planets,  considering 
the  Twelve  Houses  of  the  scheme  as  answering  to  the  Twelve  Signs.  Thus,  the  Ascendant  or  First  House 
answers  to  Aides,  the  Second  House  to  Taurus,  the  Third  House  to  Gemini,  and  so  on  to  the  Twelfth 
answering  to  Pisces.  Therefore  the  figures  of  Mars  will  be  strong  in  the  First  House,  but  weak  in  the 
Seventh  House,  and  so  forth. 

TABLE  OF  DIGNITIES 


Sign 

Element 

Ruler 

Exaltation 

Fall 

Detriment 

Strong 

Aries 

Fire 

Mars 

Sun 

Saturn 

Venus 

Jupiter 

Taurus 

Earth 

Venus 

Luna 

- 

Mars 

Jupiter 

Gemini 

Air 

Mercury 

- 

-- 

Jupiter 

Saturn 

Cancer 

Water 

Luna 

Jupiter 

Mars 

Saturn 

Mercury 

Leo 

Fire 

Sun 

-- 

- 

Saturn 

Mars 

Virgo 

Earth 

Mercury 

Mercury 

Venus 

Jupiter 

Saturn 

Libra 

Air 

Venus 

Saturn 

Sun 

Mars 

Jupiter 

Scorpio 

Water 

Mars 

-- 

Luna 

V enus 

Sun 

Sagittarius 

Fire 

Jupiter 

-- 

-- 

Mercury 

Venus 

Capricorn 

Earth 

Saturn 

Mars 

Jupiter 

Luna 

Mercury 

Aquarius 

Air 

Saturn 

-- 

-- 

Sun 

-- 

Pisces 

Water 

Jupiter 

Venus 

Mercury 

Mercury 

- 

Caput  Draconis  is  strong  in  the  dignities  of  Jupiter  and  Venus. 
Cauda  Draconis  is  strong  in  the  dignities  of  Saturn  and  Mars. 


NOTES 

The  following  notes  were  abstracted  from  a paper  on  Geomancy  circulated  in  the  A.O., 
which  was  the  name  given  to  the  renewed  Golden  Dawn  by  Mathers  years  after  the  revolt. 
In  it,  the  statement  is  made  that  it  was  compiled  by  S.R.M.D.  from  ancient  treatises:  1)  Ye 
Geomcincie  ofMaister  Christopher  Catton;  a very  old  work  in  black  letters.  2)  The 
Theomagia  by  John  Heydon  (17th  century).  3)  And  the  Geomancia  Astronomica  of 
Gerardus  CAM  BRENSIS  or  Cremonensis.) 

In  each  set  of  four  lines  of  print,  the  First  or  Top  line  is  attributed  to  the  element  FIRE  (as 


78 


VOLUME  FIVE 


being  the  most  subtle  element),  the  second  line  to  the  Air  (the  next  in  lightness),  the  third  to  the 
Water  (more  heavy),  and  the  fourth  and  lowest  line  to  Earth  (the  heaviest  of  all). 

Further  that  each  set  of  Four  points  signifieth  an  element,  thus: 

The  first  Four  Lines  signify  FIRE;  the  second  Four  the  element  AIR;  the  third  Four  lines  the 
element  of  WATER;  and  the  fourth  Four  lines  the  element  of  EARTH. 

In  Geomancy  there  are  three  points  which  may  tend  a little  to  confuse  the  Practicus:  (a)  Why  the 
Names  and  Seals  of  the  SPIRITS  of  the  Planets  are  employed  instead  of  those  of  the  INTELLIGENCES, 
the  former  being  said  to  be  more  Evil  in  nature,  and  the  latter  More  Good,  (b)  This  being  so,  why  the 
names  and  sigils  of  the  Archangels  of  the  Zodiacal  Signs,  purely  Good  in  Nature,  should  be  also 
employed;  and  instead  of  those  of  either  the  Angels,  or  Assistant  Angels  of  the  Zodiac,  (c)  There  being 
16  figures  of  Geomancy,  and  these  under  the  12  Signs,  how  are  the  4 extra  to  be  attributed  in  this 
classification. 

(a)  Geomancy  being  a form  of  Divination  especially  attributed  to  the  Element  of  Earth,  and 
therefore  more  purely  Terrestrial  in  operation,  the  Spirits  and  their  Characters  are  more  naturally 
appropriate  hereto  than  the  Intelligences,  as  representing  the  more  weighty  and  automatic  force  of  the 
Planetary  Ray  in  its  action  upon  the  Earth.  Also  the  Sigils  employed  in  Geomancy  are  different  from 
those  of  the  same  Spirits  when  taken  from  the  Kameas  of  the  Planets,  and  this  to  affirm  their  more 
specialized  action  in  this  Art. 

(b)  The  reason  of  the  employment  of  such  powerful  Names  as  those  of  Malchidael,  etc.,  is  to 
bring  a strong  aiding  Force  of  Good  into  the  Operation,  again  specialized  by  the  Sigils  used  in  this 
connection. 

(c)  The  12  Governors  of  the  12  Zodiacal  Ideas  or  Figures,  have  power  over  the  face  of  the 

Earth  in  their  Figures  and  Places,  but  the  4 extra  which  be  Fortuna  Minor,  Via,  Caput 

Draconis  and  Cauda  Draconis,  also  naturally  have  reference  to  the  Four  Winds  and  their 

Genii;  a fortunate  phase  of  the  Moon  (especially  at  Full)  aspecting,  is  Good. 

Gerardus  Cremonensis  sayeth:  But  you  must  always  take  heed,  that  you  do  not  make  a Question 
in  a Rainy,  very  Stormy,  cloudy,  or  very  Windy  Season;  that  is  when  the  Elements  be  Angry;  or  when 
thou  thyself  art  angry,  or  thy  mind  over-busied  with  many  affairs;  nor  for  tempters  nor  deriders,  neither 
renew  nor  reiterate  the  same  question  again  under  the  same  Figure  or  Form;  for  that  is  Error. 

YE  COMPANIE  OF  HOUSES-  From  the  Geomancie” ofMaister  Christopher  Cattan.  When  ye 
doe  find  a Good  Figure  in  a good  House,  it  is  double  Good,  because  the  House  is  Good  and  the  Figure 
also;  and  it  signifieth  that  without  any  doubt  the  Querent  shall  obtain  his  Demand.  By  the  like  reason  if 
ye  find  an  111  figure  in  an  111  House  it  is  very  111  for  the  Querent.  But  if  ye  find  a Good  Figure  in  an  111 
House,  it  Signifieth  Good  to  the  Querent  but  it  will  not  continue,  but  taketh  away  part  of  the  Malice  of 
the  House.  In  like  case  if  ye  find  an  111  figure  in  a Good  House,  it  taketh  away  the  Malice  of  the  Figure, 
for  he  would  do  harm,  but  he  cannot;  yet  keeping  back  always  the  Good  that  it  come  not  to  the  Querent. 

By  “111  House”  is  meant  that  which  in  a Question  shews  persons  or  things  opposed  to  the 


79 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Querent  or  to  his  interest  in  the  Question,  as  in  a Lawsuit,  The  House  shewing  his  Opponent;  in 
a case  of  Sickness,  the  6th  and  8th  would  be  hostile.  “Good  Houses”  would  be  those  shewing  Aid  etc. 
We  might  in  a general  sense  consider  the  6th,  and  8th,  (death)  and  the  12th  (Fears,  prison,  private 
enemies),  “111  House”  by  Nature. 

The  “Companie  of  the  Houses”  is  after  three  manners:  SIMPLE,  SEMI  SIMPLE,  and 
COMPOUND.  And  the  House  be  classed  in  Pairs,  thus:  the  Second  House  is  always  the  Companion  of 
the  First;  the  Fourth  of  the  Third;  the  Sixth  of  the  Fifth,  and  so  on. 

The  COMPANIE  SIMPLE  is  when  the  same  Figure  is  repeated  in  both  Houses  of  any  of  the 
“Pairs.”  Thus  in  our  Scheme,  VIA  is  repeated  in  the  PAIR  formed  by  the  Ascendant  and  the  Second 
House  and  they  are  therefore  in  COMPANY  together.  In  this  case  shew  that  the  indecision  of  the  querent 
re-acts  on  his  business.  But  though  Caput  Draconis  is  repeated  in  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  houses  which  be 
next  each  other,  there  is  no  COMPANY,  for  they  belong  to  different  pairs,  the  Fourth  house  being  the 
Companion  of  the  Third  and  not  of  the  Fifth,  and  the  latter  being  Company  to  the  Sixth  and  not  to  the 
Fourth.  And  with  regard  to  Persons,  the  COMPANION  Figure  will  shew  the  COMPANIONS  or 
Associates  of  a Person  in  question,  as  also  will  the  COMPANION  House.  Good  Figures  in  COMPANY 
show  much  Good,  and  as  well  in  the  Present  as  in  the  time  to  come;  and  Evil  Figures  the  reverse.  For 
also  the  First  House  (of  a Pair)  showeth  the  Time  Present,  and  the  Second  the  Time  to  Come. 

The  COMPANY  DEMI  SIMPLE  is  when  the  Figures  in  the  Two  Houses  forming  a Pair  be  not 
identical,  but  be  under  the  same  Planetary  Ruler  as  Acquisitio  and  Laetitia  which  be  both  under  Jupiter 
and  Hismael,  Fortuna  Major  and  Minor  under  the  Sun,  Puella  and  Amissio  under  Venus,  etc. 

The  COMPANY  COMPOUND  is  when  the  Points  of  the  Two  Figures  be  the  exact 
complementary  contrary  one  of  the  other  in  arrangement  as  Puer  and  Puella,  Albus  and  Rubeus, 
Acquisitio  and  Amissio,  Laetitia  and  Tristitia,  etc.  A Reconciler  figure  is  then  formed  from  them  in  the 
same  way  that  the  Judge  is  calculated  from  the  Two  Witnesses,  and  according  as  this  Figure  is 
harmonized  with  such  and  Good,  so  is  the  nature  of  this  “Company  Compound,”  but  if  discordant  and 
evil  so  is  this  form  of  COMPANY. 

There  is  also  yet  another  kind  of  COMPANY  which  is  that  of  the  uppermost  Line  of  the  Two 
Figures  in  the  Pair  of  Houses.  If  this  uppermost  line  in  both  cases  be  odd  or  even,  there  is  COMPANY, 
and  as  in  the  case  of  the  COMPANY  COMPOUND,  a Reconciler  Figure  is  formed  and  the  case  judged 
as  in  the  last  paragraph.  But  if  the  top  line  of  the  one  be  odd  and  the  other  be  even  there  is  no 
COMPANY  between  those  Figures.  In  our  Scheme  Tristitia  is  in  the  Third  and  Caput  in  the  Fourth 
House,  and  as  the  top  line  of  each  has  even  points  there  is  COMPANY  between  them.  The  Reconciler 
Figure  will  be  Conjunctio,  which  is  Harmonious  with  Both  and  is  an  argument  of  Good  being  signified 
thereby. 

The  reference  in  the  above  to  “our  scheme”  only  means  that  Mathers  had  set  up  a divination  in 
full,  with  its  complete  interpretation.  I have  not  included  it  here  because  it  would  be  redundant;  one  is 
already  included  in  this  text. 


80 


VOLUME  FIVE 


SEVEN 


Remember  always  that  if  the  figures  Rubeus  or  Cauda  Draconis  fall  in  the  Ascendant, 
or  first  house,  the  figure  is  not  fit  for  Judgment  and  should  be  destroyed  without 
consideration.  Another  figure  for  the  question  should  not  be  erected  before  at  least  two 
hours  have  elapsed. 

Your  figure  being  thoroughly  arranged  as  on  a Map  of  the  heavens,  as  previously  shown, 
note  first  to  what  House  the  demand  belongs.  Then  look  for  the  Witnesses  and  the  Judge,  as 
to  whether  the  latter  is  favourable  or  otherwise,  and  in  what  particular  way. 

Note  next  what  Figure  falls  in  the  House  required.  Also  whether  it  passes  or  springs  - that 
is  whether  it  is  also  present  in  any  other  House  or  Houses.  These  should  also  be  considered 
as  for  example  in  a question  of  money  stolen,  if  the  figure  in  the  second  House  be  also  found 
in  the  sixth  House,  it  might  also  show  that  the  thief  was  a servant  in  the  house. 

Then  look  in  the  Table  of  Figures  in  the  Houses  and  see  what  the  Figure  signifies  in  the 
special  House  under  consideration.  Put  this  down  also.  Then  look  in  the  Table  for  the 
strength  of  the  figures  in  that  House.  Following  this,  apply  the  astrological  rule  of  aspects 
between  houses,  noting  what  houses  are  Sextile,  Quintile,  Square,  Trine,  etc.  Write  the 
"Good"  on  one  side  and  the  "Evil"  on  the  other,  noting  also  whether  these  figures  also  are 
"strong"  or  "weak, ""friendly"  or  "unfriendly"  in  nature  to  the  figure  in  the  House  required. 
Note  that  in  looking  up  the  aspects  between  houses,  there  are  two  directions,  Dexter  and 
Sinister.  The  Dexter  aspect  is  that  which  is  contrary  to  the  natural  succession  of  the  houses; 
the  Sinister  is  the  reverse.  The  Dexter  aspect  is  more  powerful  than  the  Sinister. 

Then  add  the  meaning  of  the  figure  in  the  Fourth  House,  which  will  si'nify  the  end  of  the 
matter.  It  may  also  assist  you  to  form  a Reconciler  Figure  from  the  Figure  in  the  house 
required  and  the  Judge,  noting  what  figure  results  and  whether  it  harmonises  with  either  or 
both  by  nature.  Now  consider  all  you  have  written  down,  and  according  to  the  balance  of 
"good"  and  "evil"  therein  form  your  final  judgment. 

Consider  also  in  "money"  matters  where  the  Part  of  Fortune  falls. 

For  example,  let  us  consider  the  figure  previously  set  up  and  form  a judgment  for  "Loss 
of  money  in  business"  therefrom. 

Populus  is  the  Judge,  and  we  find  that  in  questions  of  money,  which  concern  the  Second 
House,  it  signifies  "medium  good."  The  question  as  a whole  is  of  the  nature  of  the  Second 
House,  where  we  find  Career.  We  then  discover  that  Career  here  is  "evil,"  as  showing 
obstacles  and  delays.  The  Part  of  Fortune  is  in  the  Ascendant  with  Amissio,  signifying  loss 
through  Querent's  own  mistake,  and  loss  through  Querent's  self. 

The  Figure  of  Amissio  springs  into  no  other  house,  therefore  this  does  not  affect  the 
question.  "Career, -'  in  the  Second  House  is  neither  "strong"  nor  "weak"  its  strength  for  evil 
is  medium.  The  figures  Sextile  and  Trine  of  the  Second  are  Conjunctio,  Fortuna  Major, 
Fortuna  Minor,  and  Acquisitio,  all  "good"  figures,  helping  the  matter  and  "friendly"  in 
nature.  This  signifies  well  intentioned  help  of  friends.  The  figures  square  and  opposition  of 


81 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  Second  are  Fortuna  Minor,  Conjunctio,  Albus  which  are  not  hostile  to  Career,  therefore 
showing  “opposition  not  great.” 

The  figure  in  the  Fourth  House  is  Fortuna  Major  which  shows  a good  end  but  with  anxiety.  Let 
us  now  form  a Reconciler  between  the  figure  of  the  Second  House  which  is  Career  and  the  Judge, 
Populus,  which  produces  Career  again,  a sympathetic  figure,  but  noting  delay,  but  helping  the  Querent’s 
wishes.  Now  let  us  add  all  these  together: 

1 . Medium. 

2.  Evil  and  Obstacles,  delay. 

3.  Loss  through  querent’s  self. 

4.  Strength  for  evil,  medium  only. 

5.  Well-intentioned  aid  of  friends. 

6.  Not  much  opposition  from  enemies. 

7.  Ending  good;  but  with  anxiety. 

8.  Delay,  but  helping  Querent’s  wishes. 

And  we  can  formulate  the  final  judgment.  That  the  Querent’s  loss  in  business  has  been 
principally  owing  to  his  own  mismanagement.  That  he  will  have  a long  and  hard  struggle,  but  will  meet 
with  help  from  friends.  That  his  obstacles  will  gradually  give  way,  and  that  after  much  anxiety  he  will 
eventually  recoup  himself  from  his  former  losses. 


SUMMARY  OF  STAGES  IN  GEOMANTIC  DIVINATION 

1.  If  Rubeus  or  Cauda  Draconis  in  Ascendant  destroy  the  figure. 

2.  Note  the  House  to  which  the  question  belongs.  See  if  the  figure  there  springs  into  another 

house. 

3.  Form  the  Judge  from  the  two  witnesses. 

4.  Part  of  Fortune  that  is,  if  a money  question. 

5.  See  if  Figure  in  House  concerned  is  “strong”  or  “weak.”  If  it  pass  or  spring  into  any  other 

house. 

6.  See  figures  Sextile  and  Trine,  Square  and  Opposition. 

7.  Friendly  or  unfriendly. 

8.  Note  the  figure  in  Fourth  House,  signifying  the  end  or  outcome. 

9.  Form  the  Reconciler  from  Judge  and  the  figure  in  House  to  which  the  demand  appertains. 


82 


VOLUME  FIVE 


SKRYING 

By 

V.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 

I would  like  to  deal  with  a topic  that  is  considered  to  be  at  the  heart  of  the  magical 
system.  Crowley  for  example,  whose  contribution  to  the  subject  can  hardly  be  called  minimal, 
considers  the  Body  of  Light  technique  of  prime  importance.  In  fact,  he  has  formulated  Liber 
Samekh,  one  of  the  most  significant  of  the  rituals  of  his  own  Order  dealing  with  the  knowledge 
and  conversation  of  the  Holy  Guardian  Angel,  around  the  Body  of  Light  technique.  There  can 
be  no  possibility  of  performing  this  ritual  without  considerable  skill  in  this  art.  In  the  Golden 
Dawn  itself,  many  of  the  primary  magical  skills,  if  not  wholly  dependent  on  this  skill,  at  least 
need  to  bring  it  into  play  for  those  skills  to  become  effective.  For  example,  in  Tarot  divination, 
you  will  often  find  the  advice  given  by  Mathers  to  use  clairvoyance  to  divine  the  significance  of 
any  one  card.  It  must  be  added  here  that  clairvoyance,  in  the  Order  sense  of  the  term  meant 
seeing  with  the  inner  eye,  the  eyes  of  the  Body  of  Light.  Furthermore,  most  of  the  Enochian 
system,  the  crown  and  jewel  and  synthesis  of  all  the  Golden  Dawn  teaching,  devolves  upon  the 
Body  of  Light  Technique  for  full  use  of  the  system. 

The  discussion  of  this  topic  must  revolve  around  three  different  headings: 

1.  The  Order  method,  sometimes  referred  to  as  Tattwa  vision,  or  skrying  in  the  spirit 

vision. 

2.  The  Inner  Guide  Meditation  of  Edwin  Steinbrecher,  now  achieving  considerable 

popularity. 

3.  Aleister  Crowley's  method,  previously  referred  to  as  the  Body  of  Light  Technique. 

1.  This  method  is  described  in  several  places  in  the  Order  teaching.  For  example,  in  the 
paper  entitled  "Man,  the  Microcosm"  it  is  described  at  some  length.  Then  there  is  a so-called 
flying  roll  where  the  description  covers  some  several  pages.  Here  and  there  in  many  other 
documents,  it  is  further  described. 

"The  subject  of  clairvoyance  must  always  be  in  the  highest  degree  interesting  to  all  who 
are  aspiring  after  adeptship  even  in  its  lowest  grades...  We  frequently  meet  with  two  opposite 
attitudes  towards  the  subject,  both  in  the  outer  world  and  amongst  our  junior  members.  Both 
these  attitudes  are  hindrances  to  its  proper  study,  and  therefore  I shall  preface  my  remarks  by  a 
few  words  concerning  each  of  them."  (I  should  interpolate  here  that  these  remarks  were  made  by 
G.H.  Frater  Felkins.) 

"The  first  is  fear  of  clairvoyance,  and  the  second  is  a disproportionate  estimate  of  its 

value. 

"Both  of  these  attitudes  arise  from  a misunderstanding  of  its  true  character.  People 
imagine  that  somehow  the  power  of  clairvoyance  is  obtained  secondhand  from  the  powers  of 
evil;  or 


83 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


that  its  exercise  will  bring  those  who  practice  it  under  their  influence.  Or,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  imagine  that  the  power  of  clairvoyance  will  save  them  a great  deal  of  trouble,  and 
give  them  a short  and  easy  path  to  the  information  and  guidance  they  desire,  in  fact,  that  these 
may  almost  be  attained  at  will.  Nay  more,  would  such  a power  not  fully  satisfy  that  curiosity 
which  is  one  of  the  pitfalls  of  the  superficial  student? 

"The  properly  trained  clairvoyant  need  have  no  fear  that  he  will  thereby  expose  himself 
to  the  powers  of  evil.  It  is  the  untrained  natural  clairvoyant  who  is  in  danger.  Training  will 
give  him  knowledge,  discipline  and  protection,  such  as  will  protect  him  from  the  onslaughts  of 
the  averse  powers. 

"On  the  other  hand,  let  him  who  desires  to  save  himself  trouble  and  to  gain  knowledge 
to  which  he  has  no  claim,  be  very  well  assured  that  only  'in  the  sweat  of  his  brow1  can  he  obtain 
this  power  and  exercise  it  in  security.  And  that  he  who  seeks  to  gratify  his  curiosity  will  either  he 
mortified  by  disappointment  or  distressed  by  discoveries  he  would  much  prefer  not  to  have  made. 
Trained,  humble,  and  reverent  clairvoyance  is  a great  gift,  opening  up  new  worlds  and  deeper 
truths,  lifting  us  out  of  ourselves  into  the  great  inpouring  and  outpouring  of  the  heart  of  God." 

Most  of  the  following  quotations  are  from  a rather  lengthy  flying  roll,  #11  actually, 
written  by  G.H.  Frater  D.D.C.F.  on  clairvoyance.  "We  pass  through  life  affecting  others,  and 
being  affected  by  others  through  these  akashic  envelopes  that  surround  us  — so  that  when  we 
close  the  eyes  of  the  body  and  senses  upon  the  material  world,  we  first  apprehend  by  interior 
vision  the  essences  of  our  own  and  contiguous  natures.  This  perception  of  our  own  environment 
is  a source  of  error  to  the  beginner  in  clairvoyance.  Fie  believes  himself  to  have  gone  away  and 
to  see  elsewhere,  but  he  may  be  among  only  the  confused  images  of  his  own  aura." 

"An  old  name  of  clairvoyance,  in  our  ancient  manuscripts  was  'skrying  in  the  spirit 
vision;'  becoming  a 'skryer'  was  not  simply  becoming  a seer,  but  one  who  descries  what  he 
seeks,  not  only  the  impassive  receiver  of  visions  beyond  control  or  definition. 

When  one  stands  in  common  life  in  the  kingdom  of  Malkuth,  there  is  but  little 
confusion  of  sight,  but  when  one  voluntarily  leaves  the  dead  level  of  materialism  and  passes  up 
the  path  of  Tau  towards  Yesod,  then  there  is  a confusion  of  lights.  One  comes  within  the  scope 
of  the  crossing  and  reflected  and  coloured  rays  of  the  Qesheth,  the  rainbow  of  colours  spread 
over  the  earth.  Here  then  we  require  instruction  and  guidance  to  avoid  confusion  and  folly.  And 
yet  this  stage  must  be  passed  through  --  to  go  higher. 

"Beyond  Yesod  you  enter  the  path  of  Samekh,  the  strait  and  narrow  path  which  leads  to 
truly  spiritual  regions  of  perception.  This  is  attained  by  the  process  called  rising  in  the  planes. 

"Our  subject  falls  most  conveniently  into  three  heads,  which  are  however  closely 
related,  and  the  three  forms  or  stages  pass  one  into  the  other. 

" I.  Clairvoyance.  Descrying  in  the  spirit  vision. 

"2.  Astral  projection.  Traveling  in  the  spirit  vision. 

"3.  Rising  in  the  planes. 

"It  is  well  to  commence  (1)  by  means  of  a symbol,  such  as  a drawing,  or  coloured 
diagram,  related  in  design,  form  and  colour  to  the  subject  chosen  for  study.  The  simple  and 
compound  Tattwa  emblems  are  suitable  for  this  purpose.  It  is  better  for  them  not  to  be  in  the 
complementary 


84 


VOLUME  FIVE 


"flashing"  colours  for  this  purpose  as  though  more  powerful,  they  are  also  more 
exhausting  to  the  student.  The  symbol  should  be  of  convenient  size,  for  the  eye  to  take  it  in  at  a 
glance,  and  large  enough  not  to  require  too  close  an  application  of  sight  to  realize  the 
details. ..(The  Tattwa  scheme  is  nearly  the  same  as  our  queen  scale  of  colour  applied  to  the 
Sephirotic  colours  in  the  Minutum  Mundum  diagram). ..To  use  the  symbol  for  clairvoyance, 
place  it  before  you,  as  on  a table,  place  the  hands  beside  it,  or  hold  it  up  with  both  hands,  then, 
with  the  utmost  concentration,  gaze  at  it,  comprehend  it,  formulate  its  meaning  and  relations. 
When  the  mind  is  steady  upon  it,  close  the  eyes  and  continue  the  meditation.  Let  the  conception 
still  remain  before  you.  Keep  up  the  design,  form  and  colour  in  the  akashic  aura,  as  clearly  as 
they  appeared  in  material  form  to  the  outward  seeing.  Transfer  the  vital  effort  from  the  optic 
nerve  to  the  mental  perception , or  thought  seeing  as  distinct  from  seeing  with  the  eye. 
Let  one  form  of  apprehension  glide  on  with  the  other  --  produce  the  reality  of  the  dream  vision, 
by  positive  will  in  the  waking  state.  All  this  will  be  possible  only  if  the  mind  is  steady,  clear  and 
undisturbed,  and  the  will  powerful.  It  cannot  lead  to  success  if  you  are  in  an  unsuitable  state  of 
anxiety,  fear,  indignation,  trouble  or  anticipation.  You  must  procure  peace,  solitude  and  leisure, 
and  you  must  banish  all  disturbing  influences. 

"Above  all,  never  attempt  these  magic  arts  if  there  be  any  resentment  in  the  mind,  anger, 
or  any  evil  passion.  If  you  do,  the  more  you  succeed,  the  greater  will  be  the  evil  that  will  follow 
for  yourself. 

"With  the  conditions  favourable,  the  process  may  be  continued  and  this,  by  means  of 
introducing  into  the  consciousness  and  by  formulating  into  sound,  the  highest  divine  names 
connected  therewith.  This  invocation  produces  and  harmonizes  currents  of  spiritual  force  in 
sympathy  with  your  object.  Then  follow  with  the  sacred  names  of  archangelic  and  angelic  import, 
producing  them  mentally,  visually  and  by  voice." 

However  casually  this  may  have  been  stated,  nonetheless  this  is  the  essence  of  the 
difference  between  the  Golden  Dawn  method  and  that  of  the  inner  guide  meditation.  I shall  have 
more  to  say  about  this  when  this  particular  method  is  being  discussed,  but  nonetheless  it  should 
be  emphasized  right  here.  The  reader  should  have  noticed  that  in  one  of  the  obligations  that  the 
initiate  into  the  Order  has  assumed  there  is  the  statement  that  no  matter  what  type  of  magical 
operation  he  proposes  to  engage  in,  he  will  always  invoke  the  highest  divine  names  within  his 
purview.  In  this  way,  his  steps  will  be  guided  in  the  right  direction  and  all  harm  thus  avoided.  In  a 
major  sense  this  is  one  of  the  greatest  differences  between  the  initiated  and  profane  points  of 
view.  It  holds  good  in  all  occult  matters  — from  so  apparently  a prosaic  undertaking  as  divining 
by  means  of  geomancy  to  invoking  one's  higher  and  divine  genius.  It  means  placing  one's 
workings  and  one's  goal  in  the  hands  of  the  divine  — no  matter  how  one  defines  the  latter. 

Now  we  can  return  to  the  long  quotation  about  clairvoyance  by  Mathers:  "Then, 
maintaining  your  abstraction  from  your  surroundings,  and  still  concentrating  upon  the  symbol 
and  its  correlated  ideas,  you  are  to  seek  a perception  of  a scene,  panorama,  or  view  of  a place. 
This  may  also  be  brought  on  by  a sense  of  tearing  open,  as  a curtain  is  drawn  aside  and  seeing 
the  'within'  of  the  symbol  before  you.  As  the  scene  dawns  upon  you,  particularize  the  details, 


85 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


and  seek  around  for  objects  and  then  for  beings,  entities  and  persons  --  attract 
their  attention,  call  mentally  to  them  by  suitable  titles  and  courtesies,  and  by  proper 
and  appropriate  signs  and  symbols,  such  as  the  signs  of  the  grades,  pentagrams, 
hexagrams  and  sigils,  etc." 

Again,  let  me  call  attention  to  this  statement  as  being  one  of  overwhelming  significance 
and  importance.  It  is  another  one  of  those  differences  between  an  initiated  and  a profane  point 
of  view  or  technique.  All  the  correspondences  that  the  student  has  been  obliged  to  learn  and 
memorize  before  he  even  attempts  this  kind  of  training  now  come  into  use.  They  are  the  means 
whereby  he  attempts  'to  test  the  spirits,  whether  they  be  of  god  or  the  devil.'  If  the  student  has 
elected  to  travel  upon  the  path  of  Saturn  leading  from  Malkuth  to  Yesod  and  feels  that  somehow 
all  is  not  going  well,  and  because  of  that  makes  the  invoking  or  banishing  hexagrams  of  Saturn, 
even  drawing  in  the  air  before  him  the  astrological  symbol  of  Saturn  and  the  Hebrew  letter  Tau  to 
which  this  path  is  attributed,  he  will  find  that  there  will  be  changes  in  the  visual  environment  in 
which  he  finds  himself.  The  tracing  of  the  appropriate  symbols  and  the  vibration  of  the 
appropriate  divine  names  eliminates  all  those  things  which  have  no  place  in  vision.  Thus  the 
details  which  may  represent  delusion  and  deception  are  banished  from  the  scene  enabling  him  to 
proceed  safely  with  his  mission  of  investigation,  etc. 

"Test  them  by  divine  and  angelic  names,  observing  their  attitude  and  responses  thereto. 
Thus  losing  sight  of  the  symbol  you  see  its  inwardness,  perceive  things  as  in  a mirror  by 
reflection.  In  this  form  of  descrying,  note  that  you  see  objects  reversed,  as  to  right  and  left,  for 
which  suitable  allowance  must  be  made.  You  project;  in  this  process,  part  of  your  own  nerve 
and  spirit  force  upon  the  symbol,  and  by  this  you  attract  and  attach  to  it  more  akashic  force  from 
the  environment,  hence  the  results  obtained.  If,  instead  of  this  simple  spirit  vision,  a ray  of 
yourself  is  sent  and  actually  goes  to  a place  (astral  projection)  there  is  not  necessarily  the  sense  of 
reversal  of  objects. 

"In  using  symbols  it  is  necessary  to  avoid  self  hypnotization,  for  this  occurrence  would 
dispose  you  to  mediumship,  and  to  be  the  playground  of  forces  you  must  control  and  not  permit 
to  control  you.  For  this  reason,  partly,  it  is  well  not  to  have  the  symbol  too  small.  It  is  of  advantage 
to  pursue  these  researches  with  the  aid  of  the  presence  before  you  of  the  four  magical  implements, 
and  even  to  hold  the  one  suitable  to  the  investigation.  If  you  enter  upon  the  spirit  vision  without  a 
symbol  you  proceed  by  a mental  symbol  imagined  in  the  astral  light.  This  is  not  a wise 
proceeding  for  learners  because  it  opens  the  door  to  other  astral  effects.  You  create  a vortex  into 
which  other  astral  influences  are  drawn  and  hence  confusion  and  mischief  may  result. 

"The  process  of  working  by  a small  symbol  placed  upon  the  forehead  or  elsewhere  is  not 
wholly  good  either.  It  is  more  liable  to  derange  the  brain  circulation  and  cause  mental  illusion  and 
disturbance,  headache  and  nervous  exhaustion  than  the  first  method. 

"In  using  symbols  placed  before  you,  it  is  a useful  addition  to  provide  a large  circular  or 
square  tablet,  around  which  are  placed  divine  names  etc.,  related  to  the  elements,  and  to  the 
cardinal  points.  Then  after  duly  arranging  this  with  respect  to  the  compass,  place  your  symbol 
upon  and  within  this  frame. 

"Astral  projection,  although  from  one  point  of  view  a development  of 
clairvoyance,  yet  is  from  another  quite  distinct.  In  astral  projection,  the  adept  emits 
from  his  ego  a perceptible 


86 


VOLUME  FIVE 


ray  of  his  identity,  and  by  cultured  and  trained  will,  sends  it  to  travel  to  the  place 
desired,  focusses  it  there,  sees  there,  directly  and  not  by  reflection,  perceives  its  bodily  home, 
and  re-enters  it. 

"In  this  traveling  of  the  spirit,  the  process  may  be  caused  to  start  also  by  the  symbol  as 
before,  or  by  will  alone.  But  in  any  event  the  divine  names  should  be  used  and  relied  upon.  If 
the  ray  be  emitted,  and  you  succeed  in  this  traveling  to  the  place,  you  perceive  a different  result 
to  that  of  the  clairvoyant,  mirror-like  vision,  scenes  and  things  instead  of  being  like  a picture, 
have  the  third  dimension,  solidity.  They  stand  out  first  like  a bas  relief,  then  you  see  as  from  a 
balloon,  as  it  is  said,  by  a bird's  eye  view.  You  feel  free  to  go  to  the  place,  to  descend  upon  it,  to 
step  out  upon  the  scene  and  to  be  an  actor  there. 

"Having  attained  success  in  projection  you  should  practice  the  method  when 
opportunity  offers,  and  having  passed  to  any  place,  should  make  efforts  — and  if  you  will  -- 
success  will  follow  --  to  pass  through  all  elements,  water  and  earth  as  well  as  through  air. 
Practice  will  enable  you  to  fly  through  air  either  quickly  or  slowly  as  willed,  and  to  swim 
through  water,  or  pass  through  earth  and  through  fire  fearlessly  with  the  aid  of  the  divine  names, 
in  this  astral  projection." 

Once  again,  Mathers  is  stressing  the  initiated  viewpoint,  the  vibration  of  the  divine 
names  in  order  to  achieve  one's  ends  and  to  get  to  where  one  wishes  to  go  without  undue 
opposition  or  difficulty.  He  stresses  this  as  often  as  possible  to  ensure  that  the  idea  is  driven 
home,  and  that  the  method  be  used  on  all  possible  occasions.  The  above  section  also  stresses 
the  use  of  the  magical  implements  in  all  such  undertakings  — implements  which  have  been 
made  and  charged  and  consecrated  by  the  student  himself  for  use  in  just  such  circumstances.  It 
is  only  when  these  basic  rules  are  not  scrupulously  and  faithfully  followed  that  some  mishap  or 
disaster  may  occur.  Crowley's  method,  which  is  really  that  of  the  Order,  follows  this  procedure 
--Steinbrecher's  does  not. 

"Seek  then  the  forms  and  persons  of  the  place  or  of  the  plane  you  read,  seek  converse 
with  them,  by  voice,  word,  letter  and  symbol,  and  claim  admission,  etc.  by  signs  and  by 
invocation.  Every  figure  is  to  be  tried  and  tested,  whether  he  be  as  he  appears  or  whether  a 
delusory  and  deluding  embodied  power.  It  may  be  too  that  your  travel  is  not  real,  and  that  you 
are  wandering  in  your  own  environment,  and  are  misled  by  memory,  etc.  hence  you  might  be 
deceiving  yourself  by  your  own  reminiscences. 

"Try  all  beings,  and  if  offered  favours  or  initiation  by  any,  try  and  test  them  by  the 
divine  names  and  forces.  And  ever  remember  your  own  adept  obligation  and  your  allegiance  to 
it,  to  your  own  higher  self,  and  to  the  great  angel  Hua,  before  whom  you  stood  fastened  to  the 
cross  of  suffering,  and  to  whom  you  pledged  your  obedience. 

"This  old  proverb  enshrines  a great  truth,  as  many  of  them  do.  'Believe  thyself  there 
and  thou  art  there.' 

"Rising  in  the  planes  is  a spiritual  process  after  spiritual  conceptions  and  higher  aims; 
by  concentration  and  contemplation  of  the  divine,  you  formulate  a Tree  of  Life  passing  from  you 
to  the  spiritual  realms  above  and  beyond  you.  Picture  to  yourself  that  you  stand  in  Malkuth— 
then  by  the  use  of  the  divine  names  and  aspirations  you  strive  upward  by  the  path  of  Tau  toward 


87 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Yesod,  neglecting  the  crossing  rays  which  attract  you  as  you  pass  up.  Look  upwards  to 
the  divine  light  shining  down  from  Kether  upon  you.  From  Yesod  leads  up  the  path  of 
Temperance,  Samekh;  the  arrow  cleaving  upward  leads  the  way  to  Tiphareth,  the  great  central 
sun  of  sacred  power. 

"Invoke  the  great  angel  Hua,  and  conceive  yourself  as  standing  fastened  to  the  cross  of 
suffering,  carefully  vibrating  the  holy  names  allied  to  your  position,  and  so  may  the  mental 
vision  attain  unto  higher  planes. 

"There  are  three  special  tendencies  to  error  and  illusion  which  assail  the  adept  in  these 
studies.  They  are:  memory,  imagination  and  actual  sight.  These  elements  of  doubt  are  to  be 
avoided  by  the  vibration  of  divine  names,  and  by  the  letters  and  titles  of  the  'lords  who  wander' 
--the  planetary  forces  represented  by  the  several  double  letters  of  the  Hebrew  Alphabet. 

"If  the  memory  entice  thee  astray,  apply  for  help  to  Saturn,  whose  Tarot  title  is  'the 
great  one  of  the  night  of  time,’  formulate  the  Hebrew  letter  Tau  in  whiteness. 

"If  the  vision  change  or  disappear,  your  memory  has  falsified  your  efforts.  If 
imagination  cheat  thee,  use  the  Hebrew  letter  Caph  for  the  forces  of  Jupiter  named  'lord  of  the 
forces  of  life.’  If  the  deception  be  of  lying  — intellectual  untruth,  appeal  to  the  force  of  Mercury 
by  the  Hebrew  letter  Beth.  If  the  trouble  be  of  wavering  of  mind,  use  the  Hebrew  letter  Gimel 
for  the  Moon.  If  the  enticement  of  pleasure  be  the  error,  then  use  the  Hebrew  letter  Daleth  as  an 
aid.  Use  the  Hebrew  letter  Peh  for  Mars  to  coerce  sense  of  anger  and  violence.  Use  the  Hebrew 
letter  Resh  for  the  sun  to  coerce  sense  of  haughtiness  and  vanity. 

"Never  attempt  any  of  these  divine  processes  when  at  all  influenced  by  passion  or  anger 
or  fear.  Leave  off  if  desire  of  sleep  approach.  Never  force  a mind  disinclined.  Balance  the  Mem 
and  Shin  of  your  nature  and  mind,  so  as  to  leave  Aleph  like  a gentle  flame  rising  softly  between 
them. 

"You  must  do  all  these  things  by  yourself  alone.  No  one  can  make  you  nor  take  you.  Do 
not  try  to  make,  or  take  others.  You  may  only  point  out  the  path  and  guide,  but  must  not  help 
others. 

"A  strong  person  can  galvanize  a weak  one,  but  its  effect  is  only  a temporary  folly, 
doing  good  neither  to  the  strong  nor  to  the  weak.  Only  offer  guidance  to  those  who  are  making 
necessary  efforts  of  themselves.  Do  not  assist  a negligent  pupil,  nor  encourage  one  whose  desire 
is  not  in  the  work. 

"This  rule  is  open  to  some  alteration  when,  passing  from  our  mystic  studies,  you  refer 
to  the  worldly  guidance  of  childhood.  A parent  is  in  a special  position,  and  has  a natural  duty 
incumbent  upon  him  or  her  to  train,  guide  and  protect  a child. 

"Still,  even  here,  do  protect  and  lead,  but  do  not  'obsess'  a child;  don't  override  by  your 
peculiar  personal  predilections  all  the  personal  aims  of  the  offspring.  A man's  ideal  of  true 
propriety  is  often  himself,  and  his  idea  of  doing  good  to  a child  is  to  make  it  like  himself. 
Although  this  father  may  be  a good  man,  his  form  of  goodness  is  not  to  be  made  a universal 
type,  and  there  are  many  other  forms  equally  existing,  and  equally  fit  to  exist,  and  any  attempt  to 
dictate  too  closely  a child's  'thought  life'  may,  while  failing  of  success,  yet  warp  aside  from  the 
truth  what  would  otherwise  pass  into  a good  path,  through  its  own  peculiar  avenue." 


88 


VOLUME  FIVE 


"It  is  well  to  make  all  symbols  for  clairvoyant  use  yourself.  Otherwise,  to  obtain  a 
purely  individual  result,  you  have  to  banish  the  influence  of  him  who  made  them. 

"It  is  best  to  do  high  clairvoyance  alone,  or  only  with  others  of  the  utmost  purity,  and  in 
whom  you  have  the  utmost  confidence. 

"If  more  than  one  is  attempting  in  concert  the  same  process,  there  is  the  source  of  error 
that  there  becomes  formed  in  the  astral  light  a complex  symbol,  and  struggle  ensues  as  to  who 
shall  lead  the  direction  of  the  currents.  When  two  sit  together,  as  in  the  vault,  they  should  be 
balanced.  And  so  with  three.  For  two,  one  each  side  of  the  Pastos  or  one  at  each  end,  for  three 
assume  the  position  of  the  angles  of  a triangle,  say  one  at  head  of  Pastos,  one  at  the  right  and  at 
the  left  hand  of  the  form  of  Christian  Rosy  Cross." 

Example:  The  V.H.  Soror  V.N.R.  6-5  sat  at  a table,  robed,  and  took  a Tattwa  card 
coloured  symbol  (Tejas  — Akasha)  an  erect  red  triangle  upon  which  is  a dark  violet  or  black  egg 
shaped  centre.  She  placed  her  hands  beside  her  side,  or  held  it  in  turns  before  the  eyes  (held  the 
magic  fire  wand).  Gazed  and  contemplated  and  considered  as  the  symbol  grew  before  her,  so 
enlarged  and  filled  the  place,  that  she  seemed  to  pass  into  it,  or  into  a vast  triangle  of  flame.  She 
realizes  that  she  is  in  the  presence  of  a desert  of  sand,  harsh,  dry  and  hot. 

Thinks  of,  and  vibrates  Elohim.  Action  seems  set  up,  increase  of  heat  and  light.  Passing 
through  the  symbol  and  scene,  she  seems  to  arrive  and  descend  there,  feels  the  hot  dry  sand  -- 
perceives  a small  pyramid  in  the  distance.  Wills  to  rise  up  and  fly  through  air  to  it,  descends 
beside  it,  passes  around,  sees  a small  square  door  on  each  side.  Vibrates  — Elohim,  Michael, 
Aral,  Seraph,  Darom,  Ash. 

Stamps  five  times,  figure  appears  at  an  entrance,  stamps  again  five  times  and  vibrates 
Seraphiel.  A warrior  figure  leads  out  a procession  of  guards,  she  asks  for  his  seal,  he  shows  a 
complex  symbol  of  four  triangles  around  a central  emblem?  Deceptive,  draw  Beth  before  him  -- 
he  appears  terrified.  Withdraw  symbol,  he  is  courteous,  ask  him  about  pyramid.  He  says  they 
conduct  ceremonies  there.  She  seeks  admission,  gives  sign  of  0-0  grade.  There  is  a sense  of 
opposition.  Gives  sign  of  1-10;  this  appears  to  suffice.  But  he  gives  signs  of  adeptship.  Guards 
kneel  before  her  and  she  passes  in.  Dazzling  light,  as  in  a temple.  An  altar  in  the  midst,  kneeling 
figures  surround  it,  there  is  a dais  beyond  and  many  figures  upon  it.  They  seem  to  be  elementals 
of  a fiery  nature.  She  sees  a pentagram,  puts  a Leo  into  it,  thanks  the  figure  who  conducts  her. 
Wills  to  pass  through  the  pyramid,  finds  herself  out  amid  the  sand.  Wills  her  return.  Returns, 
perceiving  her  body  in  robes  seated  in  the  second  order  hall. 

Another  instance  of  such  visionary  experience  I recorded  many  years  ago  in  an  essay 
now  published  under  the  title  of  The  Foundations  of  Practical  Magic  - the  essay  itself  being 
entitled  The  Art  and  Meaning  of  Magic.  It  was  a Tattwa  Vision  of  dealing  with  the  32nd 
path  on  the  Tree  of  Life.  "We  marched  down  the  wide  indigo  road.  There  was  a cloudy 
nightsky  — no  stars.  The  road  was  raised  above  the  general  level  of  the  ground.  There  was  a 
canal  each  side  beyond  which  we  could  see  the  lights  of  what  appeared  to  be  a large  city.  We 
went  on  like  this  for  a long  way,  but  then  I noticed  in  the  distance  a tiny  figure  of  a woman,  like 
a miniature  — she  seemed  to  be  naked,  but  as  she  drew  near,  I saw  a scarf  floating  round  her. 
She  had  a crown  of  stars  on  her  head  and  in  her  hands  were  two  wands.  She  came  towards  us 
very 


89 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


quickly,  and  1 gazed  fascinatedly  at  a string  of  pearls  reaching  from  her  neck  to  her 
knees  — and  gazing,  found  that  we  had  passed  through  the  circle  of  pearls,  and  she  had 
disappeared. 

Now  the  sky  is  clear  and  full  of  stars. ..the  moon,  a great  yellow  harvest  moon,  rises 
slowly  up  the  sky  to  a full  arch...  and  we  saw  three  moonbeams  shining  on  the  high  purple  walls 
of  a city. ..we  did  not  delay  to  look  about,  but  marched  quickly  to  the  centre  of  the  city,  to  an 
open  space,  in  the  midst  of  which  was  a round  temple  like  a ball  of  silver.  It  was  approached  by 
nine  steps,  and  rested  on  a silver  platform.  It  had  four  doors.  Before  each  was  a large  angel  with 
silver  wings. ..inside,  we  were  in  a very  airy  place.  Light  breezes  lifted  our  clothes  and  our  hair  - 
- the  interior  was  very  white  and  clear  silvery  — no  colours.  Suspended  in  the  centre  was  a great 
globe,  like  the  moon  itself... while  we  looked  we  saw  that  the  globe  was  not  suspended  in  the  air;  it 
rested  on  immense  cupped  hands.  We  followed  the  arms  up  and  saw,  far  up  near  the  roof,  deep 
dark  eyes  looking  down,  dark  like  the  night  sky,  and  a voice  said..." 

2.  Simplicity  itself  is  the  keyword  to  the  method  described  by  Edwin  Steinbrecher.  He  is 
an  astrologer,  well-versed  in  associated  subjects,  such  as  tarot,  alchemy,  qabalah,  etc.,  and 
underwent  a lengthy  Jungian  analysis.  In  the  latter  he  was  instructed  in  Jung's  technique  of 
creative  imagination.  By  this  means,  to  put  it  crudely  and  oversimplified,  one  carries  on 
conversations  with  the  images  and  personalities  seen  in  dreams.  Apparently  some  quite  interesting 
results  follow  from  this  procedure.  One  interesting  example  is  The  Tree  by  J.  Marvin  Spiegelman 
(Falcon  Press,  1982),  which  the  author  describes  in  his  introduction  as  an  experiment  in  creative 
psycho-mythology.  The  book  is  based  on  some  interior  experiences  and  conversations  the  author 
had  with  some  of  his  dream  images,  described  at  considerable  length. 

As  Steinbrecher  describes  it,  the  Inner  Guide  Meditation  is  a "transformative  process 
concerned  with  assimilating  the  disparate  energies  which  exist  in  the  human  unconscious  into 
the  unified  wholeness  that  is  the  awakened  enlightened  being  inherent  in  each  of  us,  thus  ending 
the  illusions  which  cause  separation,  guilt  and  judgment.  With  the  meditation  of  the  inner  guides, 
problems  once  unapproachable  and  unchangeable  become  fulfilling  challenges  that  bring  forth 
productive  and  creative  responses." 

Let  me  quote  the  author  as  he  describes  the  process  of  meditation,  after  which  I would 
like  to  discuss  a description  given  of  a rather  frightening  experience  he  had.  This  latter  could 
have  readily  been  obviated  had  he  known  beforehand  something  of  the  Order  method  as  given 
earlier. 

"Close  your  eyes,  and  invent  a cave  around  you  as  if  you  had  just  walked  into  the  cave 
and  the  entrance  is  at  your  back.  Allow  the  cave  to  structure  itself  as  it  will,  well-lighted  or  dim, 
smooth  walled  or  rough.  Try  to  be  like  blank  film  receiving  impressions.  Accept  these 
impressions  uncritically  as  they  come  to  you  from  this  environment.  Try  not  to  edit  what  comes." 
So  far  so  good.  This  is  the  essence  of  the  Jungian  method. 

"Be  as  sensory  as  you  can. ..use  all  your  senses.. .be  sure  you  are  observing  and  sensing 
this  environment  while  being  in  your  body  and  looking  out  of  your  eyes.  Don't  be  watching  an 
image  of  yourself!... 

"When  you  can  feel  yourself  in  the  cave,  even  though  things  may  still  be  vague  at  this 
point,  move  to  the  left,  away  from  the  cave  entrance,  and  find  some  kind  of  doorway  or  opening 


90 


VOLUME  FIVE 


there  on  the  left  that  will  lead  you  out  into  a landscape. ..take  a step  out  into  the 
landscape  when  it  appears,  feeling  the  new  type  of  ground  under  your  feet.  Is  it  soft  or  hard, 
grassy  or  rocky?  What  is  around  you?  What  is  the  scene  like? 

"Then  with  your  mind  call  for  an  animal  to  come  to  you.  Let  it  be  an  animal  you  don't 
know.  Not  a familiar  housepet  or  some  other  known  outer  world  animal,  (e.g.,  your  friend's 
horse,  the  neighbor's  cat,  the  lamb  you  had  when  you  were  a child),  and  ask  the  animal  to  lead 
you  off  to  the  right  to  where  your  inner  guide  awaits  you.  Concentrate  on  following  the  animal 
and  try  not  to  anticipate  the  guide. ..the  animals  that  appear  to  people  come  in  all  varieties.  Deer 
were  common,  as  are  squirrels,  sometimes  a lion  or  a dog  or  cat  will  appear.  People  have  even 
gotten  skunks  and  anteaters... 

"The  animal  will  lead  you  to  an  unknown  male  figure  — your  first  guide.  The  initial 
inner  guide  for  both  men  and  women  is  a male  form... you  will  generally  feel  an  outpouring  of 
love,  protection  and  friendliness  from  the  figure... 

"Let  all  these  impressions  come  to  you  as  they  will.  Don't  try  to  see  the  guide's  face 
clearly  right  away  unless  it  presents  itself  easily.  One  of  the  hallmarks  of  the  true  inner  guide  is 
that  his  face  isn't  usually  clear  at  first,  although  a false  guide's  face  almost  always  is.  The  true 
guide's  face  will  clear  and  come  into  focus  later  on  as  you  work  with  him  --  when  you  stop 
trying  to  "make  him  a face."  Be  sure  to  ask  the  figure  if  he  is  your  true  guide.  Generally  a false 
guide  will  answer  "no"  to  this  question.  Feel  the  guide's  feeling  for  you.  There  is  no  love  from 
a false  guide. 

"Ask  the  guide  to  take  your  right  hand  in  his  left. ..feel  the  hand  contact  as  much  as  you 
can... then  ask  the  guide  to  point  to  where  the  sun  is  in  the  sky  of  your  inner  world.  Look  to 
where  he  points.. don't  accept  any  known  person  from  your  outer  world  as  your  inner  guide. 
Your  guide  is  a being  who  wasn't  alive  on  this  planet  when  you  were  born,  so  if  your  favorite 
uncle,  or  your  father,  or  the  current  or  past  president  of  the  United  States  appear,  keep  looking 
past  him  to  the  right.  And  if  a famous  deceased  guru  or  teacher  or  luminary  from  the  past  should 
appear,  test  him,  and  see  if  another  figure  appears  beyond  him  on  the  right. ..the  inner  guides  are 
always  human  and  do  not  have  the  powers  or  attributes  of  gods... remember  you're  in  foreign 
territory.  Trust  and  use  your  inner  guide  to  act  both  as  interpreter  and  counselor— truly  let  him 
guide  you..." 

The  author  then  goes  into  a great  deal  of  detail  and  explanation  of  the  meditation  and  the 
guide  and  the  material  to  be  derived  from  this  sort  of  thing.  The  book  is  well  worth  reading,  and 
the  method  of  course  experimented  with.  I recommend  it  unequivocally  — at  least  as  a device 
for  dealing  with  the  inner  world  of  the  spirit.  What  I am  interested  in  at  this  moment  is  to 
analyze  briefly  a couple  of  the  problems  he  encountered  as  relative  to  the  meditation. 

For  example,  he  describes  how  the  meditation  evolved.  He  was  undergoing  Jungian 
analysis  many  years  ago.  At  one  point  his  analyst  left  town  for  Zurich  where  the  Jungian 
Institute  is  located,  and  he  was  left  with  a feeling  of  being  stranded,  that  his  unconscious  had  been 
activated  but,  at  that  moment,  not  going  anywhere  in  particular.  He  had  been  using  the  "active 
imagination"  technique  the  analyst  had  taught  him  and  was  fascinated  by  the  living  experiences  he 
had  while  exploring  his  psyche.  He  had  been  warned  about  the  potential  dangers  of  the 


91 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


process,  that  repressed  unconscious  forces  could  well  up  to  overcome  the  ego  and  usurp 
it.  However  despite  that  warning,  he  continued  experimenting  with  the  method  trying  to  establish 
relationships  between  the  tarot  and  astrology.  (He  was  a professional  astrologer  at  the  time.) 

He  wrote:  "I  was  delighted  with  my  new  toy.  It  had  a reality  and  a freshness  1 hadn't 
experienced  since  childhood,  and  there  was  no  doubt  about  the  experiential  realness  of  it... but 
then  I had  an  experience  that  acutely  demonstrated  the  analyst's  warning  about  the  dangers  of 
active  imagination  as  it  is  practiced  in  analytical  psychology.  It  was  inside  the  room  where  I 
came  into  contact  with  the  archetypal  forms  when  an  image  of  the  tarot  old  Pan  or  devil 
appeared,  unsummoned  and  unwanted.  It  was  a classic  Christian  devil  with  an  emanation  of 
'evil'  as  real  as  the  beneficence  1 had  felt  when  interacting  with  the  archetype  of  the  sun... I was 
paralyzed.  1 began  to  panic.  I seemed  to  be  frozen  in  the  chair.  The  old  Pan  entity  became  even 
more  menacing  than  before,  placing  himself  in  my  inner  world  between  me  and  the  stairway  to  the 
outer  world  and  safety.  The  panic  finally  subsided  (although  not  the  fear)  and  I further  tried  to 
manouevre  to  the  stairway  around  the  figure,  but  to  no  avail.  This  entity  of  the  inner  world 
blocked  my  every  move  whenever  I attempted  the  stairs.  He  did  not  advance  towards  me  but 
remained  as  a moving  barrier  to  any  possible  exit.  It  even  crossed  my  mind  that  I might  be 
discovered  by  the  outer  world  in  this  catatonic  state  and  be  taken  off  to  the  nearest  psychiatric 
hospital.  1 couldn't  even  call  out  to  try  to  communicate  my  situation  to  anyone  who  might  he 
within  hearing. ..the  experience  was  so  frightening  to  me,  however,  that  1 decided  then  and  there 
never  again  to  attempt  another  venture  into  the  realms  of  the  unconscious  without  the  presence 
of  a trained  analyst." 

Eventually,  however,  he  recovered  from  that  fright  — as  we  might  have  anticipated.  The 
point  I wish  to  emphasize  here  however  is  that  all  this  terror  could  have  been  obviated,  without 
any  difficulty,  had  he  been  trained  (or  trained  himself)  in  those  Golden  Dawn  methods  that  are 
being  described  in  this  section.  The  Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram,  the  vibration  of  the 
appropriate  divine  names,  the  assumption  of  god  forms,  etc.  are  all  devices  which  the  student  must 
have  mastered  long  before  attempting  to  enter  the  inner  world  by  means  of  Tattwa  Vision,  etc.  In 
a well-regulated  temple,  these  fundamental  techniques  would  have  been  taught  regularly  and 
gradually  to  the  aspirant  so  that  by  the  time  he  was  ready  to  attempt  this  kind  of  inner 
adventure  these  techniques  would  have  been  well  assimilated  and  become  second  nature. 

One  might  well  ask,  then,  that  if  this  is  the  case  why  were  there  so  many  disasters  in  the 
Order  as  a result  of  the  use  of  inner  vision?  The  answer  is  so  simple  as  almost  to  be  frightening. 
These  methods  were  not  being  used  as  scrupulously  as  they  should  have.  Many  assumed  that 
since  they  had  used  the  visionary  techniques  for  a long  period  of  time,  they  had  no  further  need 
for  the  protective  devices.  In  the  Felkins  period  of  government  of  the  Stella  Matutina,  as 
reported  by  Ellic  Howe  and  Arthur  E.  Waite,  and  several  others,  an  extraordinary  degree  of 
gullibility  seemed  to  have  taken  possession  of  these  visionaries  who  apparently  had  lost  their 
wits  and  all  sense  of  proportion  and  sanity  primarily  because  they  did  not  use  any  or  all  of  the 
protective  devices  in  which  the  Order  had  already  trained  them. 

This  is  one  of  the  several  reasons  for  my  repeated  insistence  in  several  areas  of  this 
book  for  a complete  mastery  of  the  Pentagram  and  Hexagram  rituals  in  all  their  phases,  with 
the 


92 


VOLUME  FIVE 


absolute  memorization  of  the  divine  names,  gestures,  signs,  etc.  There  should  be  no 
passing  on  to  more  advanced  methods  until  the  basic  drills  had  been  mastered.  Otherwise  the 
student  who  initiated  himself,  without  the  aid  of  a teacher  other  than  this  book  of  instructions, 
may  find  himself  in  a similar  quandary  as  did  Steinbrecher  and  others.  There  is  simply  no 
justification  or  excuse  for  any  of  this  at  all.  Proper  preparation  is  the  basic  rule  for  every  phase 
of  the  magical  arts.  Without  this,  only  disaster  can  loom  ahead. 

While  on  this  topic  let  me  launch  into  a pet  peeve  of  mine  which  is  stimulated  into 
activity  every  time  I glance  through  some  of  the  manuscript  rituals  dating  from  various  periods 
in  the  history  of  the  Order.  Again  and  again  I am  struck  by  sketches  of  Pentagrams,  Hexagrams 
and  grade  signs  to  be  made  at  various  points  of  the  ritual.  1 confess  myself  to  be  more  than 
somewhat  irritated  by  this  procedure,  since  in  theory  it  is  not  necessary.  They  are  there  included 
obviously  to  act  as  a reminder  to  the  officer  of  technical  matters  which  theoretically  should  have 
been  mastered  long  before.  Had  they  been  mastered  beforehand,  then  there  would  have  been  no 
point  in  making  these  sketches  of  what  he  has  to  do. 

In  one  sense,  this  is  the  fault  of  the  founders  of  the  Order.  Mathers  himself  has  written  a 
paper  about  the  least  amount  of  work  needed  to  be  done  to  pass  a written  examination.  This  is  a 
pretty  poor  notion  to  convey  to  newly  admitted  aspirants  to  higher  things.  This  was  a curse  that 
ran  through  all  the  Order  work  as  I have  indicated  in  What  You  Should  Know  About  the  Golden 
Dawn.  Students  for  the  most  part  did  only  so  much  as  would  get  them  through  an  examination. 
There  was  no  thought  of  obtaining  real  proficiency  in  anything.  Consecration  ceremonies  were 
done  for  the  sword,  the  elemental  weapons,  the  rose  cross  and  so  on,  and  there  they  stopped.  It 
seemed  never  to  have  occurred  to  them  to  repeat  their  performance  many  times,  over  months  or 
years  if  necessary  in  order  to  sharpen  their  expertise.  And  yet  practice  for  most  of  us  is  the  only 
means  whereby  that  expertise  may  be  obtained. 

The  Pentagram  and  Hexagram  rituals  should  have  been  committed  to  memory  long 
before  some  of  these  grade  rituals  were  to  have  been  performed.  I am  not  antagonistic  to  the 
notion  that  the  officers  should  refer  to  their  scripts  for  the  long  speeches  required  in  some  of  the 
grade  and  other  rituals,  but  I deem  it  unworthy  of  them  — if  they  are  adepts  in  reality  and  not 
merely  in  name  only  --  if  they  must  consult  their  manuscripts  in  order  to  determine  what  kind  of 
pentagram  they  were  required  to  trace  in  some  particular  place,  here,  there  or  anywhere. 

The  study  of  the  Pentagram  Ritual,  for  example,  must  not  be  confined  merely  to  reading 
it  over  many  times.  It  has  to  be  performed  again  and  again  until  it  becomes  almost  deeply 
embedded  in  the  very  warp  and  woof  of  one's  unconscious.  It  has  to  be  practiced  until  the 
Nephesch  or  automatic  consciousness  is  able  to  reproduce  it  without  the  Ruach  giving  the  matter 
any  deliberate  thought. 

It  seems  to  me  to  be  a good  idea  for  the  student  to  prepare  a simple  type  of  ritual  for 
daily  use  in  which  he  will  be  required  to  employ  almost  everything  he  has  learned  concerning 
the  art  of  invocation  so  that  he  will  not  need  to  think  about  it,  but  to  devote  his  whole  attention 
to  the  really  significant  parts  of  the  ritual  — the  use  of  will  and  imagination  and  the  vibratory 
formula  of  the  middle  pillar. 

Many  years  ago  --  in  the  mid-thirties  — I constructed  a simple  form  of  ritual  for  invoking 


93 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  elements.  I borrowed  the  openings  from  each  of  the  four  elemental  grade  ceremonies 
and  bound  them  together  into  a coherent  whole.  Then,  for  almost  a whole  year,  I performed  this 
little  ritual  daily,  until  I was  able  to  describe  and  trace  the  appropriate  lineal  figures  together 
with  the  appropriate  divine  names  without  a moment's  hesitation.  It  succeeded  in  driving  these 
basic  ritual  methods  deeply  home  into  my  unconscious  psyche  so  that  they  were  there  when  I 
needed  them. 

Many  years  later,  probably  a couple  of  decades,  when  1 returned  to  the  simples  and 
rudimentals  again,  I appropriated  the  opening  phase  of  the  Corpus  Christi  celebration  which  I 
called  Opening  by  Watchtower.  This  becomes  a magnificent  little  ceremony  and  has  become 
elaborated  into  a variety  of  different  directions.  Some  of  these  have  been  described  and  written 
about  at  some  length  in  Ceremonial  Magic  (Aquarian  Press,  England,  1980).  It  accomplishes 
in  a slightly  different  manner  what  1 had  attempted  to  do  much  earlier,  making  use  of  every 
seemingly  arbitrary  gesture  of  elementary  magic.  Its  practice  is  such  that  it  should  result  in  the 
ability  to  trace  any  pentagram  or  hexagram,  invoking  or  banishing,  at  will  in  the  right  place,  etc. 
without  having  to  burden  one's  script  with  a sketch  of  the  appropriate  pentagram.  Actually,  the 
ritual  is  very  easy  to  learn  and  1 strongly  suggest  it  be  committed  to  memory  and  performed  as 
often  as  may  be  possible.  In  this  manner,  the  basic  principles  of  magical  procedure  are  used  so 
often  that  they  become  second  nature.  At  the  same  time,  the  sphere  of  sensation  is  purified, 
exalted  and  made  impenetrable  to  any  outside  and  disturbing  influence.  With  such  an  aura,  one 
can  go  anywhere,  do  anything,  meet  any  entity  without  fear  or  anxiety  that  one's  person  could 
be  assailed  successfully.  After  a year  of  study  and  the  practice  of  the  Opening  by  Watchtower, 
this  magical  result  is  achieved.  When  that  stage  has  been  reached,  other  usages  of  that  ritual 
will  suggest  themselves. 

But  the  primary  goal  of  this  exhortation  will  have  been  accomplished.  When  performing 
a ritual  — any  ritual,  either  by  oneself  or  to  demonstrate  a technique  to  a beginner  — one  should 
not  have  to  consult  any  text  in  order  to  recall  what  an  invoking  active  spirit  pentagram  looks 
like,  or  from  what  point  a banishing  lunar  hexagram  should  begin.  This  is  fundamental  magical 
training,  must  not  be  glossed  over,  and  should  be  respected  as  such  for  its  disciplinary  effect  on 
the  Nephesch  and  Ruach. 

To  return  however  to  the  Inner  Guide  Meditation.  In  one  place,  the  author  gives  a 
question  asked  by  one  of  his  students,  as  follows:  "Is  the  inner  guide  an  aspect  of  my  ego?" 

His  reply  was  no.  The  guides  do  not  always  cater  to  our  ego  whims  and  fancies.  They 
say  and  do  what  is  needed,  not  wanted.  They  know  our  limits  and  our  inadequacies  and  allow 
exposure  to  unconscious  materials  which  the  ego  would  never  choose  to  deal  with. 

This  is  all  very  well,  and  by  and  large  I will  accept  this.  But  I did  know  sometime  ago  a 
lady  who  used  this  Inner  Guide  Meditation  a very  great  deal  and  let  it  govern  her  every  day  life 
and  activity.  It  so  happened  that  she  was  a compulsive  neurotic  and  a hypochondriac  —the  two 
often  go  together. 

Very  often  she  would  consult  her  inner  guide  as  to  some  course  of  behavior,  and  of 
course  he  would  advise  her.  As  it  turned  out,  he  was  a compulsive  neurotic  too,  for  he  would 
advise  her  to  behave  in  markedly  compulsive  routines,  ritualistically  as  it  were.  These  she  would 
accept 


94 


VOLUME  FIVE 


without  equivocation  — naturally.  It  was  her  own  voice,  as  it  were.  The  result  was  that 
her  whole  world  fell  apart  disruptively  and  utter  chaos  ensued.  I doubt  if  that  taught  her  anything. 
She  had  given  herself  a crash  course  in  magical  procedures;  she  did  have  a copy  of  one  of  my 
books.  I doubt  if  she  employed  any  of  the  testing  devices  I have  mentioned.  That  is  the  trouble 
with  such  crash  courses;  not  enough  of  an  impression  is  made  on  the  unconscious  psyche  for  the 
technique  to  be  used  when  really  necessary. 

The  stupidity  of  the  whole  business  is  that  it  taught  her  nothing!  Her  compulsiveness 
remained,  unaltered  and  unchanged! 

3.  Crowley's  Body  of  Light  Technique. 

Before  going  too  far  with  a description  of  this  method,  let  me  give  a long  quotation  from 
his  Liber  0,  reprinted  in  Gems  from  the  Equinox  (Falcon  Press,  1982). 

" 1.  This  book  is  very  easy  to  misunderstand;  readers  are  asked  to  use  the  most  minute 
critical  care  in  the  study  of  it,  even  as  we  have  done  in  the  preparation. 

"2.  In  this  book  it  is  spoken  of  the  Sephiroth,  and  the  paths,  of  spirits  and  conjurations; 
of  gods,  spheres,  planes,  and  many  other  things  which  may  or  may  not  exist. 

"It  is  immaterial  whether  they  exist  or  not.  By  doing  certain  things  certain  results 
follow;  students  are  most  earnestly  warned  against  attributing  objective  reality  or  philosophic 
validity  to  any  of  them... 

"4 The 

student,  if  he  attains  any  success  in  the  following  practices,  will  find  himself  confronted  by 
things  (ideas  or  beings)  too  glorious  or  too  dreadful  to  be  described.  It  is  essential  that  he  remain 
the  master  of  all  that  he  beholds,  hears  or  conceives;  otherwise  he  will  be  the  slave  of  illusion 
and  the  prey  of  madness... 

"5 There  is 

little  danger  that  any  student,  however  idle  or  stupid,  will  fail  to  get  some  result;  but  there  is 
great  danger  that  he  will  be  led  astray,  even  though  it  be  by  those  which  it  is  necessary  that  he 
should  attain.  Too  often,  moreover,  he  mistaketh  the  first  resting-place  for  the  goal,  and  taketh 
off  his  armour  as  if  he  were  a victor  ere  the  fight  is  well  begun. 

"It  is  desirable  that  the  student  should  never  attach  to  any  result  the  importance  which  it 
at  first  seems  to  possess." 

Before  proceeding  further,  let  me  state  that  all  other  things  apart,  Crowley  was  once  a 
member  of  the  Golden  Dawn.  All  his  early  writings  are  essentially  expressive  of  the  Golden 
Dawn  viewpoint.  It  is  only  in  his  later  writings  that  he  departs  a considerable  distance  from  the 
Order  viewpont.  But  even  then  there  always  remains  a nucleus  of  the  Order  teaching  which  he 
embraced  with  all  his  heart.  No  matter  how  far  he  departed  from  the  basic  Order  methodology, 
he  was  a Golden  Dawn  initiate  — first,  last  and  always.  Let  this  always  be  remembered.  In  his 
writing,  there  is  much  of  value  to  the  sincere  student  of  these  Golden  Dawn  techniques. 

"1 Let  the 

student  be  at  rest  in  one  of  his  prescribed  positions,  having  bathed  and  robed  with  the  proper 
decorum.  Let  the  place  be  free  from  all  disturbance,  and  let  the  preliminary  purifications, 
banishings  and  invocations  be  duly  accomplished,  and,  lastly,  let  the  incense  be  kindled. 

"2.  Let  him  imagine  his  own  figure  (preferably  robed  in  the  proper  magical  garments, 
and  armed  with  the  proper  magical  weapons)  as  enveloping  his  physical  body,  or  stand  near  to 
and  in  front  of  him. 


95 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


"3.  Let  him  then  transfer  the  seat  of  his  consciousness  to  that  imagined  figure;  so  that 
it  may  seem  to  him  that  he  is  seeing  with  its  eyes,  and  hearing  with  its  ears. 

"This  will  usually  be  the  great  difficulty  of  the  operation. 

"4.  Let  him  then  cause  that  imagined  figure  to  rise  in  the  air  to  a great  height  above 
the  earth. 

"5.  Let  him  stop  and  look  aboiut  him.  (It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  open  the  eyes.) 

"6.  Probably  he  will  see  figures  approaching  him,  or  become  conscious  of  a landscape. 
"Let  him  speak  to  such  figures,  and  insist  upon  being  answered,  using  the  proper  pentagrams 

and  signs,  as  previously  taught. 

"7.  Let  him  travel  at  will,  either  with  or  without  guidance  from  such  figure  or  figures. 

"8.  Let  him  further  employ  such  special  invocations  as  will  cause  to  appear  the 
particular  places  he  may  wish  to  visit. 

"9.  Let  him  beware  of  the  thousand  subtle  attacks  and  deceptions  that  he  will 
experience,  carefully  testing  the  truth  of  all  with  whom  he  speaks..." 

At  first  sight  this  sounds  a great  deal  different  from  the  basic  Golden  Dawn  method  as 
described  above.  In  point  of  fact,  however,  it  is  identical.  Identical  in  spirit  as  well  as  in  letter.  For 
example,  somewhere  in  his  autobiography,  Crowley  speaks  of  instructing  a student  to  visualize 
one  of  the  hexagrams  of  the  Yi  King,  and  then  to  imagine  that  he  is  passing  through  it  as  if 
going  through  a door.  A vision  of  some  kind  results  from  that,  and  when  the  student  had 
returned  from  one  of  these,  Crowley  would  open  Legge's  book  on  the  Yi  King  and  read  the 
description  given  of  that  hexagram.  Usually  there  would  be  more  than  a marked  relationship. 

Furthermore,  in  the  Blue  Equinox,  at  the  end  of  the  diary  of  Frater  Achad  (Charles 
Stansfeld  Jones),  Crowley  under  the  pseudonym  of  Frater  O.M.  prescribes  an  examination  for 
Achad.  One  of  the  items  of  that  examination  was  to  pass  through  a door  on  which  was  described 
a hexagram  of  a particular  kind  that  Crowley  had  drawn  specifically  for  that  purpose,  and  report 
what  he  had  found  out  about  that  symbol  by  means  of  the  vision. 

Do  note  that  in  both  these  instances,  he  mentions  nothing  of  visualizing  a body  within 
his  physical  body  or  trying  to  transfer  his  consciousness  to  it.  In  both  instances  he  was  literally 
following  the  Golden  Dawn  method  of  so-called  Tattwa  vision.  Years  ago,  shortly  after  receiving 
my  5=6  degree,  I painted  on  3x5  filing  cards  a series  of  symbols  — those  of  the  Tattwas,  the 
Hebrew  letters,  the  geomantic  symbols,  and  the  signs  of  the  planets  and  zodiac.  These  became 
the  symbolic  doors  to  use  for  skrying  in  the  spirit  vision,  to  use  the  technical  name  for  the 
process  being  considered.  One  simply  stared  for  a minute  or  so  at  the  card  or  the  symbol  on  it, 
and  then  closed  one's  eyes  — in  which  case  one  saw  the  symbol  in  its  complementary  color. 
Then  one  imagined  that  this  symbol  grew  in  size  until  it  was  like  a large  door  through  which 
one  could  pass.  Using  the  sign  of  the  Enterer,  one  projected  oneself  through  the  door  and  on  the 
other  side  vibrated  the  appropriate  names  and  traced  the  corresponding  pentagrams  and  other 
lineal  figures.  A landscape  was  sure  to  develop,  and  as  a result  of  the  invocations  a figure  would 
appear.  If  all  went  well,  everything  that  he  was  in  person  and  in  color  would  be  appropriate  to 
that  symbol.  In  any  event  he  was  to  be  tested  by  all  the  tests  at  ones  disposal  to  make  sure  that 
one  was  on  the  right  track. 


96 


VOLUME  FIVE 


Crowley's  Body  of  Light  technique  thus  turns  out  in  the  end  to  be  identical  with  that  of 
the  Golden  Dawn.  I could  quote  from  Crowley's  writings  to  give  examples  of  his  skrying,  but 
that  is  not  really  necessary  at  this  juncture. 

The  method  is  the  same,  and  the  testing  techniques  of  course  are  the  same.  The 
document  Liber  0 from  which  1 quoted  most  of  the  above  instruction  also  describes  the 
pentagram  and  hexagram  rituals,  as  well  as  the  vibratory  formula  of  the  middle  pillar  and  the 
assumption  of  god  forms.  All  are  taken,  in  their  entirety,  from  the  Order  of  which  he  was  once  a 
member. 

All  three  methods  --  that  of  the  Order,  Steinbrecher  and  Crowley  — are  very  similar, 
save  only  that  Steinbrecher's  method  is  lacking  in  the  very  protective  devices  that  it  so  urgently 
needs.  Apart  from  that,  it  may  well  be  that  his  method  is  an  ideal  one  for  the  beginner  to  use, 
even  if  only  to  acquire  some  expertise  in  the  method.  Once  obtained,  he  should  learn  the  Order's 
methods  of  testing  and  protecting  — and  proceed  from  there. 


97 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ON  SKRYING 
By 

V.H.  SOROR  V.N.R 

Having  learned  the  general  rules  the  student  should  discover  for  himself 
particular  methods  best  suited  to  his  own  particular  temperament.  It  may  prove  useful  to 
some  however  to  write  in  some  detail  about  the  mode  of  skrying  and  of  astral  projection 
which  have  already  proved  likely  to  bring  about  successful  results,  and  which  by  reason 
of  its  continual  tests  would  tend  to  minimize  the  chances  of  illusion,  delusion  and 
hallucination.  Before  proceeding  it  would  be  well  to  refer  to  the  Microcosm  lecture 
regarding  the  theory  of  skrying. 

The  rules  for  skrying  and  astral  projection  being  almost  similar  the  two  subjects 
can  be  studied  together,  the  one  being  taken  as  the  complement  of  the  other. 

Skrying  can  be  commenced  simply.  That  is  to  say,  not  projecting  the  astral  beyond 
the  sphere  of  sensation  into  the  Macrocosm,  but  retaining  it  to  perceive  some  scene  in 
the  Universe  reflected  in  the  symbol  which  you  hold.  This  latter  acts  as  a mirror  which 
reflects  to  you  some  scenes  outside  your  normal  range  of  vision.  Secondly,  you  can 
continue  the  operation  by  using  the  same  symbol  and  by  passing  through  it  projecting 
yourself  to  the  scene  in  question  which  previously  you  had  only  perceived  as  a 
reflection. 

This  latter  process  will  probably  appear  more  vivid  to  the  perception  than  the  prior 
one,  just  as  in  the  material  vision  one  is  less  likely  to  be  deceived  by  going  to  a place  and 
actually  examining  it  than  by  obtaining  knowledge  of  it  from  a mere  reflection  in  a 
mirror. 

In  the  room  in  which  I am  now  for  example,  I see  reflected  in  a mirror  a portion  of 
the  garden.  I obtain  an  impression  of  all  within  my  range  of  sight,  but  not  nearly  so 
powerful  a one  as  when  I step  out  into  the  garden  to  the  spot  in  question  to  examine  all  the 
objects  therein,  feel  the  atmosphere,  touch  the  ground,  smell  the  flowers,  etc. 

But  it  is  well  to  practice  both  methods.  The  latter  will  probably  be  found  to  be 
more  instructive  though  far  more  fatiguing  since,  when  projecting  the  astral  you  will  have 
to  supply  it  with  much  vitality  drawn  mostly  from  the  Nephesch. 

The  key  to  success  in  both  skrying  and  astral  projection  then,  would  appear  to  be 
alternately  to  employ  both  intuition  and  reason.  This  is  done  by  permitting  each  thought 
picture  to  impress  itself  on  the  brain  in  the  manner  comprehended  generally  by  the  word 
inspiration,  followed  by  the  reason  applying  its  knowledge  of  correspondences  to  an 
affirmation  or  correction  of  the  same. 

You  must  be  prepared  to  receive  impressions  of  scenes,  forms  and  sounds  as  vivid 
thought  - forms.  I use  the  phrase  thought  - forms  for  want  of  a better  one.  There  are 
distinctly  in  these  experiences,  things  heard,  things  felt  as  well  as  things  seen,  which  would 


98 


VOLUME  FIVE 


prove  that  the  faculties  are  really  the  sublimated  senses.  That  the  faculty  of 
clairvoyance  exists  is  easily  provable  after  a little  patient  exercise  with  one  of  the  first 
methods  given  for  the  practice  of  skrying. 

Take  the  Tattwa  cards  and  from  them  choose  one  at  random.  Don  t look  to  see 
what  symbol  it  represents.  Lay  it  down  on  a table  face  downwards.  Then  try  to  guess  the 
nature  of  the  symbol.  To  do  this,  make  your  mind  a blank  as  much  as  possible,  always 
keeping  control  over  the  same,  attempting  to  chase  away  for  the  time  being  the 
reasoning  element,  memory,  imagination,  etc.  After  a few  minutes  of  gazing  attentively 
at  the  back  of  the  card,  you  will  find  that  it  will  seem  as  though  the  thought  form  of  the 
Tattwa  appeared  to  enter  the  mind  suddenly.  When  more  practised  it  will  probably 
appear  to  you  later  as  if  the  symbol  were  trying  to  precipitate  itself  materially 
through  the  back  of  the  card.  But  sometimes,  especially  if  the  cards  have  been  long 
kept  together  in  the  pack  in  the  same  order,  we  may  find  that  the  back  of  the  card  in 
question  is  charged  astrally  not  with  the  symbol  upon  its  face,  but  with  that  upon  the  card 
whose  face  has  been  next  to  its  back  in  the  order  of  the  pack. 

Some  may  find  it  easier  to  turn  the  card  over  astrally,  that  is  in  imagination, 
and  in  imagination  endeavor  to  perceive  what  flashes  in  the  mind  in  that  moment. 

Since  it  is  with  the  Tattwas  that  we  obtain  our  first  experiences,  to  illustrate  the 
following  rules,  preferably  use  one  that  is  in  harmony  with  the  time  in  which  1 commence 
my  working. 


RULES  FOR  SKRYING 

if  possible  work  in  an  especially  prepared  magical  room.  G.D.  Altar  in  the 
center,  bearing  the  four  elements  and  the  cross  and  the  triangle,  incense  burning,  lamp 
lighted,  water  in  the  cup,  bread  and  salt  on  the  platter.  In  addition  place  on  the  altar 
your  magical  implements.  Wear  your  white  robe  wearing  your  Adeptus  Minor  sash  and 
your  Rose  Cross  Lamen  on  your  breast. 

Have  by  you  your  Sword  and  Lotus  Wand.  Sit  at  the  side  of  the  altar  facing  the 
quarter  of  the  element,  planet  or  sign  with  which  you  propose  to  work.  Should  any 
other  Frater  or  Soror  be  with  you  arrange  that  they  shall  sit  in  balanced  disposition 
around  the  altar.  For  example,  if  the  forces  with  which  you  work  be  in  the  West  your 
place  is  East  of  the  altar  facing  West  across  it.  Should  it  be  inconvenient  for  you  to  have 
your  own  Temple  or  to  have  at  hand  all  or  any  of  the  implements  for  your  experiment,  do 
your  utmost  to  imagine  them  as  astrally  present,  and  in  any  case  in  astral  projection 
wear  the  garments  and  insignia  astrally  all  through  the  experience. 

In  fact,  after  considerable,  most  constant  practice  you  will  probably  not  find  the 
absolute  physical  so  necessary.  Yet  remember,  that  though  the  material  in  magical 
working  is  the  least  important  of  the  planes  in  one  sense,  yet  in  another  major  sense  it 
is  of  the  greatest  importance  crystallising  as  it  does  the  astral  plane,  completing  it. 

Have  present  before  you  the  exact  correspondences  of  certain  universal  formulae, 
for  in  the  aforesaid  insignia  and  implements  you  hold  a perfect  symbolic  representation 
of  the 


99 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Universe.  Their  contemplation  should  in  itself  prevent  your  mind  wandering  to 
irrelevant  subjects,  but  to  the  contrary  compel  your  concentration  on  the  sublime 
mysteries  of  the  Macrocosm.  Moreover  these  consecrated  insignia  give  you  a certain 
power  by  means  of  having  attracted  rays  of  force  from  the  infinite  more  or  less  potent  in 
proportion  to  your  development. 

The  importance  of  using  the  implements  on  every  possible  occasion  would  appear 
to  be  great.  For  the  implements  assist  in  the  working  of  a ceremony,  and  the  latter  in  turn 
should  help  recharge  the  implements.  Therefore  every  voyage  to  the  realms  of  fire  or  water 
should  add  as  it  were  a flame  to  the  wand  and  moisture  to  the  cup. 

Next  purify  the  room  with  fire  and  water  and  the  lesser  banishing  ritual  of  the 
Pentagram.  Imagine  that  we  have  chosen  Apas  - Prithivi  as  our  Tattwa  of  choice.  Naturally 
we  use  the  correspondences  of  water  and  earth  for  the  symbol,  but  do  keep  in  mind  that 
water  is  the  main  Tattwa  expressed  and  the  earth  being  secondary  in  this  compound 
Tattwa.  I n this  particular  example  it  is  well  to  use  principally  the  cup,  the  pentacle  only  in  a 
minor  sense.  To  employ  this,  use  the  cup  to  trace  most  of  the  earth  symbols,  only 
occasionally  employing  the  pentacle  to  work  the  particular  symbol. 

In  this  hypothetical  case  of  a compound  Tattwa,  thoroughly  to  fill  your  sphere  with 
the  idea  of  this  Tattwa,  trace  with  the  cup  around  your  room  the  greater  invoking  ritual  of 
the  Pentagram  both  of  water  and  of  earth.  Then  return  to  your  seat.  For  the  process  of 
skrying  do  the  following. 

Place  the  Tattwa  card  before  you  on  the  altar,  take  the  cup  in  your  right  hand  and 
the  pentacle  in  the  left,  and  look  at  the  symbol  long  and  steadily  until  you  can  perceive  it 
clearly  as  a thought  vision  when  you  close  your  eyes.  Vibrate  the  Names  of  Water  and  of 
Earth  (Empeh  Arsel,  etc.)  and  try  to  realize  the  mental  union  more  intensely.  It  may  help 
you  to  perceive  it  as  a large  crescent  made  of  blue  or  silvery  water  containing  a cube  of  yellow 
sand.  Continue  trying  to  acquire  a keen  perception  of  the  Tattwa  until  the  Element  and  its 
shape  and  its  qualities  shall  seern  to  have  become  a part  of  you,  and  you  should  then  begin 
to  feel  as  though  you  were  one  with  that  particular  Element,  completely  bathed  in  it.  If 
this  is  correctly  done,  you  will  find  that  the  thought  of  any  other  Element  will  become 
distinctly  distasteful  to  you. 

Having  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  thought  vision  of  the  symbol,  continue  vibrating 
the  Divine  Names  with  the  idea  well  fixed  in  your  mind  of  calling  forth  on  the  card  a 
mental  picture  of  some  scene  or  landscape.  This,  when  it  first  appears,  will  probably  be 
vague,  but  continue  to  realize  it  more  and  more.  Remember  that  this  is  a passive  state  of  the 
mind,  and  the  time  is  not  ripe  for  its  testing.  Only  when  the  thought  picture  has  become 
sufficiently  tangible  and  vivid,  and  you  find  that  you  are  beginning  to  lose  the  sense  of 
confusion  and  vagueness  should  you  begin  to  apply  tests.  Before  this  period,  all 
reasoning,  all  doubting  and  rumination  is  destructive  to  the  experiment. 

In  all  probability,  the  thought  picture  may  become  so  clear  to  you  through 
diligent  practice,  that  it  will  seem  as  though  the  picture  were  trying  to  precipitate 
through  the  symbol.  I n such  a case  as  this  there  can  be  no  difficulty,  for  the  vision  will  be 
nearly  as  clear 


100 


VOLUME  FIVE 


to  the  perception  as  a material  one.  But  you  can  arrive  at  a great  deal  by  merely 
receiving  the  impression  of  the  landscape  as  a thought.  For  example,  1 perceive  an  expanse 
of  sea,  a slight  strip  of  land  - high  grey  rocks  or  boulders  rising  out  of  the  sea.  To  the  left 
is  a long  gallery  of  cliffs  jutting  out  some  distance  into  the  ocean.  This  appears  sufficiently 
vivid,  so  I begin  my  tests.  1 suspect  my  memory  chiefly,  so  I draw  in  front  of  the  picture  on 
the  card,  with  the  Lotus  Wand,  a large  TAU  in  bright  light.  Then,  believing  that  I may 
have  constructed  the  scene  in  imagination,  I formulate  on  the  card  a large  CAPH.  In  this 
case,  neither  of  these  symbols  banish  or  dim  the  scene  in  any  way,  so  I continue.  (But  if  the 
scene  vanishes  or  changes  or  becomes  blurred,  it  is  well  to  banish  with  a Pentagram  whatever 
may  remain  on  the  card,  and  simply  recommence  the  process  at  the  point  where  you  are 
endeavouring  to  attract  a picture  on  the  card.) 

I now  draw  over  the  picture  with  the  Cup  the  Water  Pentagram,  and  with  the  Pentacle 
the  Earth  Pentagram  using  the  correct  vibration.  This  intensifies  the  picture,  and  I now 
perceive  in  it  many  figures,  principally  of  the  Water  Spirit  type.  On  gazing  further,  and 
repeating  the  vibration,  I perceive  a much  larger  figure  than  the  elementals,  overshadowing 
them,  clothed  in  blue  and  white,  with  some  glimmering  of  silver.  To  obtain  detail  I must 
work  for  some  time  longer,  and  continue  invoking  with  water  and  earth  Symbols.  I have 
found  that  it  is  best  first  to  look  at  the  image  and  then  alternately  test  it. 

Eloping  that  enough  has  been  explained  to  enable  the  student  to  understand  the 
general  method  of  skrying,  I will  proceed  further  to  the  rules  for  astral  projection. 
However  it  should  be  remembered  that  it  is  possible  to  carry  this  vision  very  far,  and  the 
student  should  not  stop  where  I have  left  off. 

ASTRAL  PROJECTION 

First  follow  the  rules  given  for  Skrying,  until  the  point  where  the  Tattwa  symbol 
has  become  perfectly  vivid  and  you  feel  as  though  you  are  one  with  the  Element.  You 
can  modify  the  earlier  stages  of  the  work  by  enlarging  the  symbol  astrally  so  that  it  is 
large  enough  for  a human  being  to  pass  through.  When  very  vivid,  and  not  until  then, 
pass,  spring,  leap  or  fly  through  it,  and  do  not  begin  to  think  or  reason  till  you  find 
yourself  in  some  place  or  landscape  on  the  other  side.  As  before,  only  test  the  experience 
when  it  has  become  tangible  and  a complete  picture,  If  you  have  made  your  mind  a blank, 
as  much  as  possible,  the  first  idea  that  enters  your  mind  vividly,  after  you  have  traversed 
the  symbol  should  be  a correct  correspondence  of  the  Tattwa  in  question. 

Having  already,  by  the  process  of  skrying,  obtained  a vision  of  a compound  Tattwa, 
my  first  impression  is  to  find  myself  standing  on  a boulder  slightly  out  at  sea,  which  I had 
noted  as  an  important  point  in  the  picture.  I realize  that  I am  standing  clothed  in  my 
Adeptus  Minor  insignia  and  white  robe,  on  this  rock,  facing  the  shore.  Turning  to  the 
right  I am  conscious  of  the  gallery  of  cliffs,  and  to  left  and  back  of  me  the  sea, 
everywhere. 

When  working  on  the  planes  it  is  well  to  act  exactly  as  one  would  normally  realizing 
each  step  as  one  goes,  not  trying  to  look  on  both  sides  at  once  or  at  the  back  of  one's 
head. 


101 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Instead  turn  first  to  the  right  and  examine  that,  and  then  to  the  left,  then  turning 
around,  and  so  on.  It  is  better  to  remain  in  one  spot  until  you  are  experienced  so  as  to  avoid 
reflexes.  In  fact,  the  more  practical  the  experiences  are,  the  greater  chance  of  success. 

I have  an  impression  that  the  air  is  very  cold.  I stoop  down  and  feel  the  rock,  which  I 
find  is  of  a coral  nature.  I have  already  tested  this  vision  in  skrying,  but  it  is  well  to  repeat 
it  to  determine  if  I am  sufficiently  in  touch  with  the  landscape.  I therefore  trace  with  my 
astral  Lotus  Wand,  the  symbols  I evoked  before,  the  TAU  and  the  CAPH,  in  white  light.  In 
fact,  I do  not  cease  tracing  them  until  I actually  perceive  them  as  vividly  as  the 
landscape.  Concluding  that  the  scene  does  not  vanish  or  become  dim  I now  with  my  Astral 
Cup  and  Pentacle,  draw  in  Light  very  large  Water  and  Earth  pentagrams,  which  stand  on 
the  sea.  These,  even  more  than  the  former  symbols  should  be  continued  and  accentuated 
until  they  become  to  the  mind  living  entities.  If  these  latter  be  correctly  drawn  and 
sufficiently  realized,  there  will  be  little  chance  of  illusion  during  the  rest  of  the 
experience. 

The  drawing  of  the  Pentagrams  standing  above  the  sea  appears  to  increase  the 
vitality  of  the  scene,  for  the  rather  intangible  Elementals  and  Angelic  Being  that  I had 
perceived  in  the  reflected  picture  became  more  and  more  real  to  the  mind. 

Had  I commenced  at  once  with  astral  projection  without  the  introduction  of  my 
skrying  experience,  1 should  have  had  to  evoke  these  figures.  In  such  a case,  using  the 
Invoking  Pentagrams  of  Water,  I should  continue  vibrating  the  Deity  Names,  etc.  of  these 
Elements  using  as  well  the  names  of  the  Angels  and  Rulers,  such  as  Tharsis,  Kerub,  etc.  I 
would  continue  this  process  using  these  names  and  symbols  until  some  forms  appeared. 

After  careful  examination,  by  first  receiving  the  impression  and  then  testing  it,  I 
can  describe  the  following.  The  Angelic  being,  feminine  in  nature,  pale  with  brown  hair 
and  light  grey-green  eyes,  is  draped  in  blue  and  white.  She  wears  a crown  formed  of  crescents. 
In  her  left  hand  she  holds  a curious  cup,  heavy,  with  a squarish  base,  and  in  her  right  hand 
a wand  with  a symbol  similar  to  the  positive  element  of  Water. 

The  Elementals  vary  in  type,  the  majority  being  of  the  mermaid  and  merman  nature, 
but  again  many  are  of  the  Earth  and  Air  nature. 

Turning  to  the  Angelic  Being,  I make  the  5-6  Signs  and  LVX  Signs,  and  to  the 
Elementals  the  3-8  and  1-10  Signs,  and  by  right  of  these  I ask  to  have  explained  some  of 
the  secret  workings  of  the  plane  of  the  compound  Tattwa. 

The  Angel  having  answered  my  signs  by  similar  ones  gives  the  impression  that  she 
is  willing  to  instruct  me.  This  can  enter  the  mind  as  an  extraneous  thought,  or  may  be 
heard  clairaudiently.  She  shows  how  even  the  work  on  this  particular  spot  is  varied  and 
according  to  the  types  of  the  Elementals  is  the  work  allotted.  Some  Elementals  such  as 
gnomes  are  digging  in  the  cliffs,  with  sharp  instruments,  and  boring  holes  therein,  thus 
permitting  water  to  enter  freely.  (This  could  explain  the  spongy  rather  than  broken 
appearance  of  the  rocks.)  The  mermaid  and  merman  Elementals,  who  I think  are  in  the 
majority  are  carrying  some  dust  into  the  sea.  Some  of  this  may  go  to  form  islands.  Others 
are  bringing  earth  and 


102 


VOLUME  FIVE 


weeds  and  alike  from  the  depths,  also  probably  to  form  land.  There  are  also 
figures  holding  funnel-like  cups  who  rise  from  the  sea,  drawing  in  air,  diving  back 
again  carrying  that  element  into  the  sea. 

It  can  be  understood  how  these  investigations  can  be  carried  to  veiy  great 
detail,  but  to  be  as  brief  as  possible  I ask  if  I may  be  shown  the  effect  of  this  Ray  of 
the  compound  Tattwa  on  the  Universe  generally  and  on  this  Planet  in  particular. 

I understand  that  the  effect  of  the  Ray  is  generating  and  fructifying  generally, 
and  on  the  whole  beneficent,  though  everything  would  depend  on  the  Force  with 
which  it  was  united.  Its  correlative  would  be  thick  rich  water,  containing  such 
substances.  I ask  for  its  influence  on  Earth.  I accomplish  this  by  shewing  thought 
pictures  of  this  planet  and  its  continents,  seas,  etc.,  and  pray  that  this  Angel  will 
send  a ray  first  to  one  spot  and  then  another.  In  answer  I perceive  the  ray  falling 
right  through  the  water  of  the  Earth,  as  if  the  affinity  lay  with  all  land  under  water. 

"The  Life  of  Earth  in  the  Waters  is  its  Name"  does  the  Angel  say.  Nearly  all 
vegetation  attracts  this  ray,  but  especially  plants  which  grow  under  water.  The 
Zoophyte  only  partially  attracts  it,  this  latter  seeming  rather  largely  composed  of 
some  active  element,  such  as  Fire.  Among  animals  the  Ray  appears  to  fall  on  the 
seal  and  hippopotamus,  and  has  a general  affinity  for  most  amphibious  animals. 
With  fish,  the  link  seems  to  be  small,  a tortoise,  a frog,  and  a snail  are  shown  me, 
and  some  water-fowl  of  the  duck  variety. 

Falling  on  man,  on  the  savage  it  would  appear  to  be  beneficial  to  health 
generally,  to  give  a feeling  of  well-being,  and  would  also  govern  to  some  extent 
generation.  Its  tendency  would  be  to  accentuate  sensuality  and  laziness.  On  the 
intellectual  man  it  increases  intuition,  with  some  desire  to  clothe  idea  with  form, 
therefore  the  first  vague  development  of  form  in  the  mind  of  the  artist.  Since  this 
experience  has  become  rather  voluminous  I will  now  stop  - feeling  that  sufficient 
information  has  been  expressed  which  can  help  guide  the  serious  and  enterprising 
student. 

I salute  therefore  the  Angel  with  the  LVX  Signs  and  the  Elementals  by  the  3-8 
and  1-10  Signs,  and  banish  astrally  with  the  Pentagram  and  other  symbols  that  I 
have  traced  upon  the  scene.  The  more  powerfully  the  symbols  have  been  evoked,  the 
more  powerfully  should  they  be  banished. 

If  you  should  be  feeling  a sensation  of  fatigue,  as  I before  mentioned,  make 
towards  the  symbols  the  sign  of  the  Enterer  indrawing  their  strength  and  vitality 
by  using  the  sign  of  Harpocrates.  Then  return  by  the  way  in  which  you  came,  that 
is  through  the  symbol  and  back  into  your  room.  Once  there  perform  the  Supreme 
Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagrams  that  you  have  evoked.  Supposing  a scene  to 
remain  on  the  symbol  of  the  Tattwa  banish  that  as  well.  When  you  have  had 
considerable  practise  it  is  probable  that  such  detailed  care  as  is  herein  indicated 
will  not  be  necessary.  Should  the  operation  be  too  complicated  to  accomplish  at 
one  sitting  it  would  be  possible  to  divide  it  into  parts.  However  you  will  find  that  one 
carefully  practised-sitting  will  provide  more  knowledge  and  ability  than  a hundred 
careless  and  vague  experiments  which  simply  strengthen  mental  deception, 
emotional  folly  and  ignorance. 


103 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


NOTES 

This  experiment  is  very  good  for  the  practice  of  Spiritual  sight,  and  in  this  manner 
you  can  easily  prove  the  correctness  of  your  vision.  Also  for  this  kind  of  simple  experience 
you  need  not  prepare  yourself  spiritually  to  such  an  extent  as  with  the  deeper  working,  so 
that  you  can  have  your  cards  continually  with  you  and  practise  with  them  as  you  will. 

To  find  what  Tattwa  is  in  course,  note  the  time  of  sunrise.  Akasa  always  begins 
with  sunrise  and  lasts  24  minutes  followed  by  Vayu,  Tejas,  Apas,  and  Prithivi  each  lasting 
for  24  minutes. 

Placed  at  the  junction  of  the  Cross  and  Triangle,  the  incense,  lamp  etc.,  should  be  at 
the  angles  of  the  arms  of  the  Cross. 

All  Adeptus  Minor  members  who  are  Z.A.M.  have  the  right  to  wear  the  white  robe 
and  yellow  girdle  of  the  3rd  Adept,  but  not  his  cloak  or  Nemyss.  Note  the  following: 

If  2 persons  are  present  one  should  be  opposite  the  other. 

If  3 persons  are  present  form  a triangle. 

If  4 persons  are  present  form  a square. 

If  5 persons  are  present  form  a pentagram,  etc. 

The  G.D.  Altar,  the  most  synthetical  of  the  symbols,  the  material  universe  ruled  by 
the  Spirit  and  Four  Elements.  The  Rose-Cross  contains  the  affirmation  of  the  principal 
divisions  of  the  Universe,  synthetical  like  the  Altar,  but  particular  in  the  sense  that  it  is 
attributed  to  the  Sephirah  Tiphareth,  the  central  Sun,  and  is  therefore  the  symbol  for  the 
Microcosm  - Man,  the  Adept,  he  to  whom  perfection  of  the  Microcosm  means  a certain 
conscious  union  with  the  Macrocosm. 

The  white  robe  and  yellow  girdle  imply  Purity  - Kether,  Harmony  - Gold, 
Tiphareth.  Lotus  Wand  - Mercy.  Sword  - Severity. 

Imagination  (eidolon)  means  the  faculty  of  building  an  image.  The  imagination  of 
the  artist  must  lie  in  the  power  which  he  possesses  more  or  less  in  proportion  to  his 
sincerity,  and  his  intuition,  of  perceiving  forces  in  the  Macrocosm,  and  allying  or  attuning 
himself  thereto,  his  talents  naturally  and  his  training  permitting  him  to  formulate  images 
which  shall  express  those  forces. 

During  this  process,  it  is  more  than  likely  that  you  will  be  believing  that  the  picture  is 
one  of  memory,  or  imagination,  or  construction,  etc.  All  these  qualities  being  analogous  to 
the  faculty  that  you  are  employing,  and  the  probability  of  their  arising  at  any  moment  will 
be  great. 

Let  it  be  remembered  that  this  can  only  be  a part  of  the  plane  of  the  Symbol 
expressed  by  the  compound  Tattwa. 

Employ  the  "Lords  who  Wander"  (the  7 Planets),  the  planetary  Tarot  trumps,  as 
important  test  symbols. 


104 


VOLUME  FIVE 


For  Memory 

Saturn  - Tau.  Lord  of  the  Night. 

For  Construction 
Jupiter  - Caph. 

For  Anger,  Impatience 
Mars  - Peh. 

For  Vanity 
Sun  - Resli. 

For  Pleasure 
Venus  - Daleth. 

For  Imagination 
Mercury  - Beth. 

For  Wandering  Thoughts 
Moon  - Gimel. 

Use  occasionally  the  Pentacle,  so  as  not  to  ignore  too  great  an  extent  the  part  that 
the  Earth  plays. 

In  the  case  of  starting  the  entire  experience  with  Astral  Projection  only,  you 
will  understand  that  you  ignore  the  portion  of  the  process  which  attracts  the  picture  to  the 
card,  but  simply  go  forward  through  the  symbol  when  once  the  latter  is  realised. 

If  working  with  correct  correspondences,  you  are  bound  to  arrive  at  some  place 
answering  to  the  same,  if  you  project  your  astral  sufficiently. 

If  after  these  repeated  tests  the  Vision  becomes  diminished  or  changes  very  much, 
banish  with  the  Astral  implement,  and  return  in  the  way  you  came,  through  the  symbol, 
and  start  again  freshly.  If  you  feel  you  have  expended  too  much  force  in  the  symbols 
which  you  traced  in  the  scenes,  redraw  some  of  the  force  spent  into  yourself  again  by  the 
formula  of  the  signs  of  Horus  and  Harpocrates.  Extend  towards  the  symbols  in  the  sign 
of  Floor,  redrawing  them  into  yourself  by  the  sign  of  Hoorparkraat. 

Sometimes  it  seems  as  though  one  had  to  find  the  words  to  translate  the 
impression;  sometimes  the  words  appear  to  be  found  already,  for  one  believes  that  one  has 
heard  them.  The  symbol  shows  the  potency  of  the  whorl-formation. 

Some  students,  I believe,  have  great  difficulty  in  returning.  In  such  a case  one  can 
do  so  gradually  by  first  flying  into  space,  thinking  of  this  Planet,  fixing  the  thoughts 
on  the  particular  country,  then  on  the  particular  spot  therein,  then  on  the  house,  and 
lastly  on  the  room  and  entering  therein.  But  in  most  cases  this  will  not  be  necessary. 

TECHNIQUE 

Here  follow  two  Tattwa  visions  by  Soror  Vestigia.  These  are  provided  as  simple 
examples  of  the  technique,  and  the  procedure  to  be  used.  The  first  of  them  is  the  fiery 
sub-element  of  Earth,  Tejas  of  Prithivi. 


105 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Vestigia  stated  that  she  found  herself,  after  going  through  the  visualized 
symbols,  "in  a volcanic  district.  Hill  and  mountains,  hot  air,  and  sunny  light.  Using  a 
Pentacle,  and  calling  on  the  Earth  names,  I see  before  me  a species  of  Angelic  King 
Elemental.  On  testing  him,  I find  that  he  gives  me  the  Neophyte  Saluting  Sign,  and  the 
Philosophus  (fire)  Sign.  He  bows  low  to  the  symbols  that  I give  him,  and  says  that  he  is 
willing  to  show  me  some  of  the  working  on  the  plane.  He  has  a beautiful  face, 
somewhat  of  the  Fire  type,  yet  sweet  in  expression.  He  wears  a Golden  Crown,  and  a 
fiery  red  cloak,  opening  onto  a yellow  tunic,  over  which  being  a shirt  of  mail.  In  his  right 
hand  he  bears  a wand,  the  lower  end  or  handle  being  shaped  somewhat  as  the  Pentacle 
implement,  and  the  staff  and  upper  end  being  as  the  Fire  Wand.  In  his  left  hand  (but  this  I 
do  not  clearly  see)  he  bears  a Fire  Wand;  I think  that  the  right  hand  points  upwards  and 
the  left  downwards,  and  is  a symbol  to  invoke  forces.  Little  figures  of  the  gnome  type 
come  at  his  call.  When  commanded  some  broke  the  rocky  parts  of  the  mountain  with 
pick-axes  which  they  carry.  Others  appear  to  dig  in  the  ground.  I n breaking  off  these 
rocky  pieces,  there  fall  away  little  bits  of  bright  metal  or  copper.  Some  of  these  gnomes 
collected  the  bits  of  metal  and  carried  them  away  in  litle  wallets  slung  by  a baldrick  from 
their  shoulders.  We  followed  them  and  came  to  some  mountainous  peaks.  From  these 
peaks  issued  some  large  and  fierce,  but  hardly  perceivable,  fires.  Into  cauldrons  or  bowls 
placed  above  these  fires,  the  collected  pieces  of  metal  were  placed.  I was  told  that  this 
was  a lengthy  process,  but  asked  that  I might  see  the  result  of  what  appeared  to  be  a 
gradual  melting  of  this  metal,  I was  then  shown  some  bowls  containing  liquid  gold,  but 
not  I imagine,  very  pure  metal,  I again  followed  my  guide,  the  Angelic  King  Elemental 
Ruler,  who  gave  me  his  name  as  Atapa,  and  followed  by  some  gnomes  bearing  the  bowl 
of  liquid  gold.  We  came,  after  passing  through  many  subterranean  passages  cut  in  the 
mountains,  to  a huge  cavern  of  immense  breadth  and  height.  It  was  like  a Palace  cut  out 
of  the  rock.  We  passed  through  rudely  cut  passages,  until  we  reached  a large  central  hall, 
at  the  end  of  which  was  a Dais  on  which  were  seated  the  King  and  Queen,  the  courtier 
gnomes  standing  around. 

"This  Hall  seemed  lighted  by  torches,  and  at  intervals  were  roughly  cut  pillars. 
The  Gnomes  who  accompanied  us  presented  to  the  King  and  Queen  their  gold.  These 
latter  commanded  their  attendants  to  remove  this  to  another  apartment.  I asked  the 
King  and  Queen  for  a further  explanation,  and  they  appointing  substitutes  in  their 
absence,  retire  to  an  inner  chamber  which  appeared  more  elevated  than  the  rest.  The 
architecture  here  seemed  to  be  of  a different  kind.  This  small  hall  had  several  sides,  each 
with  a door,  draped  by  a curtain.  In  the  center  of  the  Hall  was  a large  tripod  receiver 
containing  some  of  the  liquid  gold  such  as  that  we  had  brought  with  us.  The  King  and 
Queen  who  before  had  worn  the  colours  of  Earth  now  donned,  he  the  red,  and  she  the 
white  garments.  They  then  with  their  Earth  and  Fire  Wands  invoked  and  joined  their 
wands  over  the  Tripod.  There  appeared  in  the  air  above,  a figure  such  as  Atapa,  he  who 
had  brought  me  here.  He,  extending  his  wand,  and  invoking,  caused  to  appear  from  each 
door  a figure  of  a planetary  or  zodiacal  nature.  These  each  in  turn  held  out  his  wand 
over  the  gold,  using  some  sigil 


106 


VOLUME  FIVE 


which  I can  but  dimly  follow.  The  gold  each  time  appearing  to  undergo  a change. 
When  these  last  figures  have  retired  again  behind  the  curtains,  the  King  and  Queen  used  a 
species  of  ladle  and  compressed  together  the  gold,  making  it  into  solid  shapes  and  placing 
one  of  these  at  each  of  the  curtained  doors.  Some  gold  still  remained  in  the  bowl.  The 
King  and  Queen  departed,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  I saw  a figure  again  appear  from 
behind  each  curtain  and  draw  away  the  pieces  of  gold." 

The  second  one  I shall  quote  is  a vision  of  Spirit  of  Water,  Akasa  of  Apas,  also 
by  Vestigia. 

"A  wide  expanse  of  water  with  many  reflections  of  bright  light,  and  occasionally 
glimpses  of  rainbow  colours  appearing  (perhaps  symbolising  the  beginning  of  formation  in 
Water).  When  divine  and  other  names  were  pronounced,  elementals  of  the  mermaid  and 
merman  type  appear,  but  few  of  other  elemental  forms.  These  water  forms  are  extremely 
changeable,  one  moment  appearing  as  solid  mermaids  and  mermen,  the  next  melting  into 
foam. 

"Raising  myself  by  means  of  the  highest  symbols  1 have  been  taught,  and  vibrating 
the  names  of  Water,  I rose  until  the  Water  vanished,  and  instead  I beheld  a mighty  world 
or  globe,  with  its  dimensions  and  divisions  of  Gods,  Angels,  elementals,  demons  - the 
whole  universe  of  Water  (like  the  tablet  ruled  in  EMPEH  ARSEL  GAIOL),  I called  on  this 
latter  name,  and  the  Universe  seemed  to  vivify  more  and  more.  I then  called  on  HCOMA, 
and  there  appeared  standing  before  me  a mighty  Archangel  (with  four  wings)  robed  in 
glistening  white,  and  crowned.  In  one  hand,  the  right,  he  held  a species  of  trident,  and  in  the 
left  a Cup  filled  to  the  brim  with  an  essence  which  appeared  to  be  derived  from  above.  This 
essence,  brimming  over,  poured  down  below  on  either  side,  From  the  overflowing  or  over 
running  of  this  Cup,  which  derives  its  essence  from  Atziluth,  apparently  the  cup  being  in 
Briah,  the  World  of  Yetzirah  obtains  its  moisture.  It  is  there  differentiated  into  its  various 
operative  forces. 

"These  operative  forces  are  represented  by  Angels  each  with  their  respective  office  in 
the  world  of  moisture.  These  forces  working  in  Yetzirah,  when  descending  and  mingling 
with  the  Kether  of  Assiah,  are  initiating  the  force  of  that  which  we  as  human  beings  call 
Moisture." 

Here  is  another  good  example  of  a Tattwa  vision.  It  was  obtained  over  a score  of 
years  ago  by  Countess  Tamara  Bourkoun-Dolgoruky  when  she  visited  me  in  Los 
Angeles. 

"I  found  myself  suspended  in  an  unfathomable  abyss  of  space.  Nothing  was 
visible,  neither  sky  nor  clouds,  no  stars  or  any  other  heavenly  bodies,  save  a diffused  pale 
grey  light.  I was  conscious  of  myself  as  a colossal  figure  in  a yellow  robe  and  a yellow 
and  violet  nemyss,  holding  a yellow  dagger  and  tracing  with  it  the  appropriate 
Pentagrams  and  Divine  Names.  However,  they  did  not  appear  outlined  in  flashing  colours, 
as  had  been  the  case  when  skrying  in  the  realms  of  Fire  and  Water.  Rather  I heard  them 
vibrating  through  the  waves  of  Aether  and  reaching  the  confines  of  the  Universe,  whence 
their  echoes  rushed  back  to  me,  reverberating  with  a deafening  roar. 


107 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


"Slowly  a definite  panorama  began  to  formulate  against  the  pale  background.  A 
wide  expanse  of  turquoise,  blue  sky,  enclosed  by  luminous  lapis  lazuli  clouds  lined  with 
translucent  pinkish-orange,  stretched  on  the  horizon.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  the 
radiance  and  brilliancy  of  those  colours;  they  should  be  painted  and  even  then  the  attempt 
would  have  failed.  As  I was  observing  this  enchanting  scene,  a graceful  sylph-like  shape 
emerged  from  the  clouds  slowly  soaring  towards  me.  The  entity  was  drapped  in  filmy  gauze 
of  smokey  grey,  gradually  shading  into  mauve  and  royal  blue.  The  robe  was  caught  at  the 
waist  by  long  streamers  of  amethyst  velvet.  The  wings  were  those  of  a gigantic  butterfly, 
irridescent  and  transparent,  ornamented  with  jewelled  green-blue  "eyes"  of  a peacock's  tail. 
Tiny  silver  stars  were  gleaming  and  sparkling  through  dark  cloud-like  hair  that  framed  a 
wistful  rosy  face  with  violet-blue  eyes.  After  acknowledging  my  salutes,  the  Genie  informed 
me  that  he  was  the  messenger  of  twilight  and  the  evening  breeze. 

"At  the  approach  of  the  Angelic  being,  I suddenly  became  aware  of  a slow  rolling 
vibration  pulsating  through  space,  which  swelled  and  undulated  as  if  it  were  animated  by  in 
breathings  and  out  breathings  of  an  invisible  all-pervading  Presence.  The  words  The  Great 
Breath  which  knows  itself  not'  flashed  in  my  mind.  Yet  here  it  was,  filling  the  abysses  of 
infinite  Space,  ceaseless,  eternal,  changeless  in  its  rhythmic  motion,  embracing 
innumerable  worlds  which  swayed  and  rolled  gently  in  its  waves,  only  to  disappear  like  a 
wisp  of  vapour.  As  in  the  previous  vision  I perceived  the  circulation  of  the  Tattwas,  only  this 
time  it  was  on  a much  grander  scale,  as  the  currents  swept  not  only  around  the  Earth  but 
throughout  the  whole  universe  and  beyond.  Also  it  became  quite  simple  to  understand  why 
through  Pranayama  one  may  acquire  knowledge  and  mastery  over  the  elements,  for  is  not 
Air-Breath  our  most  direct  link  with  the  Macrocosm? 

"Thus,  immersed  in  contemplation,  I became  conscious  of  Nada,  the  faint  notes  of 
which  sounded  like  a melancholy  flute  accompanied  by  a gong  ringing  in  a void.  As  the 
Sound  swelled,  I heard  a distant  chanting  of  OM,  the  Logos,  the  Creative  Word.  And,  as  if 
to  illustrate  this,  there  slowly  emerged,  shining  softly  through  a transparent  veil  of  greyish 
clouds,  an  opalescent  orange  globe,  floating  majestically  on  the  horizon.  Rays  of  diffused 
light  were  playing  around  it,  forming  faint  outlines  of  two  enormous  wings.  No  words 
could  convey  the  supernal  beauty,  majesty  and  unutterable  sweetness  of  this  apparition 
which  seemed  to  be  the  very  essence  of  love.  The  Angel  and  I were  so  overwhelmed  that  we 
silently  knelt  immersed  in  the  soft  radiance  of  this  wondrous  winged  sphere.  My  senses 
began  to  reel,  unable  to  withstand  the  impact  of  such  a powerful  and  totally  unfamiliar 
vibration,  and  as  I was  afraid  to  lose  consciousness,  nothing  remained  but  to  ask  the  Genie  to 
conduct  me  back  to  my  body. 


108 


VOLUME  FIVE 


109 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  SIX 


no 


VOLUME  FIVE 


111 


VOLUME  SIX 


VOLUME  SIX 

OUTER  ORDER  RITUALS 
AND  COMMENTARIES 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ORIGINAL  GOLDEN  DAWN  RITUALS 
(These  are  not  the  later  revisions  of  the  Stella  Matutina) 

In  1979  and  1980,  my  friend  Carr  P.  Collins  Jr.  visited  Gerald  Yorke  in  England  on 
two  separate  occasions  to  obtain  copies  of  a Complete  Set  of  Golden  Dawn  Documents. 
One  set  was  lost  in  transit  demanding  therefore  the  second  visit.  They  are  dated  1894-5  and 
were  originally  issued  to  a member  of  the  Order  who  used  the  pseudonym  or  magical  motto 
of  Frater  De  Profundis  Ad  Lucem. 

Upon  examination  of  these  papers  I discovered  that  the  later  Rituals  of  the  Stella 
Matutina  had  been  considerably  edited  and  modified  when  compared  to  the  1894-5  versions 
of  D.P.A.L.  In  the  Complete  Golden  Dawn  System  of  Magic  the  original  versions 
written  by  Mathers  and  Westcott  have  been  used  exclusively  here. 

It  was  further  discovered  that  there  was  a quantity  of  new  material  that  either  had 
never  found  its  way  to  the  Stella  Matutina  or  had  been  ruthlessly  edited  out.  The  result  is  that 
the  contents  of  this  book  follow  literally  the  title  --  it  does  represent  the  Complete  Golden 
Dawn  System.  Good  fortune  also  pursued  me  in  that  R.A.  Gilbert  of  Bristol,  the  author  of  a 
biography  of  A.E.  Waite  now  in  preparation,  and  of  a new  history  of  the  Golden  Dawn  from 
a radically  different  point  of  view,  was  kind  enough  to  give  me  copies  of  the  Neophyte  and 
Adeptus  Minor  Rituals  employed  in  Waite's  own  Order,  The  Fellowship  of  the  Rosy  Cross. 
This  was  formed  some  years  after  the  revolt  which  splintered  and  shattered  the  unity  and 
integrity  of  the  Order. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  student  would  do  well  to  compare  the  original  simplicity  of 
the  Golden  Dawn  Rituals  with  the  complex  verbosity  of  Waite's  Rituals.  In  any  event,  the 
inclusion  of  these  two  rituals  (there  is  a third,  the  Adeptus  Major  Ritual  which  I believe 


1 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

came  from  Carr  P.  Collins'  own  private  collection  of  Golden  Dawn  Manuscripts)  with 
the  rest  of  the  original  material  makes  this  not  merely  a new  presentation  of  the  Golden  Dawn 
System,  but  an  unique  account  of  what  has  come  to  be  termed  the  Western  Esoteric  Tradition. 


N 


Temple  of  the  Neophyte  Grade 
NOTE 

The  complete  spelling  of  the  officers  who  participate  in  these  ceremonies  will  be  given 
once  here.  Thereafter  they  will  be  abbreviated  as  follows: 

Hierophant  (Red  Robe,  Lamen,  Sceptre)  will  be  shown  as  Hiero. 

Hiereus  (Black  Robe,  Lamen,  Sword)  not  abbreviated.  Hegemon  (White 
Robe,  Lamen,  Sceptre)  shown  as  Heg.  Kerux  (Black  Robe,  Lamen, 

Lamp  and  Wand)  not  abbreviated.  Stolistes  (Black  Robe,  Lamen,  Cup  of 
Water)  shown  as  Stol.  Dadouchos  (Black  Robe,  Lamen,  Thurible)  shown 
as  Dad.  Sentinel  (Black  Robe,  Lamen,  Sword)  shown  as  Sent. 


2 


VOLUME  SIX 


ON  THE  DAIS  (THE  STAGE  IN  THE  EAST  OF  TEMPLE)  These  officers 
represent  the  Second  Order  and  are  present  mostly  symbolically. 

Imperator. 

Cancellarius. 

Praemonstrat 
or.  Past  Hierophant. 

REQUIRED  MATERIALS 
FOR  THE  ALTAR: 


Cross  and  Triangle. 

Red  Rose. 

Red  Lamp. 

Cup  of  Wine. 

Paten  of  Bread  and  Salt. 

FOR  THE  CANDIDATE: 


Black  Gown. 

Red  Shoes. 

Hoodwink. 

Rope. 

Sash. 

Chemicals  to  change  clear  water  to  red  --  the  colour  of  blood. 


OPENING  OF  THE  NEOPHYTE  GRADE  0-0 

When  the  members  are  assembled  and  clothed.  Hierophant  gives  one  knock  and  the 
Officers  rise. 

Members  do  not  rise  except  for  Adorations  to  the  East  or  when  asked  for  the  signs. 
Nor  do  they  circumambulate  with  the  Officers.  When  they  do  have  occasion  to  move  in  the 
Temple,  they  do  so  in  the  direction  of  the  Sun  and  make  the  Neophyte  signs  on  passing  the 
Throne  of  the  East  --  whether  the  Hierophant  is  there  or  not.  The  Grade  sign  is  made  in  the 
direction  of  movement  except  when  entering  or  leaving  the  Hall,  when  it  is  made  toward  the 
East. 

The  knock  is  made  by  rapping  the  base  or  shaft  of  Wand  or  the  pommel  of  Sword  on 
a Table. 


3 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


OPENING  OF  THE  NEOPHYTE  GRADE  0 = 0 


Hiero: 

(Knock) 

Kerux: 

Moves  to  the  right  of  Hierophant,  faces  West  and  proclaims. 

Kerux: 

HEKAS,  HEKAS,  ESTE  BEBELOI! 

Kerux  returns  to  place. 

Hiero: 

(Knock)  Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  assist  me  to  open  the  Hall  of 
the  Neophytes  of  the  (Name  the)  Temple. 

All  rise. 

Hiero: 

Frater  Kerux  see  that  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Kerux: 

(Knock) 

Sentinel: 

(Knock) 

Kerux: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant  the  Hall  is  properly  guarded. 

Hiero: 

Very  Honored  Hiereus,  assure  yourself  that  all  present  have  witnessed  the  Golden  Dawn. 

Hiereus: 

Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer  give  the  signs  of  a Neophyte. 

All  give  the  sign  of  a Neophyte. 

Hiereus: 

(Salute)  Very  Honored  Hierophant  all  present  have  been  so  honored. 

Hiero: 

Very  Honored  Hiereus,  how  many  chief  officers  are  there  in  this  grade? 

Hiereus: 

Three,  Very  Honored  Hierophant.  Namely,  the  Hierophant  Hiereus  and  Hegemon. 

Hiero: 

Is  there  any  peculiarity  in  these  names? 

Hiereus: 

They  all  commence  with  the  letter  H. 

Hiero: 

Of  what  is  this  letter  the  symbol? 

Hiereus: 

Of  life,  because  the  character  H is  one  mode  of  representing  the  ancient  Greek  aspirate;  Breathing  and 
Breath,  are  the  evidence  of  life. 

Hiero: 

How  many  assistant  officers  are  there  in  this  grade? 


4 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiereus: 

Three,  besides  the  Sentinel,  namely,  the  Kerux,  the  Stolistes,  and  Dadouchos. 

Hiero: 

The  situation  of  the  Sentinel? 

Hiereus: 

Without  the  portal  of  the  Hall. 

Hiero: 

His  duty? 

Hiereus: 

Armed  with  a sword  to  keep  out  intruders,  into  prepare  the  candidate. 

Hiero: 

Frater  Dadouchos,  your  situation? 

Dad: 

In  the  south,  very  honored  Hierophant,  to  symbolize  heat  in  dryness. 

Hiero: 

Your  duty? 

Dad: 

1 attend  to  the  censer  and  the  incense,  and  I assist  in  the  purification  and  consecration  by  fire  all  the  Hall, 
are  the  members,  and  of  the  candidate. 

Hiero: 

Frater  Stolistes,  your  situation? 

Stol: 

In  the  North,  very  honored  Hierophant,  to  symbolize  cold  and  moisture. 

Hiero: 

Your  duty? 

Stol: 

1 see  that  the  robes,  collars  and  insignia  of  the  officers  are  ready  before  the  opening;  I attend  the  cup  of 
lust  roll  water  and  I assist  in  the  purification  and  consecration  by  water,  all  the  Hall,  of  the  members,  and 
of  the  candidate. 

Hiero: 

Frater  Kerux,  your  situation? 


5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Kerux: 

Within  the  portal  of  the  Hall,  very  honored  Hierophant. 

Hiero: 

Your  duty? 

Kerux: 

1 see  that  all  the  furniture  of  the  hall  is  properly  arranged  before  the  opening.  I guard  the  inside  of  the 
portal.  I admit  Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  order.  I assist  in  the  reception  of  the  candidates.  I attend  to  the 
lamp  of  my  office.  I lead  the  mystic  circumambulation  and  make  all  announcements  and  reports. 

Hiero: 

What  do  your  lamp  and  wand  symbolize? 

Kerux: 

The  light  of  occult  science  and  directing  power. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon  your  station? 

Heg: 

Between  the  two  pillars  of  Hermes  and  Solomon  facing  the  cubicle  altar  of  the  universe,  very  honored 
Hierophant. 

Hiero: 

Your  duty? 

Heg: 

I preside  over  the  symbolic  gateway  of  occult  science.  1 am  to  reconcile  her  between  light  and  darkness.  I 
immediately  follow  the  Kerux  in  the  mystic  circumambulations.  I superintendent  the  preparation  of  the 
candidate;  lead  him  through  the  path  of  darkness  into  light,  and  assist  in  his  reception,  and  I aid  the  other 
officers  in  the  execution  of  their  duties. 

Hiero: 

What  does  the  white  color  of  your  robes  symbolize? 

Heg: 

Purity. 

Hiero: 

Your  peculiar  ensign  of  office? 


6 


VOLUME  SIX 


Heg: 

The  miter-headed  scepter. 

Hiero: 

What  does  it  symbolize? 

Heg: 

Religion,  to  guide  and  regulate  life. 

Hiero: 

What  does  your  office  symbolize? 

Heg: 

Those  higher  aspirations  of  the  soul  which  should  guide  its  actions. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus  your  station? 

Hiereus: 

On  the  throne  of  the  West,  Very  Honored  Hierophant 

Hiero: 

What  does  the  throne  of  the  West  symbolize? 

Hiereus: 

Increase  of  darkness;  decrease  of  light. 

Hiero: 

Your  duty? 

Hiereus: 

I preside  over  twilight  and  darkness,  which  encompass  us  in  the  absence  of  the  Sun  of  Life  and  Light.  1 
guard  the  gate  of  the  West.  I assist  in  the  reception  of  the  Candidate  and  I superintend  the  inferior  officers 
in  the  execution  of  their  duties. 

Hiero: 

What  does  the  black  color  of  your  robe  symbolize? 

Hiereus: 

Darkness. 

Hiero: 

Your  peculiar  insignia  of  office? 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiereus: 

The  Sword  and  Banner  of  the  West 

Hiero: 

What  does  the  Banner  of  the  West  symbolize? 

Hiereus: 

Twilight 

Hiero: 

What  does  the  Sword  symbolize? 

Hiereus: 

Severity  and  Judgement 

Hiero: 

What  does  your  office  symbolize? 

Hiereus: 

Fortitude. 

Hiero: 

My  place  is  on  the  Throne  of  the  East,  which  symbolizes  the  rise  of  the  Sun  of  Life  and  Light.  My  duty  is 
to  rule  and  govern  this  Hall  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  Order.  The  red  color  of  my  robe 
symbolizes  Light.  My  insignia  are  the  Scepter  and  the  Banner  of  the  East  which  signify  power  and  light 
mercy  and  wisdom,  and  my  office  is  that  of  Expounder  of  the  Mysteries.  Lrater  Stolistes,  I command  you 
to  purify  the  Hall  and  the  members  by  Water. 

Stol: 

(Circumambulates,  saying)  I consecrate  with  water 

Hiero: 

Lrater  Dadouchos  I command  you  to  purify  the  Hall  and  the  members  by  fire. 

Dad: 

(Circumambulates,  saying)  I consecrate  with  fire. 

Heg: 

Goes  to  the  North  and  faces  East. 

Hiero: 

Rises  with  Scepter  and  Banner. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  mystic  circumambulation  take  place  in  the  path  of  light 


8 


VOLUME  SIX 


Kerux  begins  then  Hegemon,  Hiereus,  other  members  and  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  last.  They 
pass  three  times  around  from  East  by  South  to  West.  Each  as  he  passes  the  throne  of  the  East  salutes 
and  lowers  insignia,  except  the  Hierophant. 

After  first  round  Hiereus  returns  to  his  place. 

After  second  round  Hegemon  returns  to  his  place. 

After  third  round  remaining  members  returns  to  their  places. 

Hiero: 

The  mystic  circumambulation  symbolic  of  the  rise  of  the  Light  is  accomplished.  Let  us  adore  the  Lord  of 
the  Universe. 


(ADORATION) 

Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

Holy  art  Thou,  whom  Nature  hath  not  formed. 

Holy  art  Thou,  The  Vast  and  Mighty  One. 

Lord  of  the  Light  and  of  the  Darkness. 

All  Salute. 

Hiero: 

Frater  Kerux,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  I command  you  to  declare  that  I have  opened  the 
Hall  of  the  Neophytes. 

Kerux: 

Moves  to  the  right  of  the  Hierophant. 

Kerux: 

In  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  I declare  that  the  Sun  hath  arisen,  and  that  the  Light  shineth  in 
the  Darkness. 

Kerux: 

(Knock) 

Hiereus: 

(Knock) 

Heg: 

(Knock) 

Hiero: 

(Knock)  KHABS. 

Hiereus: 

(Knock)  AM. 

Heg: 

(Knock)  PEKHT. 

Hiereus: 

(Knock)  KONX. 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

(Knock)  OM. 

Hiero: 

(Knock)  PAX. 

Heg: 

(Knock)  LIGHT. 

Hiero: 

(Knock)  IN. 

Hiereus: 

(Knock)  EXTENSION. 


CEREMONY  OF  ADMISSION 

(The  Candidate  is  not  to  be  told  the  name  of  the  Order  until  his  admission.) 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  I have  received  a dispensation 
from  the  Greatly  Honored  Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order  to  admit  (name  of  aspirant)  to  the  Grade  of 
Neophyte  Honored  Hegemon  instruct  (name  of  aspirant)  to  hold  himself(or  herself)  in  readiness  for  the 
ceremony  of  his  (or  her)  admission  and  superintend  his  (or  her)  preparation. 

Heg: 

Removes  his  chair  from  between  the  Pillars,  salutes  Hierophant,  quits  Temple  and  prepares  Candidate 
as  follows:  The  Candidate  is  Hoodwinked  and  a rope  tied  thrice  around  the  waist. 

Kerux: 

Moves  to  temple  entrance. 

Heg: 

Leads  candidates  to  temple  entrance. 

Heg: 

Child  of  Earth,  arise  and  enter  the  Path  of  Darkness. 

Kerux: 

Kerux  opens  door  but  bars  the  entrance. 

Kerux: 

(Knocks)  Very  Honored  Hierophant  is  it  your  pleasure  that  the  Candidate  be  admitted? 

Hiero: 

It  is.  Admit  (name  of  aspirant)in  due  form,  who  will  hereafter  be  known  by  the  motto  XYZ.  Frater 
Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  assist  the  Kerux  in  the  reception. 

Stol: 

Moves  to  temple  entrance. 

Dad: 

Moves  to  temple  entrance. 

Kerux: 

Child  of  Earth,  unpurified  and  unconsecrated  thou  canst  not  enter  our  Sacred  Hall. 

Stol: 

(Signing  a Cross  on  Candidate's  forehead)  Child  of  Earth,  I purify  thee  with  water. 


10 


VOLUME  SIX 


Dad: 

(Censing  the  Candidate)  Child  of  Earth,  I consecrate  thee  with  Fire. 

Hiero: 

Conduct  the  Candidate  to  the  foot  of  the  altar.  Child  of  Earth,  why  dost  thou  request  admission  into  this 
Order? 

Cand: 

(Prompted  by  Hegemon ) My  soul  is  wandering  in  darkness  seeking  for  the  Light  of  Occult  Knowledge, 
and  I believe  that  in  this  Order  the  knowledge  of  that  Light  may  be  obtained. 

Hiero: 

(Name  of  aspirant)  I hold  in  my  hand  your  signed  pledge  to  keep  secret  all  relating  to  this  Order,  but  to 
confirm  it  I now  ask  if  you  are  willing  in  the  presence  of  this  assembly  to  take  a great  and  solemn 
obligation  to  keep  inviolate  the  secrets  and  mysteries  of  our  Order?  Let  me  however  assure  you  that  this 
obligation  contains  nothing  incompatible  with  your  civil,  moral  or  religious  duties. 

Cand: 

1 am. 

Hiero: 

Advances  between  Pillars  to  Eastern  side  of  Altar. 

Hiereus: 

Stands  on  Candidate 's  left. 

Heg: 

Stands  on  Candidate 's  right. 

Kerux: 

Advances  to  the  altar  picks  up  the  triangle  and  delivers  it  to  the  Hierophant. 

Hiero: 

Thou  wilt  kneel  on  both  knees,  give  me  your  right  hand,  which  I place  on  this  sacred  and  sublime  symbol. 
Places  Candidate's  right  hand  on  the  center  of  the  triangle.  Place  your  left  hand  in  mine,  bow  your 
head,  repeat  your  full  name  at  length  and  say  after  me 
All  rise. 


EAST 

Hierophant 


\ 

\ 

Hegemon 


Stolistes 

* 

\ 

\ 

PLACES  OF  OFFICERS  .AMI)  \ 
CANDIDATE  DURING  \ 

OBLIGATION.  \ 


WEST 


Dadouchos 

- P 


/ 


Pi 

Kerux 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  OBLIGATION 

Hiero: 

I (name  of  aspirant),  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  and  of  this  Hall  of  Neophytes  of  the 
Order  of  The  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  regularly  assembled  under  warrant  from  the  Greatly  Honored 
Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order,  do  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord  hereby  and  hereon  most  solemnly  pledge 
myself  to  keep  secret  this  Order.  Its  name,  the  name  of  its  members,  and  the  proceedings  which  take  place 
at  its  meetings,  from  all  and  every  person  in  the  whole  world  who  is  outside  the  pale  of  the  Order,  and  not 
even  to  discuss  these  with  initiates,  unless  he  or  they  are  in  possession  of  the  password  for  the  time  being. 
Nor  yet  with  any  member  who  has  resigned,  demitted  or  been  expelled,  and  I undertake  to  maintain  a kind 
and  benevolent  relation  with  all  the  Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  Order. 

I furthermore  promise  and  swear  that  I will  keep  any  information  relative  to  this  Order,  which 
may  have  become  known  to  me  Prior  to  the  completion  of  the  Ceremony  of  my  admission  and  I also 
pledge  myself  to  divulge  nothing  whatsoever  concerning  this  Order  to  the  outside  world  in  case  either  of 
my  resignation,  demission  or  expulsion  therefrom,  after  the  completion  of  my  admission.  I will  not  seek 
to  obtain  any  ritual  or  lecture  pertaining  to  the  Order  without  due  authorization  from  the  Praemonstrator 
of  my  Temple,  nor  will  I possess  any  ritual  or  lecture  unless  it  be  properly  registered  and  labeled  by  him. 

I further  undertake  that  any  such  ritual  or  lecture  and  any  case,  cover  or  box  containing  them 
shall  bear  the  official  label  of  the  Golden  Dawn.  I will  not  copy  myself  nor  lend  to  any  other  person  to  be 
copied,  any  ritual  or  lecture,  until  and  unless  I hold  the  written  permission  of  the  Praemonstrator  to  do  so, 
lest  our  secret  knowledge  be  revealed  through  my  neglect  or  error. 

Furthermore,  I undertake  to  prosecute  with  zeal  the  study  of  Occult  Sciences,  seeing  that  this 
Order  is  not  established  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  desire  only  a superficial  knowledge  thereof.  I will  not 
suffer  myself  to  be  hypnotized,  or  mesmerized,  nor  will  I place  myself  in  such  a passive  state  that  any 
uninitiated  person,  power,  or  being  may  cause  me  to  lose  control  of  my  thoughts,  words  or  actions. 

Neither  will  I use  my  Occult  powers  for  any  evil  purposes  and  I further  promise  topersevere 
with  firmness  and  courage  through  the  ceremony  of  my  admission,  and  these  points  I generally  and 
severally,  upon  this  sacred  and  sublime  symbol  swear  to  observe  without  evasion,  equivocation,  or  mental 
reservation  of  any  kind  whatsoever;  under  the  no  less  penalty  on  the  violation  of  any  or  either  of  them  of 
being  expelled  from  this  Order,  as  a willfully  perjured  wretch,  void  of  ah  moral  worth,  and  unfit  for  the 
society  of  all  right  and  true  persons,  and  in  addition  under  the  awful  penalty  of  voluntarily  submitting 
myself  to  a deadly  and  hostile  current  of  will  set  in  motion  by  the  chiefs  of  the  Order,  by  which  I should 
fall  slain  and  paralyzed  without  visible  weapon  as  if  slain  by  the  lightning  flash. 

Hiereus: 

Suddenly  lays  the  blade  of  his  sword  on  the  nape  of  the  Candidate's  neck  and  withdraws  it  again. 

Hiero: 

So  help  me  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  and  my  own  higher  soul. 


12 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiero: 

Rise,  newly  obligated  Neophyte  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer.  Place  the  Candidate  in  the  Northern 
part  of  the  Hall,  the  place  of  the  greatest  symbolic  darkness. 

Candidate  rises  faces  to  the  East 
Hierophant  and  Hiereus  return  to  their  thrones. 

Hiero: 

The  voice  of  my  higher  soul  said  unto  me,  Let  me  enter  the  Path  of  Darkness,  peradventure  thus  shall  I 
obtain  the  Light  I am  the  only  being  in  an  abyss  of  darkness.  From  the  darkness  came  I forth  ere  my  birth, 
from  the  silence  of  a primal  sleep,  and  the  Voice  of  Ages  answered  unto  my  soul  I am  he  that  formulates 
in  darkness.  Child  of  Earth,  the  Light  shineth  in  the  darkness,  but  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not.  Let 
the  mystic  circumambulation  take  place  in  the  path  of  darkness  with  the  symbolic  Light  of  Occult  Science 
to  guide  the  way. 

Hiero: 

Knocks  at  commencement  of  circumambulation. 

Kerux: 

Kerux  leads  with  Light  and  Wand 
Heg: 

Hegemon  guides  the  Candidate 

Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  follow.  They  halt  in  the  South  the  third  time  round. 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks) 

Hiero: 

( Knocks ) 

Kerux: 

Child  of  Fai  th,  unpurified  and  unconsecrated,  thou  canst  not  enter  the  path  of  the  West. 

Stol: 

(Signing  a Cross  on  Candidate's  forehead)  Child  of  Earth,  1 purify  thee  with  water 

Dad: 

(Censing  Candidate)  Child  of  Earth,  I consecrate  thee  with  fire. 

Heg: 

Child  of  Earth,  twice  consecrated,  thou  mayest  approach  the  gate  of  the  West 
They  move  to  the  West  facing  Throne  and  halt. 

Hiereus: 

Rises , takes  Banner  in  left  hand,  menaces  Candidate  with  sword. 

Heg: 

Hegemon  slips  up  the  Candidate 's  hoodwink. 

Hiereus: 

Thou  canst  not  pass  by  me  saith  the  Guardian  of  the  West  unless  thou  canst  tell  me  my  name. 

Heg: 

Darkness  is  thy  name,  the  Great  One  of  the  Paths  of  the  Shades. 

Hiereus: 

(Slowly  sinking  point  of  sword)  Child  of  Earth,  fear  is  failure.  Therefore  be  without  fear,  for  in  the  heart 
of  the  coward  virtue  abideth  not  Thou  hast  known  me,  so  pass  thou  on. 

Heg: 

Slips  hoodwink  down  again. 

The  procession  moves  to  the  North  and  halt. 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Kerux: 

Child  of  Earth,  unpurified  and  unconsecrated,  thou  canst  not  enter  the  Path  of  the  East. 

Stol: 

(Signing  a Cross  on  the  Candidate's  forehead)  Child  of  Earth,  1 purify  thee  with  water. 

Dad: 

(Censing  the  Candidate)  Child  of  Earth,  I consecrate  thee  with  fire. 

Heg: 

Child  of  Earth,  thrice  consecrated,  thou  mayest  approach  the  gate  of  the  East. 

The  procession  moves  to  the  East  facing  Throne  and  halt. 

Hiero: 

Hierophant  rises,  takes  Banner  in  left  hand  and  raises  Scepter  as  if  to  strike. 

Heg: 

Hegemon  slips  up  Candidate 's  hoodwink. 

Hiero: 

Thou  canst  not  pass  by  me  saith  the  Guardian  of  the  East  unless  thou  canst  tell  me  my  name. 

Heg: 

LIGHT  dawning  in  darkness  is  thy  name,  the  LIGHT  of  a Golden  Day. 

Hiero: 

( Slowly  lowering  Scepter)  Child  of  Earth,  remember  that  unbalanced  force  is  evil,  unbalanced  mercy  is 
but  weakness,  unbalanced  severity  is  but  oppression.  Thou  hast  known  me,  so  pegs  thou  on  unto  the 
Cubical  Altar  of  the  Universe. 

Heg: 

Hoodwink  slipped  down  and  Candidate  taken  to  West  of  Altar 
Hiero: 

Hierophant  leaves  Throne  and  stands  between  the  pillars,  facing  Candidate  with  Scepter  in  right  hand 
and  Banner  in  left. 

Hiero: 

I come  in  the  Power  of  the  Light. 

I come  in  the  Light  of  Wisdom. 

I come  in  the  Mercy  of  the  Light. 

The  Light  hath  Healing  in  its  Wings. 

Heg: 

Hegemon  moves  to  Candidate 's  right. 

Kerux: 

Kerux  moves  behind  Candidate. 

Stol: 

Moves  to  left  of  Kerux. 

Dad: 

Moves  to  right  of  Kerux. 

The  officers  are  now  forming  a Hexagram  around  the  Altar. 

Hiereus: 

Holds  sword  in  the  right  hand  with  the  Banner  of  the  West  in  left. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Candidate  kneel  while  I invoke  the  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

Hiero: 

Lord  of  the  Universe,  the  Vast  and  the  Mighty  One,  Ruler  of  the  Light  and  of  the  Darkness,  we  adore 
Thee  and  we  invoke  Thee.  Look  with  favor  upon  this  Neophyte,  who  now 


14 


VOLUME  SIX 


kneeleth  before  Thee  and  grant  Thine  aid  unto  the  higher  aspirations  of  his  soul  so  that  he  may 
prove  a true  and  faithful  Frater  among  us  unto  the  Glory  of  Thy  ineffable  Name.  Amen. 

Let  the  Candidate  rise. 

Candidate  is  assisted  to  rise  and  is  brought  close  to  the  Altar. 

Hierophant  Hiereus,  and  Hegemon  raise  Wands  and  Sword  touching  over  the  head  of  the 
Candidate. 

Heg: 

Inheritor  of  a dying  world  we  call  thee  to  the  living  beauty. 

Hiereus: 

Wanderer  in  the  wild  darkness  we  call  thee  to  the  gentle  light. 

Hiero: 

Child  of  Earth,  long  hast  thou  dwelt  in  darkness. 

Kerux: 

(Removes  hoodwink ) Quit  the  night  and  seek  the  day. 

All  members  present  clap  hands. 

Hiero: 

Hiereus: 

Heg: 

Frater  XYZ  we  receive  thee  into  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  KHABS. 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks)  AM. 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  PEKHT. 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks)  KONX. 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  OM. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  PAX. 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  LIGHT 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiero: 

(Knocks)  IN. 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks)  EXTENSION. 

Hiero: 

In  all  your  wanderings  through  darkness  the  lamp  of  the  Kerux  went  before  you,  though  you  saw  it  not. 

Kerux: 

Kerux  advances  and  raises  his  lamp. 

Hiero: 

It  is  the  symbol  of  the  Hidden  Light  of  Occult  Science.  Let  the  Candidate  be  conducted  to  the  East  of  the 
Altar. 

Heg: 

Conducts  candidates  to  Eastern  side  of  altar. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  I delegate  to  you  the  duty  of  entrusting  the  Candidate  with  the  secret  signs,  grip,  grand 
word  and  present  password  of  the  Neophyte  Grade  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  of 
placing  him  between  the  mystic  pillars  and  of  superintending  his  fourth  and  final  consecration. 

Hiero: 

Hierophant  returns  to  Throne. 

Hiereus: 

Takes  his  place  between  the  pillars. 

Heg: 

Conducts  candidates  to  the  East  of  the  Altar  facing  Hiereus. 

Hiereus: 

Gives  Sword  and  Banner  to  Hegemon  to  hold. 

Hiereus: 


Frater  XYZ,  I now  proceed  to  instruct  you  in  the  secret  signs,  grip  and  token,  grand  word  and  password 
for  the  present  time  for  this  Grade.  Firstly,  advance  your  left  foot  about  six  inches:  this  is  called  the  step 
of  the  grade.  The  sign  is  two-fold;  the  Saluting  Sign  and  Sign  of 

THC  NtOPHYTC  SIGNS  Joe  portal.  Sign:, 


16 


VOLUME  SIX 


Silence.  The  first  should  always  be  answered  by  the  second.  The  Saluting  Sign  is  given  by 
thrusting  both  arms  horizontally  forward,  palms  downwards,  as  if  groping  your  way  and  bow  your  head. 
It  alludes  to  your  condition  in  a state  of  darkness  unillumined  by  the  Lamp  of  Occult  Knowledge  and 
groping  your  way  blindly  in  the  search  for  truth.  The  Sign  of  Silence  is  given  by  placing  the  left  first 
finger  on  the  mouth.  It  alludes  to  the  strict  silence  inculcated  on  you  by  your  obligation  regarding  all 
proceedings  of  the  Order.  The  grip  or  token  is  given  in  the  following  manner  Advance  your  left  foot  about 
six  inches  touching  mine,  side  to  side  and  toe  to  heel  Now  extend  your  right  hand  as  if  to  grip  mine,  but 
miss  it  intentionally;  again  extend  it  and  seize  mine  by  the  fingers  only.  It  alludes  to  the  seeking  for 
guidance  in  darkness.  The  Grand  Word  is  HAR-PAR-KRAT  whispered  by  alternate  syllables  mouth  to 
ear  thus.  It  is  the  title  of  the  Egyptian  God  of  Silence  and  should  ever  remind  you  of  the  strict  silence  you 
have  sworn  to  maintain.  The  password  is  (blank)  which  will  be  periodically  changed  at  each  Equinox  so 
that  a member  who  has  resigned,  demitted,  or  been  expelled  from  the  Order,  may  be  in  ignorance  of  the 
existing  password.  I now  place  you  between  the  two  pillars  of  Hermes  and  Solomon  in  the  symbolical 
Gateway  of  Occult  Science. 

Hiereus: 

Draws  Candidate  forward  between  the  pillars.  He  receives  sword  and  banner  from  Hegemon,  stands  at 
the  latter's  left,  all  facing  Candidate. 

Hiereus: 

Let  the  final  consecration  of  the  Candidate  take  place. 

Kerux: 

Goes  to  the  North  and  faces  East. 

Stol: 

Signs  a Cross  on  Candidate 's  forehead,  bows  to  Hierophant  and  sprinkles  East. 

Stol: 

Frater  XYZ,  I purify  thee  finally  with  water. 

Dad: 

Censing  as  Stolistes  has  done. 

Dad: 

Frater  XYZ,  I consecrate  thee  finally  with  fire. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  the  final  consecration  of  the  Candidate  having  been  performed,  I command  you  to 
remove  the  rope  from  his  waist  the  last  remaining  symbol  of  the  path  of  darkness,  and  to  invest  him  with 
the  distinguishing  badge  of  the  grade. 

Heg: 

Picks  up  the  sash  badges  for  the  grade  of  neophyte  from  the  altar  and  presents  them  to  the  candidate. 
Heg: 

By  the  command  of  the  Very  Honored  Hierophant  I invest  you  with  the  distinguishing  badge  of  the  grade. 
It  symbolizes  Light  dawning  in  darkness. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  mystic  circumambulation  take  place  in  the  path  of  Light. 

Hiero: 

Stands  holding  Scepter  and  Banner  as  in  the  Opening. 

Kerux: 

Goes  to  the  North  East. 

Heg: 

Takes  Candidate  behind  Black  Pillar,  and  stands  behind  Kerux. 

Hiereus: 

Takes  place  behind  Hegemon. 

Stol: 

Takes  place  behind  Hiereus. 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Dad: 

Takes  place  behind  Stolistes. 

All  salute  on  passing  Hierophant. 

Hiereus: 

Drops  out  on  reaching  his  Throne. 

Heg: 

Returns  to  between  the  Pillars  after  passing  Hierophant  twice,  directs  Neophyte  to  follow  Kerux. 

Hiero: 

Take  your  place  North  West  of  the  Stolistes. 

Kerux: 

Indicates  this  and  goes  on  followed  by  Stolistes  who  falls  out  in  the  North  and  returns  to  his  place. 

Heg: 

Replaces  his  chair  between  the  Pillars  and  sits  down. 

Kerux: 

Replaces  the  Rose,  Lamp,  Cup  and  Paten  in  their  proper  places  on  the  Altar.  And  are  seated. 

Hiero: 

The  Three  Fold  Cord  bound  about  your  waist,  was  an  image  of  the  three-fold  bondage  of  Mortality,  which 
amongst  the  Initiated  is  called  earthly  or  material  inclination,  that  has  bound  into  a narrow  place  the  once 
far-wandering  Soul;  and  the  Hood-wink  was  an  image  of  the  Darkness,  of  Ignorance,  of  Mortality  that  has 
blinded  men  to  the  Happiness  and  Beauty  their  eyes  once  looked  upon.  The  Double  Cubical  Altar  in  the 
center  of  the  Hall,  is  an  emblem  of  visible  Nature  or  the  Material  Universe,  concealing  within  herself  the 
mysteries  of  all  dimensions,  while  revealing  her  surface  to  the  exterior  senses.  It  is  a double  cube  because, 
as  the  Emerald  Tablet  has  said  The  things  that  are  below  are  a reflection  of  the  things  that  are  above.  The 
world  of  men  and  women  created  to  unhappiness  is  a reflection  of  the  World  of  Divine  Beings  created  to 
Happiness.  It  is  described  in  the  SEPHER  YETZIRAH,  or  The  Book  of  Formation,  as  An  Abyss  of 
Height  and  as  an  Abyss  of  Depth,  An  Abyss  of  the  East  and  An  Abyss  of  the  West,  An  Abyss  of  the 
North  and  An  Abyss  of  the  South.  The  Altar  is  black  because,  unlike  Divine  Beings  who  unfold  in  the 
Element  of  Light,  the  Fires  of  Created  Brings  arise  from  Darkness  and  Obscurity.  On  the  Altar  is  a White 
Triangle  to  be  the  Image  of  that  Immortal  Light,  that  Triune  Light,  which  moved  in  Darkness  and  formed 
the  World  of  Darkness  and  out  of  Darkness.  There  are  two  contending  Forces  and  One  always  uniting 
them.  And  these  Three  have  their  Image  in  the  three-fold  Flame  of  our  Being  and  in  the  threefold  wave  of 
the  sensual  world. 

Hiero: 

Stands  in  the  form  of  Cross,  saying: 

Hiero: 

Glory  be  to  Thee,  Father  of  the  Undying.  For  Thy  Glory  Bows  out  rejoicing,  to  the  ends  of  the  Earth! 

Hiero: 

He  reseats  himself. 

Hiero: 

The  Red  Cross  above  the  White  Triangle,  is  an  Image  of  Him  Who  was  unfolded  in  the  Light.  At  its  East, 
South,  West  and  North  Angles  are  a Rose  Fire,  Cup  of  Wine  and  Bread  and  Salt.  These  allude  to  the  Four 
Elements,  Air,  Fire,  Water,  Earth.  The  Mystical  Words  - KHABS  AM  PEKHT  - are  ancient  Egyptian  and 
are  the  origin  of  the  Greek  KONX  OM  PAX  - which  was  uttered  at  the  Eleusinian  Mysteries.  A literal 
translation  would  be  Light  Rushing  Out  in  One  Ray  and  they  signify  the  same  form  of  Light  as  that 
symbolized  by  the  Staff  of  the  Kerux.  East  of  the  Double  Cubical  Altar  of  created  things,  art  the  Pillars  of 
Hermes  and  of  Solomon.  On  these  are  painted  certain  Hieroglyphics  from  the  17th  and  the  125th  Chapters 
of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  They  are  the  symbols  of  the  two  powers  of  Day  and  Night,  Love  and  Hate,  Work 
and  Rest,  the  subtle  force  of  the  Lodestone  and  the  Eternal  out-pouring  and  in-pouring  of  the  Heart  of 
God.  The  Lamps  that  burn,  though  with  a veiled  light,  upon  their  summits  show  that  the  Pathway  to 
Hidden  Knowledge,  unlike  the  Pathway  of  Nature  - which  is  a continual  undulation,  the  winding  hither 
and  thither  of  the  Serpent  - is  the  straight  and  narrow  way  between  them.  It  was  because  of  this  that  I 


18 


VOLUME  SIX 


passed  between  them,  when  you  came  to  the  Light,  and  it  was  because  of  this  that  you  were  placed 
between  them  to  receive  the  final  Consecration.  Two  contending  Forces  and  one  which  unites  them 
eternally.  Two  basal  angles  of  the  triangle  and  one  which  forms  the  apex.  Such  is  the  origin  of  Creation,  it 
is  the  Triad  of  Life.  My  Throne  at  the  Gate  of  the  East  is  the  Place  of  the  Guardian  of  the  Dawning  Sun. 
The  Throne  of  the  Fliereus  at  the  Gate  of  the  West  is  the  Place  of  the  Guardian  against  the  Multitudes  that 
sleep  through  the  Light  and  awaken  at  the  twilight.  The  Throne  of  the  Hegemon  seated  between  the 
Columns  is  the  Place  of  Balanced  Power,  between  the  Ultimate  Light  and  the  Ultimate  Darkness.  These 
meanings  are  shown  in  detail  and  by  the  color  of  our  robes.  The  Wand  of  the  Kerux  is  the  Beam  of  Light 
from  the  Hidden  Wisdom,  and  his  Lamp  is  an  emblem  of  the  ever  burning  Lamp  of  the  Guardian  of  the 
Mysteries,  The  Seat  of  the  Stolistes  at  the  Gate  of  the  North  is  the  Place  of  the  Guardian  of  the  Cauldron 
and  the  Well  of  Water  of  Cold  and  Moisture.  The  Seat  of  the  Dadouchos  at  the  Gate  of  the  South  is  the 
Place  of  the  Guardian  of  the  Lake  of  Fire  and  the  Burning  Bush. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Frater  Kerux,  I command  you  to  declare  that  the  Neophyte  has  been  initiated  into  the  Mysteries 
of  the  Neophyte  Grade. 

Kerux: 

Advances  to  the  North  East,  faces  West,  raises  his  Wand  and  says: 

Kerux: 

In  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  and  by  command  of  the  Very  Honored  Hierophant  hear  all  ye  that 
I proclaim  that  (name  of  aspirant)  who  will  hereafter  be  known  unto  you  by  the  Motto  XYZ,  has  been 
admitted  in  due  form  to  the  Neophyte  grade  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer. 

All  clap  hands. 

Hiero: 

Very  Honored  Hiereus,  I delegate  to  you  the  duty  of  pronouncing  a short  address  to  our  Frater  on  his 
admission. 

Hiereus: 

As  you  have  now  passed  through  the  ceremony  of  your  admission,  allow  me  to  congratulate  you  on  being 
admitted  a member  of  this  ancient  and  honorable  Order,  whose  professed  object  and  end  is  the  practical 
study  of  Occult  Science.  Let  me  therefore  advise  you  to  remember  this  day  as  a marked  one  in  your 
existence  and  to  adopt  and  cultivate  a mental  condition  worthy  of  this  Order.  To  this  end  let  me  first 
earnestly  recommend  you  never  to  forget  due  honor  and  reverence  to  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  for  as  the 
whole  is  greater  than  its  parts,  so  is  He  far  greater  than  we,  who  are  but  as  sparks  derived  from  that 
unsupportable  Light  which  is  in  Him.  It  is  written  that  the  borders  of  his  Garment  of  Flame  sweep  the 
ends  of  the  Universe  and  unto  Him  all  return.  Therefore  do  we  adore  Him,  therefore  do  we  invoke  Him; 
therefore  in  adoration  to  Him  sinks  even  the  Banner  of  the  East.  (Done)Secondly,  let  me  advise  you  never 
to  ridicule  or  cast  obloquy  upon  the  form  of  religion  professed  by  another,  for  what  right  have  you  to 
desecrate  what  is  sacred  in  his  eyes?  Thirdly,  never  let  the  seal  of  secrecy  regarding  the  Order  be  absent 
from  your  recollection,  and  beware  that  you  betray  it  not  by  a casual  or  unthinking  word.  Fourthly,  study 
well  that  Great  Arcanum,  the  proper  equilibrium  of  mercy  and  severity,  for  either  unbalanced  is  not  good; 
unbalanced  severity  is  cruelty  and  oppression;  unbalanced  mercy  is  but  weakness  and  would  permit  evil 
to  exist  unchecked,  thus  making  itself  as  it  were  the  accomplice  of  that  evil.  Lastly,  do  not  be  daunted  by 
the  difficulties  of  Occult  Study  and  remember  that  every  obstacle  can  at  length  be  conquered  by 
perseverance. 


19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiero: 

Before  you  can  pass  on  to  the  next  Higher  Grade  of  this  Order  you  will  have  to  make  yourself  perfect  in 
the  following:  1)  The  names  and  alchemical  symbols  of  the  four  elements.  2)  The  names,  astrological 
symbols  and  elemental  attribution  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac.  3)  The  names  and  astrological 
symbols  of  the  seven  planets,  also  their  houses,  exaltation  and  triplicity  in  the  Zodiac.  4)  The  names, 
characters  and  numerical  values  of  the  twenty-two  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet.  5)  The  names  and 
English  meanings  of  the  ten  Qabalistic  Sephiroth.  A MSS.  lecture  on  these  subjects  of  study  may  be 
obtained  on  application.  When  you  know  these  thoroughly  you  must  signify  the  same  by  letter  to  the 
Cancellarius  or  Scribe.  You  will  then  be  examined  and  if  found  perfect  you  will  be  eligible  for  admission 
to  the  next  higher  grade,  should  the  higher  powers  approve  your  application. 

Kerux: 

Conducts  Candidate  to  East  of  the  altar,  facing  west,  gives  him  a solution  and  tells  him  to  pour  a few 
drops  in  the  cup  of  water  before  him. 

Kerux: 

As  this  pure  and  limpid  fluid  is  changed  into  the  semblance  of  blood,  so  mayest  thou  perish  if  thou 
betrayest  thine  oath  of  secrecy  to  this  Order  by  word  or  deed. 

Kerux: 

Instructs  candidate  to  face  Hierophant  in  the  East. 

Hiero: 

Resume  your  seat  and  remember  that  your  admission  to  this  Order  gives  you  no  right  to  initiate  any  other 
person  without  dispensation  from  the  Grand  High  Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order. 

Kerux: 

Moves  to  the  right  of  Hierophant,  faces  West  and  proclaims. 

Kerux: 

HEKAS,  HEKAS,  ESTE  BEBELOI! 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer  assist  me  to  close  this  Hall  in 
the  Grade  of  Neophyte. 

All  rise. 


20 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiereus: 

(3  Knocks ) 

Heg: 

(3  Knocks ) 

Hiero: 

(3  Knocks ) Frater  Kerux,  see  that  the  Hall  is  properly  guarded. 

Kerux: 

Moves  to  the  entrance  of  the  Temple  and  knocks  once. 

Sentinel: 

( Knocks ) 

Kerux: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant,  the  Hall  is  properly  guarded. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  assure  yourself  that  all  present  have  witnessed  the  Golden  Dawn. 

Hiereus: 

Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  give  the  signs  of  a Neophyte. 

All  give  sign  of  the  Neophyte. 

Hiereus: 

Salutes. 

Hiereus: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant  all  present  have  been  so  honored. 

Hiero: 

Frater  Stolistes,  I command  you  to  purify  the  Hall  and  the  members  by  water. 

Stol: 

(Circumambulates,  saying)  I purify  with  water. 

Hiero: 

Frater  Dadouchos,  1 command  you  to  purify  the  Hall  and  the  members  by  fire. 

Dad: 

( Circumambulates , saying)  I purify  with  fire. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Mystic  Reverse  circumambulation  take  place  in  the  Path  of  Light. 

Hiero: 

Stands  holding  the  Banner  of  the  East  in  his  left  hand,  the  Scepter  in  his  right. 

Kerux: 

Goes  from  South  to  the  South  East. 

Heg: 

Goes  to  the  North  and  leads  the  new  Neophyte  by  West  and  South  to  the  Kerux. 

Hiereus: 

Falls  in  behind  Neophytes. 

Stol: 

Falls  in  behind  Hiereus. 

Dad: 

Falls  in  behind  Stolistes. 

Sentinel: 

Ends  the  procession. 

All  salute  as  they  pass  the  Hierophant. 

Hiereus: 

Drops  out  when  his  Throne  is  reached. 

Heg: 

Passes  Hierophant  twice  and  then  takes  his  place  between  the  Pillars.  Directs  neophytes  to  follow 
Kerux. 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

Directs  Neophyte  to  his  seat  in  the  North. 

All  officers  return  to  their  places. 

Hiero: 

The  Mystical  Reverse  Circumambulation  is  accomplished.  It  is  the  symbol  of  Fading  Light.  Let  us  adore 
the  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

All  turn  East. 

Stol: 

Directs  Neophyte  to  rise  and  face  East. 

Hiero: 

Faces  East,. 

All  together  say  saluting. 

Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  Universe ! Salute 
Holy  art  Thou,  Whom  Nature  hath  not  formed!  Salute 
Holy  art  Thou,  the  Vast  and  the  Mighty  One!  Salute 
Lord  of  the  Light  and  of  the  Darkness!  Salute 
Hiero: 

Nothing  now  remains  but  to  partake  together  in  silence  of  the  Mystic  Repast  composed  of  the  symbols  of 
the  Four  Elements  and  to  remember  our  pledge  of  secrecy. 

All  are  seated. 

Hiero: 

Puts  down  his  Scepter  and  returns  the  Banner  of  the  East  to  its  place.  He  goes  to  the  West  of  the  Altar 
As  Hierophant  goes  to  West  of  altar  all  turn  west 

Hierophant  west  of  altar  facing  East  gives  the  saluting  sign  but  not  the  sign  of  silence  taking 
up  rose  says 

Hiero: 

1 invite  you  to  inhale  with  me  the  perfume  of  this  Rose,  as  a symbol  of  air.  Smells  Rose.  To  feel  with  me 
the  warmth  of  this  sacred  Fire.  Spreads  his  hands  over  it.  To  eat  with  me  this  Bread  and  Salt  as  types  of 
Earth.  Dips  bread  in  Salt  and  eats.  And  finally  to  drink  with  me  this  Wine,  the  consecrated  emblem  of 
Elemental  Water.  Makes  a Cross  with  the  Cup  and  drinks.  Hierophant  puts  down  the  Cup  between  the 
Cross  and  Triangle.  He  conies  East  of  the  Altar  from  South  and  faces  West. 

Hiero: 

Replies  with  the  sign  of  Silence 
Hiero: 

Returns  to  place  on  dais 

(If  no  chiefs  on  dais  go  to  outer  order  officers) 

Then  the  chiefs  on  dais  follow  in  order  of  seniority  Praemonstrator,  Cancellarius,  lmperator 
and  past  Hierophant.  From  East  to  North  West  of  altar  to  West  of  altar,  after  drinking  returns  cup  to 
altar  and  goes  South  returning  to  his/her  place  on  dais. 

Officers: 

Move  to  the  west  of  the  altar,  Officers  partake  in  the  following  order:  Hiereus,  Hegemon,  Stolistes, 
Dadouchos.  Sentinel,  Makes  a Cross,  with  cup  and  drinks,  and  returns  the  cup  to  the  altar.  Then 
passes  by  West  and  South  and  returns  to  their  places. 

Inner  Members  partake  in  order  of  seniority  of  admission.  The  Order  of  procedure  for  Outer 
members  is  Philosophus,  Practicus,  Theoricus,  Zelator,  Neophyte. 

Heg: 

Directs  neophyte  to  west  of  the  altar  and  returns  to  place. 

Neophytes: 

Makes  a cross,  Takes  cup  and  drinks,  and  returns  the  cup  to  the  altar.  Then  passes  by  West  and  south 
to  the  east  of  the  altar. 


22 


VOLUME  SIX 


Kerux: 

When  the  last  Neophyte  stands  East  of  the  Altar,  Kerux  comes  to  the  West,  exchanges  the  Signs  and 
partakes. 

Heg: 

Hegemon  directs  Neophyte  to  return  to  his  place  as  soon  as  Kerux  takes  the  Cup. 

Kerux: 

On  receiving  the  Cup,  drains  it,  inverts  it,  and  says: 

Kerux: 

It  is  finished!  ( Kerux  replaces  the  Cup  and  returns  to  his  place.) 

All  rise 
Hiero: 

(Knocks)  TETELESTAI! 

Hiereus: 

( Knocks ) 

Heg: 

(Knocks) 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  KHABS. 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks)  AM. 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  PEKHT. 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks)  KONX  . 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  OM. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  PAX. 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  LIGHT. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  IN. 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks)  EXTENSION. 

All  make  the  Signs  towards  the  Altar. 

Hiero: 

May  what  we  have  partaken  maintain  us  in  our  search  for  the  QUINTESSENCE,  the  Stone  of  the 
Philosophers.  True  Wisdom,  Perfect  Happiness,  the  SUMMUM  BONUM. 

Officers  remain  in  the  Temple  while  the  new  Neophyte  is  led  out  by  Kerux. 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


DISCUSSION  OF  THE  Z-DOCUMENTS 
By 

Y.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G 

These  three  document,  Z-l,  Z-2,  and  Z-3,  are  amongst  the  most  important  of  all  the 
instructions  issued  by  the  Golden  Dawn.  They  are  extensive  commentaries  on  the  Neophyte  Ritual. 
All  three  are  replete  with  the  most  profound  instruction  on  Magic  ever  written. 

As  I reflect  upon  what  I have  written  in  this  book  1 am  sure  that  I have  asserted  several  times 
that  this  particular  document  or  that  one  are  the  most  important  lessons  ever  released  within  the  Order. 
This  is  probably  most  correct.  All  the  instructions  handed  out  to  the  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor  are 
unequivocally  important  in  different  ways.  But  they  all  serve  as  the  foundation  of  the  magical  art. 
Throughout  the  years,  whenever  I have  casually  opened  the  book  to  any  page  of  these  Z documents,  I 
have  found  them  always  illuminating  - more  so  with  each  perusal  of  their  contents.  Their  ability  to 
illuminate  seems  inexhaustable.  And  for  this  reason,  I must  insist  that  the  student  pay  special  attention 
to  them,  studying  them  carefully  over  a long  period  of  time  rather  than  trying  to  read  them  as  he  would 
a novel  or  some  informative  non-fictional  piece  of  work. 

They  have  all  the  earmarks  of  having  been  written  by  S.L.  Mathers  - G.H.  Frater  D.  D.C.F. 
More  than  anything  else  I know,  they  exemplify  the  profundities  of  which  he  was  capable.  Admittedly 
some  of  the  material  is  trite,  elaborating  the  usual  claptrap  of  secret  societies  - such  as  grips,  steps  and 
passwords.  But  these  trivia  comprise  but  a small  segment  of  these  fantastic  papers.  The  remaining 
material  is  of  such  a nature  that  I feel  compelled  to  warn  the  casual  reader  not  to  be  casual  in  dealing 
with  this  type  of  information.  This  is  "heavy"  material  which  needs  to  be  savored,  thought  about  and 
reflected  upon. 

For  example,  in  the  description  of  the  accoutrements  of  the  Hierophant,  one  is  inclined  to  gloss 
it  over  as  merely  explanatory  of  the  Temple  equipment.  It  is  really  much  more  than  that.  Some 
formulae  of  magic  were  concealed  and  simultaneously  revealed  in  the  most  prosaic  and  trite 
explanations  and  descriptions.  Do  not  gloss  over  them. 

From  the  standpoint  of  practical  magical  technique,  I suggest  a frequent  review  of  the 
segment  entitled  "The  Symbolism  of  the  Opening."  One  practical  formula  after  another  is  described 
here,  not  abstractly  but  concretely  as  a technical  exercise  available  to  the  alert  and  eager  aspirant. 

Some  of  these  served  as  seminal  ideas  which  came  to  full  term  in  the  development  of  the 
Middle  Pillar  technique.  The  rudiments  are  all  Golden  Dawn.  But  each  rudiment  is  scattered  here  and 
there,  throughout  several  documents.  However,  one  does  not  really  have  to  search  too  hard  for  them. 
They  are  prolific  - presenting  themselves  as  alive  and  vital.  Over  a period  of  time,  as  one  uses  them, 
the  seeds  sprout  and  grow  into  dynamic 


24 


VOLUME  SIX 


constituents  of  one's  wake-a-day  consciousness  as  though  waiting  to  be  found  and 

used. 

For  example,  there  was  the  rudimentary  Middle  Pillar  technique  as  given  in  one  of 
the  early  Portal  papers.  The  technique  of  circulating  the  energies  awakened  or  released  by 
this  method  of  meditation  are  to  be  found  in  part  in  this  particular  paper.  It  is  only  a hint, 
however.  It  becomes  rounded  out  and  expanded  by  applying  that  idea  to  the  formula  of  the 
Tree  of  Life  projected  into  a sphere  (See  painting  of  this  in  coloured  plate  section  of  this 
work),  producing  four  individual  columns  around  a central  invisible  pillar.  The  roots  of  all 
this  will  be  found  in  the  Microcosm  paper  and  elsewhere,  but  in  its  fullness  in  those 
documents  at  the  end  of  the  Tarot  section. 

The  attributions  of  the  planets,  signs  and  houses  are  standard  astrological  notions 
within  the  Golden  Dawn  system.  Its  employment  as  described,  for  example,  in  The 
Foundations  of  Practical  Magic  Aquarian  Press,  1979  depends  entirely  on  how  well  one  has 
understood  and  used  some  of  the  principles  of  that  magical  exercise. 

The  technique  has  been  borrowed  without  acknowledgment  by  a number  of  writers 
who  believed  it  to  be  a magical  technique  borrowed  from  the  Order.  In  a large  sense,  they 
were  plagiarizing,  because  in  no  place  has  this  method  been  described  except  in  the  barest 
outline  form.  Yet  in  a sense  which  they  never  realized,  because  they  were  actually 
plagiarizing,  it  is  predicated  fundamentally  and  unequivocally  on  the  whole  basic  structure 
of  the  Golden  Dawn  system  itself.  And  it  is  that  system  that  hostile  critics  claim  was  the 
end  result  of  research  done  by  McGregor  Mathers  in  the  British  Museum.  If  taken  by  itself, 
that  is  pure  nonsense.  I defy  any  critic  to  demonstrate  where  and  how  these  methods  were 
borrowed  from  books  or  manuscripts  in  the  British  Museum. 

In  The  Symbolism  of  the  Opening,  there  is  given  first  the  method  of  vibrating 
Divine  Names.  It  is  called  The  Vibratory  Formula  of  the  Middle  Pillar.  Again,  I must  urge 
the  student  to  study  it  carefully.  It  has  been  repeated  and  elaborated  upon  in  several 
different  places  in  these  texts.  But  you  must  study  it,  practise  it  and  master  it. 

Once  mastered,  it  should  be  used  in  all  instances  where  the  Divine  Names  are 
employed.  These  are  in  the  practice  of  the  Pentagram  Ritual,  lesser  and  greater,  the 
Hexagram  Ritual,  lesser  and  greater,  and  the  Middle  Pillar  technique  itself,  (Note,  some  of 
these  rituals  are  described  in  the  Regardie  Tapes  Falcon  Press,  1982).  These  tapes  can  help 
enormously  in  the  mastery  of  the  various  ceremonials  themselves  - such  as  the 
consecration  of  the  Elemental  Weapons,  and  so  on.  The  method  of  pronouncing  and 
vibrating  the  Names  is  clearly  indicated  on  the  Tapes  so  as  to  eliminate  all  possibilities  of 
doubt  and  confusion. 

Some  of  the  techniques  too  are  infinitely  valuable  during  the  process  of  skrying. 
Safeguards  are  required  here  to  protect  one  from  delusion  and  self-deception  - all  too  easy 
in  this  method.  The  use  of  the  Banners  of  the  East  and  West  may  also  be  used  as  devices  to 
open  up  areas  that  one  would  not  suspect  could  be  opened,  so  securely  are  they  guarded. 
The  assumption  of  God-forms  described  in  several  of  these  documents,  (and  depicted  on 
some  of  the  beautiful  paintings  in  the  coloured  plate  section  of  this  book),  which  comment 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


on  the  Neophyte  Ritual  is  another  method  not  merely  of  protecting  oneself,  but  of 
ensuring  compliance  with  one's  demands  for  knowledge  and  self-knowledge,  and  for 
gaining  admission  to  sanctuaries  whose  existence  one  may  suspect  - but  that  is  all. 

This  practice  needs  to  be  used  often  to  gain  skill.  The  descriptions  given  in  the  text 
are  brief  enough  as  well  as  long  enough.  That  is  really  all  it  requires.  Once  having  made  its 
acquaintance,  nothing  remains  but  to  practice  it  day  in  and  day  out  until  it  is  more  or  less 
easy.  One  of  the  best  books  that  gives  practically  all  the  needed  God-forms  is  the  paper- 
back reprint  by  Dover  of  Wallis  Budge's  The  Gods  of  the  Egyptians.  This  is  not  only  a 
storehouse  of  Egyptian  information,  but  the  dozens  of  full  page  plates  of  the  Gods  is 
without  rival  in  our  literature.  At  the  same  time  for  a better  descriptions  of  the  colours 
employed  in  the  God  Forms,  you  should  consult  the  colour  plates  in  this  book. 

The  section  in  Z-l  describing  the  God  forms  used  in  the  Neophyte  initiation  will  be 
more  than  amplify  what  has  just  been  stated.  Those  colors  used  in  the  first  edition  of 
Budge's  book  by  Methuen,  decades  ago,  are  accurate  enough  in  terms  of  how  they  were 
once  depicted.  But  for  practical  uses,  the  colour  scheme  shown  in  this  work  is  to  be 
preferred.  Never  let  it  be  forgotten  that  one  of  the  basic  themes  of  the  Order  is  that  colors 
are  not  symbols  of  forces,  but  are  forces  themselves.  So  do  study  the  coloring  system  and 
apply  it  to  the  plain  photos  of  the  Dover  edition. 

There  are  hosts  of  fertile  ideas  in  these  papers.  I do  not  wish  to  elaborate  all  of  them 
in  any  way.  Something  must  be  left  to  the  ingenuity  and  intuition  of  the  reader  and  student. 
But  what  I have  had  to  say  here  should  be  adequate  to  keep  him  alert  when  perusing  this 
most  valuable  and  suggestive  series  of  texts. 

One  of  the  many  documents  given  to  advanced  members  of  the  Zelator  Adeptus 
Minor  grade  was  Z-2,  an  elaborate  analysis  of  the  Neophyte  grade.  The  breakdown  into  a 
couple  of  dozen  specific  points,  is  in  itself,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  astute  tabulations  1 
know.  Like  so  many  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  papers,  it  fills  me  with  enormous  respect  for 
whoever  was  responsible  for  the  analysis.  The  entire  elaboration  was  classified  into  five 
major  divisions,  corresponding  to  the  Pentagrammaton.  In  addition,  that  section  attributed 
to  Shin  was  broken  down  still  further  into  three  other  segments  so  that  all  told  there  were 
seven  formulae  for  magical  working. 

Z-2  was  one  of  the  papers  that  was  destined  for  elimination  from  the  curriculum  of 
the  Stella  Matutina,  a most  grave  error.  My  guess  is  that  it  was  being  eliminated  because 
it  represented  some  exceedingly  hard  work  on  the  part  of  the  celebrant. 

The  application  of  Z-2  to  the  process  of  Divination  was  never  quite  clear  to  me. 
Rather  than  follow  the  procedure  of  the  Stella  Matutina,  I have  decided  to  include  it  here 
because  some  students  will  be  able  to  determine  on  their  own  what  its  sphere  of  usefulness  is. 
If  the  student  follows  the  general  rule  laid  down  for  all  the  other  subdivisions  of  this 
important  document,  he  may  arrive  at  some  format  pleasing  and  useful  to  him  personally. 


26 


VOLUME  SIX 


The  Alchemy  section  for  long  years  bothered  me,  for  I was  not  able  to  make  much  sense  from 
it.  Francis  King,  in  his  book  Ritual  Magic  in  England  reproduces  a paper  based  on  this  section.  It  is 
most  interesting,  but  raises  an  enormous  number  of  questions  relating  to  procedure,  laboratory 
technique  and  allied  topics.  I had  some  correspondence  with  Mr.  King  about  this  matter  but  nothing 
came  of  it. 

Sometime  during  the  mid-thirties  some  alchemical  processes  became  more  or  less  clear  to  me, 
which  made  more  intelligible  some  of  the  sections  in  Z-2.  Years  later,  after  a meeting  with  Frater 
Albertus  of  the  Paracelsus  Research  Society,  new  insights  developed. 

A ritual  exemplifying  the  rules  laid  down  in  Z-2  will  be  found  immediately  following  the 
various  initiatory  rituals. 

So  far  as  rituals  relating  to  evocation  and  similar  types  of  operations  are  concerned  some 
students  found  out  that  they  are  long,  tedious,  repetitive  and  very  wearying.  I must  confess  they  are. 
Success  in  working  them  depends  on  patience,  enthusiasm,  and  above  all  on  the  ability  to  stir  the 
magical  energy  into  activity.  The  rituals  themselves  will  not  yield  much  satisfaction  until  and  unless 
the  student  has  either  some  inborn  theurgic  ability  or  has  developed  it  through  the  practice  of  the 
Middle  Pillar  technique.  The  method  awakens  the  magical  centers  or  chakras  within  the  psycho- 
spiritual make-up  of  the  student,  a process  of  prime  importance,  because  without  the  power  derived 
from  these  centers  or  chakras,  the  ritual  remains  merely  a ritual  - a mere  formality,  dead  and  without 
power.  The  Middle  Pillar  should  be  practiced  for  several  months,  or  even  longer,  until  the  student 
becomes  thoroughly  conscious  of  the  energy  coursing  through  the  organism  at  his  willed  command  in 
the  three  methods  of  circulation.  The  sensation  is  unmistakable,  becoming  wholly  physical  if 
steadfastly  persisted  in.  It  is  the  sine  qua  non  of  magical  success. 

When  some  skill  has  been  gained  in  this  method,  further  attention  can  be  given  to  the 
Vibratory  Formula  of  the  Middle  Pillar,  described  in  several  places  in  this  work.  The  success  of  any 
of  these  operations  is  wholly  dependent  on  these  two  methods,  the  Middle  Pillar  and  the  Vibratory 
Formula,  and  they  should  be  given  a great  deal  of  attention. 

When  this  material  was  first  published  many  years  ago,  one  of  the  gratifying  rewards  was 
hearing  from  a few  students  who  evidently  had  experimented  with  the  method.  One  in  particular 
stands  out.  I would  have  liked  to  acknowledge  his  contribution,  but  for  the  moment  he  wishes  to 
remain  anonymous.  His  letter  gives  evidence  of  the  fact  that  he  has  experimented  with  the  method  and 
found  it,  for  him,  wanting,  so  that  he  felt  obliged  to  clarify  the  procedure  and  simplify  it.  His 
complaint  was  that  the  whole  ceremony  took  approximately  two  hours,  at  the  end  of  which  time  he 
felt  exhausted  and  was  unable  to  retain  any  kind  of  "divine  intoxication"  which  is  the  sine  qua  non  of 
success.  The  method  which  he  then  devised  is  as  follows: 

"The  magician,  standing  in  the  circle,  performs  a banishing  ritual.  (For  the  evocation  of  an 
elemental,  the  lesser  Pentagram  ritual  will  suffice.  If  evoking  a more  powerful  spirit,  use  the  Supreme 
Banishing  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram,  or  Hexagram,  as  appropriate.) 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


" A suitable  God  is  invoked.  Assumption  of  God  form.  Vibratory  Formula  of  the  Middle 
Pillar,  and  Mystic  Circumambulation  being  employed.  This  is  continued  until  presence  of  the 
Divine  Force  is  unmistakable;  one  ought  to  have  the  impression  of  acting  on  behalf  of  the  God. 

"The  Sigil  of  the  Spirit  is  now  consecrated  and  placed  in  the  Triangle  outside  the  Circle. 
The  element,  planetary,  or  zodiacal  force  consonant  with  the  nature  of  the  spirit  is  invoked  using 
the  proper  Pentagram  or  Hexagram,  Divine  Names,  etc. 

"Invocation  of  the  God  is  recommenced  and  continued  until  identity  with  the  God  is 
achieved.  At  this  point  the  actual  evocation  may  begin.  (The  Magician  will  hereafter  be  referred 
to  as  the  God.) 

"The  God  extends  His  consciousness  up  to  the  spirit's  plane  (not  unlike  skrying), 
formulates  its  sigil  therein,  calls  its  name. 

"The  Spirit  is  commanded  to  manifest  in  the  Triangle,  and  as  the  God  brings  his 
consciousness  back  into  the  body  of  the  magician  in  the  circle,  the  spirit  manifests  in  the  triangle. 

"When  he  has  sworn  allegiance,  and  answered  all  questions  put  to  him,  he  is  commanded  to 
return  to  his  own  plane.  The  God  again  extends  His  consciousness  up  to  the  plane,  bringing  the 
spirit  with  Him.  When  they  have  both  arrived,  the  Sigil  previously  formulated  is  banished. 

"He  returns  to  the  Circle,  then  partially  withdraws  from  the  magician,  who  again  becomes 
aware  that  he  is  acting  on  behalf  of  the  God. 

"The  element,  planetary  or  zodiacal  force  previously  invoked,  is  now  banished.  The 
magician  then  performs  a general  banishing  ritual  and  quits  the  circle." 

The  writer  of  the  above  method  adds  a note,  which  in  my  opinion  is  worth  paying  close 
attention  to;  it  coincides  with  my  own  view  as  expressed  elsewhere. 

"There  is  reason  for  concern  that  some  students  may  misinterpret  certain  of  Crowley's 
magical  writings.  For  example  in  Magick  in  Theory  and  Practice,  Chapter  IX,  p.  69,  he  writes: 

'The  peculiar  mental  excitement  required  may  even  be  aroused  by  the  perception  of  the 
absurdity  of  the  process,  and  the  persistence  in  it,  as  when  Frater  Perdurabo... recited  From 
Greenland's  Icy  Mountains  and  obtained  his  result."' 

"Now  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  ego,  excited  to  the  proper  pitch,  is  capable  of  placing  such 
a strain  in  the  Astral  Light  as  to  cause  some  sort  of  manifestation,  perhaps  even  that  of  the  spirit  it 
was  desired  to  evoke  (but  more  likely  a phantasm  masquerading  as  such).  But  without  the  presence 
of  the  Divine  Force,  such  a being,  once  evoked,  cannot  be  controlled,  and  there  is  no  effective 
means  of  banishing  it. 

"Depending  on  the  nature  of  the  spirit,  and  the  degree  of  its  manifestation,  it  is  likely  that 
the  spiritual  progress  of  the  magician  is  at  an  end  - at  least  as  far  as  his  current  incarnation  is 
concerned." 


28 


VOLUME  SIX 


While  on  this  topic  of  magical  training  and  developing  the  powers  latent  in  man,  to 
which  the  Order  is  dedicated,  I would  like  to  quote  extensively  from  another  source. 
Though  the  Theosophical  Society  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  dead,  there  is  some  pertinent 
material  in  The  Hall  of  Magic  Mirrors  by  Victor  Endersby  that  should  set  most  of  us  back  on 
our  heels  and  induce  some  deep  reflection.  The  tradition  is  a different  one  but  facts  are 
facts  regardless  of  where  they  come  from.  In  discussing  the  problem  of  psychical 
phenomena  produced  by  Madame  Blavatasky,  Mr.  Endersby  had  this  to  say: 

"The  crux  of  the  whole  problem  is  that  the  whole  movement  had  to  ba'ance  on  a 
razor  edge  between  credence  and  incredulity;  and  a net  had  to  be  spread  whose  meshes 
were  designed,  with  infinite  care,  to  catch  fish  of  just  a certain  size  and  shape. 
Unfortunately,  even  a Mahatma  could  not  design  one  which  would  exclude  a particularly 
odd  member  of  the  species  - the  one  known  variously  as 
crackpot,  "screwball, ""oddball, "etc.  These  have  been  especially  effective  shields,  but 
also  especially  irritating  ones.  Some  of  the  most  enthusiastic  devotees  of  Theosophy 
would  convince  any  sane-minded  man  in  five  minutes  that  there  could  not  possibly  be 
anything  real  in  it. 

However,  let  us  not  be  too  hard  on  the  gentle  crackpot.  After  all,  through  the  ages 
most  human  progress  has  depended  on  his  existence  - he  is  the  one  who  is  reckless  enough 
to  crack  the  ice  with  no  thought  of  consequences,  any  more  than  of  reason,  common  sense, 
and  facts.  Most  really  capable  and  competent  people  have,  by  those  qualities,  established  a 
position  in  the  world,  which  they  will  not  readily  risk  in  pioneering.  The  risks  have  in  the 
main  to  be  left  to  people  without  sense  enough  to  be  afraid,  and  they  serve  their  purpose  in 
their  odd  ways.  After  all,  some  of  them  have  made  quite  a splash  here  and  there. 
Considering  him  from  the  purely  personal  aspect,  what  else  would  you  call  Einstein?  Or  a 
certain  famous  gentleman  who  chooses  to  immure  himself  in  an  African  jungle  and  lavish 
his  gifts  on  a minor  collection  of  ignorant  natives? 

We  will  examine  the  meshes  of  the  occult  net. 

The  Mahatma  said  that  chelaship  was  impossible  to  anyone  who  harbors  any 
tendency  toward  injustice,  even  unconsciously.  First  then,  do  you  love  scandal  and  ill  talk, 
unverified  and  onesided  about  others?  If  so,  you  are  out,  and  the  famous  scandals  will 
take  you  out. 

Are  you  a coward,  afraid  to  stand  up  for  justice?  If  so,  you  will  keep  silent  in  the  face 
of  slander.  That  will  take  you  out.  There  is  no  room  for  cowards  beyond  the  veil. 

Do  you  still  have  the  eccelesiastic  notion  that  perfection  and  infallibility  can  exist  in 
an  ever-evolving  universe?  Then  your  misconception  of  the  universe  is  profound,  probably 
incurable;  a few  scientific,  grammatical,  or  philosophical  errors  will  set  you  out  on  the 
doorstep. 

Are  you  a materialist,  unable  to  grasp  even  the  possibility  that  the  real  universe  is 
not  a material  one?  Then  the  phenomena  will  be  self-evident  fraud  to  you,  and  that  will  take 
you  out.  You  will  also  get  out  with  your  sanity,  because  the  escape  hatches  have  been  left; 
and  the  victims  will  be  fairly  safe  from  harm  because,  instead  of  striking  matches,  you  will 
only  laugh  at  them. 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Do  you  wish  to  set  yourself  up  to  be  admired  as  an  Infallible  One  by  acquiring  much 
knowledge?  Then  the  revelation  of  fallible  possibilities  on  the  parts  of  the  highest  "authorities"  you 
know  - if  you  are  a Theosophist  - will  set  you  back  a little,  and  possibly  out.  And  if  you  twist  and 
squirm  in  the  effort  to  prove  the  infallibility  of  your  gods,  that  identifies  your  degree  of  intellectual 
honesty.  That's  the  sort  of  thing  they  want  to  know. 

Are  you  prejudiced  racially  and  nationally?  Then  the  program  of  universal  brotherhood  will 
steer  you  far  away. 

Are  you  narrow-minded,  fastidious,  finicky,  and  given  to  taking  the  form  for  the  substance'? 
Then  a little  swearing  will  take  care  of  you. 

Are  you  mentally  lazy?  Then  the  effort  to  untangle  those  peculiar  books  and  make  sense  of  them 
will  take  adequate  care  of  you.  No  mentally  lazy  person  can  understand  the  occult  world,  let  alone  the 
visible  one. 

Are  your  interests  narrow?  Then  the  help  you  will  need  from  all  available  human  sources  won't 
be  there  - you  are  uninterested  in  too  much  of  it.  You  will  find  yourself  in  one  blind  alley  or  the  other. 

Do  you  think  the  kingdom  of  heaven  can  be  gained  by  physical  observances,  and  that  a meat- 
eater  is  a lower  animal?  Then  a few  eggs  in  gravy  will  eliminate  you  nicely;  if  that  won't  do  it,  a few 
packs  of  cigarettes  will  take  care  of  it.  Especially  when  you  find  that  one  of  the  Mahatmas  smoked  a 
pipe. 

It  has  often  been  asked,  why,  with  all  the  resources  and  wisdom  of  the  Mahatmas,  was  H.P.B. 
left  to  struggle  in  poverty  and  illness?  As  we  have  seen,  she  was  accused  -though  no  individual  ever  came 
forward  to  complain  - of  getting  rich  on  the  credulity  of  her  followers.  Suppose  she  had  been  richly 
maintained?  Moncure  Conway,  the  missionary,  mentions  her  "richly  furnished"  apartment.  No  doubt 
the  furniture  had  been  expensive  - before  her  wealthy  friends  gave  it  to  her  when  they  got  new  stuff. 
She  never  starved  for  food,  that  is  certain;  she  always  did  have  enough  - just  enough  - money  - to  do 
what  she  had  to  do.  As  to  health  - we  can  lay  that  in  part  to  herself.  She  did  break  all  the  rules  of  diet,  and 
possibly  not  all  because  of  thyroid  trouble  and  the  rest;  she  was  a hardheaded,  intractable  party.  She 
knew  all  the  rules.  If  she  chose  to  break  them,  the  Mahatmas  couldn't  do  anything  about  it.  Of  course, 
they  could  have  "fired"  her,  but  then  she  was  the  only  agent  able  to  do  what  they  had  in  mind. 

The  queer  thing  about  these  questions  is  that  they  are  often  from  Christians,  whose  own  God 
left  his  only  Son  to  live  in  hardship  and  poverty  and  die  in  horror. 

If  you  have  to  test  out  the  morals  of  a tribe  of  savages,  to  see  whether  it  is  ready  to  haul  its  snout 
out  of  the  mud  and  take  the  road  to  civilization,  a good  way  is  to  drop  a sick  child  of  the  same  race  but 
another  tribe  into  the  village  compound.  They  may  kill  it  with  a club,  throw  it  on  the  fire,  torture  it  with 
sharp  sticks,  eat  it,  or  pick  it  up  and  care  for  it.  If  they  do  anything  but  the  last,  you  leave  - quickly  - and 
wait  a hundred  years  until  the  tribe  has  outgrown  its  land  and  impinged  on  the  territory  of  a bigger  one. 
It  may  then  appreciate 


30 


VOLUME  SIX 


help.  Meanwhile,  if  you  are  interested  in  technical  educability,  you  string  a phone  wire  and 
show  that  you  can  talk  over  it.  The  natives  decide  that  you  are  a god.  You  show  then  that  you  can't 
crawl  through  the  wire  - you're  a fake.  You  then  decide  that  they  will  have  to  mature  a little  before 
you  try  to  teach  them  electricity.  They  will  grasp  one  use  of  the  wire  very  quickly;  it  will  make  good 
necklaces,  when  cut  up,  or  good  slugs  for  the  blunderbuss. 

Of  course,  in  order  to  get  their  attention  in  the  first  place,  you  have  to  either  shoot  some  of 
them,  or  display  a cigarette  lighter.  If  they  have  not  caught  on  by  the  time  the  fluid  runs  out,  you  run 
out  too.  And  stay  a long  time." 


31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Z-2 


THE  FORMULAE  OF  THE  MAGIC  OF  LIGHT 
AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PRACTICAL  WORKING  OF  THE  Z-2  FORMULAE 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  S.R.M.D. 

In  the  Ritual  of  the  Enterer  are  shadowed  forth  symbolically,  the  beginning  of  certain  of  the 
Formulae  of  the  Magic  of  Light.  For  this  Ritual  betokeneth  a certain  Person,  Substance  or  Thing,  which  is 
taken  from  the  dark  World  of  Matter,  to  be  brought  under  the  operation  of  the  Divine  Formulae  of  the 
Magic  of  Light. 

Also  herein  are  contained  the  commencements  of  all  formulae  of  Evocation,  the  development  of 
which  is  further  shown  in  the  Inner  knowledge  of  the  succeeding  grades  of  the  Outer  Order.  In  the  true 
knowledge  of  the  application  of  the  Symbolism  of  the  “Enterer”  lies  the  entrance  to  the  knowledge  of 
Practical  Magic.  Therefore  are  all  the  Formulae  drawn  from  the  Ritual  classed  under  Five  several  heads, 
according  unto  the  Letters  of  the  name  Yeheshuah. 

For  to  the  Letter  Yod  and  the  element  of  Fire  belong  the  works  of  Ceremonial  Magic,  as  the 
evocations  of  the  Spirits  of  the  Elements,  etc. 

Unto  the  First  Heh  the  consecration  and  charging  of  Telesmata,  and  the  production  of  Natural 
Phenomena,  as  storms,  earthquakes,  etc. 

Unto  the  Great  Holy  Letter  Shin  are  allotted  Three  classes  of  works.  Spiritual  development, 
transformations  and  invisiblity. 

Unto  the  Letter  Vau  Divination  in  all  its  branches;  and  the  art  of  making  the  Link  between  the 
subject  of  the  work  and  the  process  of  divination. 

And  to  the  Final  Heh  the  works  and  operations  of  the  Art  of  Alchemy,  the  order  of  its  processes 
and  Transmutation. 

INDEX  FOR  GENERAL  REFERENCE 

TO  THE  ENTERER  CEREMONY  OF  THE  NEOPHYTE  GRADE 

1. A-  The  Ceremony  itself.  The  place  of  the  Temple. 

2.  B - The  Hierophant. 

3.  C - The  Officers. 

4.  D - The  Candidate. 

5.  E - The  Ceremony  of  Opening. 

6.  F - Hierophant  states  that  he  has  received  a Dispensation  from  Second  Order,  and  commands 
Hegemon  to  prepare  Candidate.  Candidate  prepared.  Speech  of  Hegemon. 

7.  G - Admission  of  Candidate.  First  barring  by  Kerux.  First  baptism  of  the  Candidate  with  Water 
and  Fire. 


32 


VOLUME  SIX 


8.  H - The  Candidate  is  conducted  to  the  foot  of  the  Altar.  Hierophant  asks  “Wherefore  hast  thou 
come,  etc.”  Candidate  replies  “I  seek  the  hidden  Light,  etc.” 

9.1-  Candidate  is  asked  whether  he  is  willing  to  take  the  Obligation.  He  assents;  and  is  instructed 
now  to  kneel  at  the  Altar. 

10.  J - Administration  of  the  Obligation,  and  raising  the  Neophyte  from  the  kneeling  position. 

11. K-  Candidate  is  placed  in  the  North.  Oration  of  the  Hierophant,  “The  Voice  of  my  Higher 
Self,  etc.”  Hierophant  commands  the  mystic  circumambulation  in  the  Path  of  Darkness. 

12.  L - Procession.  Candidate  barred  in  South.  Second  Baptism  of  Water  and  Fire.  Speech  of 
Hegemon.  Allowing  the  Candidate  to  proceed. 

13.  M - Hoodwink  slipped  up.  Challenge  of  Hiereus.  Speech  of  Hegemon.  Speech  of  Hiereus. 
Candidate  re-veiled  and  passed  on. 

14.  N - Circumambulation.  Barred  in  North.  Third  Baptism.  Speech  of  Hegemon  allowing 
Candidate  to  approach  unto  the  Gate  of  the  East. 

15.  0 - Hoodwink  slipped  up  for  the  second  time.  Hierophant  challenges.  Hegemon  answers  for 
Candidate.  Speech  of  Hierophant.  Candidate  passes  on. 

16.  P - Candidate  led  to  West  of  Altar.  Hierophant  advances  by  the  Path  of  Samekh.  Officers 
form  the  Triangle.  Prayer  of  Hierophant. 

17.  Q - Candidate  rises.  Hierophant  addresses  him,  “Long  hast  thou  dwelt  in  darkness. 

Quit  the  Night  and  seek  the  Day.”  Hoodwink  finally  removed  Sceptres  and  Swords  joined.  “We 
receive  thee,  etc.”  Then  the  Mystic  Words. 

18.  R - Hierophant  indicates  Lamp  of  Kerux.  He  commands  that  the  Candidate  be  conducted  to 
the  East  of  the  Altar.  He  orders  Hiereus  to  bestow  signs,  etc.  Hiereus  places  Candidate  between  Pillars. 
Signs  and  words.  He  orders  the  fourth  and  final  consecration  to  take  place. 

19.  5 - Hegemon  removes  rope  and  invests  Candidate  with  his  Insignia.  Hiereus  then  ordains  the 
Mystic  Circumambulation  in  the  Path  of  Light. 

20.  T - Hierophant  lectures  on  the  Symbols.  Proclamation  by  Kerux. 

21.  U - Hierophant  commands  Hiereus  to  address  Candidate. 

22.  V - Hierophant  addresses  Neophyte  on  subject  of  study. 

23.  W - Blood  produced.  Speech  of  Kerux.  Hiereus’  final  caution. 

24.  X - The  closing  takes  place. 

I-YOD 

EVOCATION 


A - The  Magic  Circle. 

B - The  Magician,  wearing  the  Great  Lamen  of  the  Hierophant;  and  his  scarlet  Robe.  A Pentacle, 
whereon  is  engraved  the  Sigil  of  circle  and  cross  as  shown  on  the  Hierophant’s  Lamen. 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


C - The  Names  and  Formulae  to  be  employed. 

D - The  Symbol  of  the  whole  evocation. 

E - The  Construction  of  the  circle  and  the  placing  of  all  the  symbols,  etc.,  employed,  in  the  places 
properly  alloted  to  them;  so  as  to  represent  the  interior  of  a G.D.  Temple  in  the  Enterer,  and  the 
purification  and  consecration  of  the  actual  piece  of  ground  or  place,  selected  for  the  performance  of  the 
Evocation. 

F - The  Invocation  of  the  Fligher  Powers.  Pentacle  formed  of  three  concentric  bands,  name  and 
sigil  therein,  in  proper  colours,  is  to  be  bound  thrice  with  a cord,  and  shrouded  in  black,  thus  bringing  into 
action  a Blind  Force  to  be  further  directed  or  differentiated  in  the  Process  of  the  Ceremony. 
Announcement  aloud  of  the  Object  of  the  working;  naming  the  Spirit  or  Spirits,  which  it  is  desired  to 
evoke.  This  is  pronounced  standing  in  the  centre  of  the  Circle  and  turning  towards  the  quarter  from  which 
the  Spirit  will  come. 

G - The  Name  and  Sigil  of  the  Spirit,  wrapped  in  a black  cloth,  or  covering,  is  now  placed  within 
the  circle,  at  the  point  corresponding  to  the  West,  representing  the  Candidate.  The  consecration  or 
Baptism  by  water  and  fire  of  the  Sigil  then  takes  place,  and  the  proclamation  in  a loud  and  firm  voice  of 
the  spirit  (or  spirits)  to  be  evoked. 

H - The  veiled  Sigil  is  now  to  be  placed  at  the  foot  of  the  Altar.  The  Magician  then  calls  aloud  the 
Name  of  the  Spirit,  summoning  him  to  appear,  stating  for  what  purpose  the  spirit  is  evoked:  what  is 
desired  in  the  operation;  why  the  evocation  is  performed  at  this  time,  and  finally  solemnly  affirming  that 
the  Spirit  shall  be  evoked  by  the  Ceremony. 

I - Announcement  aloud  that  all  is  prepared  for  the  commencement  of  the  actual  Evocation.  If  it 
be  a good  spirit  the  Sigil  is  now  to  be  placed  within  the  white  Triangle  on  the  Altar,  the  Magician  places 
his  left  hand  upon  it,  raises  in  his  right  hand  the  magical  Implement  employed  (usually  the  Sword)  erect; 
and  commences  the  Evocation  of  the  Spirit  (give  name)  to  visible  appearance.  The  Magician  stands  in  the 
Place  of  the  Hierophant  during  the  Obligation,  irrespective  of  the  particular  quarter  of  the  Spirit.  But  if  the 
nature  of  that  Spirit  be  evil,  then  the  Sigil  must  be  placed  without  and  to  the  West  of  the  White  Triangle 
and  the  Magician  shall  be  careful  to  keep  the  point  of  the  Magical  Sword  upon  the  centre  of  the  Sigil. 

J - Now  let  the  Magician  imagine  himself  as  clothed  outwardly  with  the  semblance  of  the  form  of 
the  Spirit  to  be  evoked,  and  in  this  let  him  be  careful  not  to  identify  himself  with  the  spirit,  which  would 
be  dangerous;  but  only  to  formulate  a species  of  mask,  worn  for  the  time  being.  And  if  he  knows  not  the 
symbolic  form  of  the  Spirit,  then  let  him  assume  the  form  of  an  Angel  belonging  unto  the  same  class  of 
operation.  This  form  being  assumed,  then  let  him  pronounce  aloud,  with  a firm  and  solemn  voice,  a 
convenient  and  potent  oration  and  exorcism  of  the  Spirit  unto  visible  appearance.  At  the  conclusion  of 
this  exorcism,  taking  the  covered  sigil  in  his  left  hand,  let  him  smite  it  thrice  with  the  flat  blade  of  the 
Magic  Sword.  Then  let  him  raise  on  high  his  arms  to  their  utmost  stretch,  holding  in  his  left  hand  the 
veiled  sigil,  and  in  his  right  the  Sword  of  Art  erect.  At  the  same  time  stamping  thrice  upon  the  ground 
with  his  right  foot. 


34 


VOLUME  SIX 


K - The  veiled  and  corded  sigil  is  then  to  be  placed  in  the  Northern  part  of  the  Hall  at  the  edge  of 
the  Circle,  and  the  Magician  employs  the  oration  of  the  Hierophant,  from  the  throne  of  the  East, 
modifying  it  slightly,  as  follows:  “The  voice  of  the  Exorcism  said  unto  me,  Let  me  shroud  myself  in 
darkness,  peradventure  thus  may  I manifest  myself  in  Light,  etc.”  The  Magician  then  proclaims  aloud  that 
the  Mystic  Circumambulation  will  take  place. 

L - The  Magician  takes  up  the  Sigil  in  his  left  hand  and  circumambulates  the  Magic  Circle  once, 
then  passes  to  the  South  and  halts.  He  stands  (having  placed  the  sigil  on  the  ground)  between  it  and  the 
West,  and  repeats  the  oration  of  the  Kerux.  And  again  consecrates  it  with  Water  and  Fire.  Then  takes  it  in 
his  hand,  facing  westward,  saying,  “Creature  of.  . .,  twice  consecrate,  thou  mayest  approach  the  gate  of 
the  West.” 

M - The  Magician  now  moves  to  the  West  of  the  Magical  Circle,  holds  the  Sigil  in  his  left  hand 
and  the  sword  in  his  right,  faces  South  West,  and  again  astrally  masks  himself  with  the  form  of  the  Spirit, 
and  for  the  first  time  partially  opens  the  covering  of  the  Sigil,  without  however  entirely  removing  it.  He 
then  smites  it  once  with  the  flat  blade  of  the  sword,  saying,  in  a loud,  clear,  and  firm  voice:  “Thou  canst 
not  pass  from  concealment  unto  Manifestation,  save  by  the  virtue  of  the  Name  Elohim.  Before  all  things 
are  the  Chaos  and  the  Darkness,  and  the  Gates  of  the  Land  of  Night,  lam  He  Whose  Name  is  Darkness.  1 
am  the  Great  One  of  the  Path  of  the  Shades.  1 am  the  Exorcist  in  the  midst  of  the  Exorcism.  Appear  thou 
therefore  without  fear  before  me,  so  pass  thou  on.”  He  then  reveils  the  Sigil. 

N - Take  the  Sigil  to  the  North,  circumambulating  first,  halt,  place  Sigil  on  the  ground,  stand 
between  it  and  the  East,  repeat  the  oration  of  the  Kerux,  again  consecrate  with  Fire  and  Water.  Then  take 
it  up,  face  North,  and  say  “Creature  of.  . . thrice  consecrate,  thou  mayest  approach  the  Gate  of  the  East.” 

O - Repeat  Section  M in  North  East.  Magician  then  passes  to  East,  takes  up  Sigil  in  left  and 
Sword  in  right  hand.  Assumes  the  Mask  of  the  Spirit  form,  smites  the  Sigil  with  the  Lotus  Wand  or 
Sword,  and  says,  “Thou  canst  not  pass  from  concealment  unto  manifestation  save  by  virtue  of  the  name 
YHVH.  After  the  Formless  and  the  Void  and  the  Darkness,  then  cometh  the  knowledge  of  the  Light.  I am 
that  Light  which  riseth  in  the  Darkness.  1 am  the  Exorcist  in  the  midst  of  the  Exorcism.  Appear  thou 
therefore  in  visible  form  before  me,  for  I am  the  Wielder  of  the  Forces  of  the  Balance.  Thou  hast  known 
me  now,  so  pass  thou  on  to  the  Cubical  Altar  of  the  Universe!” 

P - He  then  recovers  Sigil  and  passes  to  Altar,  laying  it  thereon  as  before  shown.  He  then  passes 
to  the  East  of  the  Altar,  holding  the  sigil  and  sword  as  already  explained.  Then  doth  he  rehearse  a most 
potent  Conjuration  and  invocation  of  the  Spirit  unto  visible  appearance,  using  and  reiterating  all  the 
Divine,  Angelic,  and  Magical  Names  appropriate  to  this  end,  neither  omitting  the  signs,  seals,  sigils, 
lineal  figures,  signatures  and  the  like  from  that  conjuration. 

Q - The  Magician  now  elevates  the  covered  Sigil  towards  heaven,  removes  the  veil  entirely, 
leaving  it  yet  corded,  crying  with  a loud  voice,  “Creature  of.  . . long  hast  thou  dwelt 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


in  darkness.  Quit  the  Night  and  seek  the  Day.”  He  then  replaces  it  upon  the  Altar,  holds  the  Magical 
Sword  erect  above  it,  the  pommel  immediately  above  the  centre  thereof,  and  says,  “By  all  the  Names, 
Powers,  and  Rites  already  rehearsed,  1 conjure  thee  thus  unto  visible  appearance.”  Then  the  Mystic 
Words. 

R - Saith  the  Magician,  “As  Light  hidden  in  the  Darkness  can  manifest  therefrom,  so  shalt  thou 
become  manifest  from  concealment  unto  manifestation.”  He  then  takes  up  the  Sigil,  stands  to  East  of 
Altar,  and  faces  West.  He  shall  then  rehearse  a long  conjuration  to  the  powers  and  spirits  immediately 
superior  unto  that  one  which  he  seeks  to  invoke,  that  they  shall  force  him  to  manifest  himself  unto  visible 
appearance.  He  then  places  the  Sigil  between  the  Pillars,  himself  at  the  East  facing  West,  then  in  the  Sign 
of  the  Enterer  doth  he  direct  the  whole  current  of  his  will  upon  the  Sigil.  Thus  he  continueth  until  such 
time  as  he  shall  perceive  his  Will  power  to  be  weakening,  when  he  protects  himself  from  the  reflex  of  the 
current  by  the  Sign  of  Silence,  and  drops  his  hands.  He  now  looks  towards  the  Quarter  that  the  Spirit  is  to 
appear  in,  and  he  should  now  see  the  first  signs  of  his  visible  manifestation.  If  he  be  not  thus  faintly 
visible,  let  the  Magician  repeat  the  conjuration  of  the  Superiors  of  the  Spirit,  from  the  place  of  the  Throne 
in  the  East.  And  this  conjuration  may  be  repeated  thrice,  each  time  ending  with  a new  projection  of  Will 
in  the  sign  of  the  Enterer,  etc.  But  if  at  the  third  time  of  repetition  he  appeareth  not,  then  be  it  known  that 
there  is  an  error  in  the  working.  So  let  the  Master  of  Evocations  replace  the  Sigil  upon  the  Altar,  holding 
the  Sword  as  usual.  Thus  doing,  let  him  address  a humble  prayer  unto  the  Great  Gods  of  Heaven  to  grant 
unto  him  the  force  necessary  to  correctly  complete  that  evocation.  He  is  then  to  take  back  the  Sigil  to 
between  the  Pillars,  and  repeat  the  former  processes,  when  assuredly  that  Spirit  will  begin  to  manifest,  but 
in  a misty  and  ill-defined  form.  (But  if,  as  is  probable,  the  Operator  be  naturally  inclined  unto  evocation, 
then  might  that  Spirit  perchance  manifest  earlier  in  the  Ceremony  than  this.  Still,  the  Ceremony  is  to  be 
performed  up  to  this  point,  whether  he  be  there  or  no.)  Now  as  soon  as  the  Magician  shall  see  the  visible 
manifestation  of  that  Spirit’s  presence,  he  shall  quit  the  station  of  the  Hierophant,  and  consecrate  afresh 
with  Water  and  with  Fire,  the  Sigil  of  the  evoked  spirit. 

S - Now  doth  the  Master  of  Evocations  remove  from  the  Sigil  the  restricting  cord,  and  holding  the 
freed  Sigil  in  his  left  hand,  he  smites  it  with  the  flat  blade  of  his  sword,  exclaiming,  “By  and  in  the  Names 
of  ...  I do  invoke  upon  the  the  power  of  perfect  manifestation  into  visible  appearance.”  He  then 
circumambulates  the  circle  thrice  holding  the  sigil  in  his  Right  hand. 

T - The  Magician,  standing  in  the  place  of  the  Hierophant,  but  turning  towards  the  place  of  the 
Spirit  and  fixing  his  attention  thereon,  now  reads  a potent  Invocation  of  the  Spirit  unto  visible  appearance, 
having  previously  placed  the  sigil  on  the  ground,  within  the  circle,  at  the  quarter  where  the  Spirit  appears. 
This  Invocation  should  be  of  some  length;  and  should  rehearse  and  reiterate  the  divine  and  other  Names 
consonant  with  the  working.  That  Spirit  should  now  become  fully  and  clearly  visible,  and  should  be  able 
to  speak  with  a direct  voice,  if  consonant  with  his  nature.  The  Magician  then  proclaims  aloud  that  the 


36 


VOLUME  SIX 


Spirit  (give  name)  hath  been  duly  and  properly  evoked  in  accordance  with  the  sacred  rites.  U - The 
Magician  now  addresses  an  Invocation  unto  the  Lords  of  the  plane  of  the  spirit  to  compel  him  to  perform 
that  which  the  Magician  shall  demand  of  him. 

V - The  Magician  carefully  formulates  his  demands,  questions,  etc.,  and  writes  down  any  of  the 
answers  that  may  be  advisable.  The  Master  of  Evocations  now  addresses  a Conjuration  unto  the  Spirit 
evoked,  binding  him  to  hurt  or  injure  naught  connected  with  him,  or  his  assistants,  or  the  place.  And  that 
he  deceive  in  nothing,  and  that  he  fail  not  to  perform  that  which  he  hath  been  commanded. 

W - He  then  dismisses  that  Spirit  by  any  suitable  form,  such  as  those  used  in  the  higher  grades  of 
the  Outer.  And  if  he  will  not  go,  then  shall  the  Magician  compel  him  by  forces  contrary  to  his  nature.  But 
he  must  allow  a few  minutes  for  the  Spirit  to  dematerialise  the  body  in  which  he  hath  manifested,  for  he 
will  become  less  and  less  material  by  degrees.  And  note  well  that  the  Magician  (or  his  companions  if  he 
have  any)  shall  never  quit  the  circle  during  the  process  of  evocation,  or  afterwards,  till  the  Spirit  hath 
quite  vanished.  In  some  cases,  and  with  some  constitutions,  there  may  be  danger  arising  from  the  Astral 
conditions,  and  currents  established,  and  without  the  actual  intention  of  the  Spirit  to  harm,  although  if  of  a 
low  nature,  he  would  probably  endeavour  to  do  so.  Therefore,  before  the  commencement  of  the 
Evocation,  let  the  operator  assure  himself  that  everything  which  may  be  necessary,  be  properly  arranged 
within  the  circle.  But  if  it  be  actually  necessary  to  interrupt  the  Process,  then  let  him  stop  at  that  point, 
veil  and  re-cord  the  Sigil  if  it  have  been  unbound  or  uncovered,  recite  a License  to  Depart  or  a Banishing 
Formula,  and  perform  the  Lesser  Banishing  Rituals  both  of  the  Pentagram  and  Hexagram.  Thus  only  may 
he  in  comparative  safety  quit  the  circle. 

Note — Get  the  Spirit  into  a White  Triangle  outside  the  midheaven,  then  shall  he  speak  the  truth  of 
necessity. 


II-HEH 

CONSECRATION  OF  TALISMANS 

A - The  place  where  the  operation  is  done. 

B - The  Magical  Operator. 

C - The  Forces  of  Nature  employed  and  attracted. 

D - The  Telesma  or  material  basis. 

E - In  Telesmata,  the  selection  of  the  Matter  to  form  the  Telesma;  the  preparation  and 
arrangement  of  the  place.  The  drawing  and  forming  of  the  body  of  the  Telesma.  In  Natural  Phenomena 
the  preparation  of  the  operation;  the  formation  of  the  Circle,  and  the  selection  of  the  material  basis,  such 
as  a piece  of  Earth,  a Cup  of  Water,  a Flame  of  Fire,  a Pentacle,  or  the  like. 

F - The  invocation  of  the  highest  divine  forces,  winding  a black  cord  round  the  Telesma  or 
material  basis,  covering  the  same  with  a black  veil,  and  initiating  the  blind  force  therein.  Naming  aloud 
the  Nature  of  the  Telesma  or  Operation. 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


G - The  Telesma  or  material  Basis  is  now  placed  towards  the  West,  and  duly  consecrated  with 
Water  and  Fire.  The  purpose  of  the  operation,  and  the  effect  intended  to  be  produced  is  then  to  be 
rehearsed  in  a loud  and  clear  voice. 

FI  - Placing  the  Talisman  or  material  basis  at  the  foot  of  the  Altar,  state  aloud  the  object  to  be 
attained,  solemnly  asserting  that  it  will  be  attained,  and  the  reason  thereof. 

I - Announcement  aloud  that  all  is  prepared  and  in  readiness,  either  for  charging  the  Telesma,  or 
for  the  Commencement  of  the  Operation  to  induce  the  natural  Phenomena.  Place  a good  Telesma  or 
Material  Basis  within  the  White  Triangle  on  the  Altar.  Place  bad  Telesma  to  the  West  of  same,  holding 
the  sword  erect  in  the  right  hand  for  a good  purpose,  or  its  point  upon  the  centre  of  the  Triangle  for  evil. 

J - Now  follows  the  performance  of  an  Invocation  to  attract  the  desired  spirit  to  the  Telesma  or 
material  basis,  describing  in  the  air  above  it  the  lineal  figures  and  sigils,  etc.,  with  the  appropriate 
instrument.  Then,  taking  up  the  Telesma  in  the  left  hand,  let  him  smite  it  thrice  with  the  flat  of  the  blade 
of  the  Sword  of  Art.  Then  raise  it  in  the  left  hand  (holding  erect  and  aloft  the  Sword  in  the  right  hand 
stamping  thrice  upon  the  Earth  with  the  right  foot). 

K - The  Talisman  or  Material  basis  is  to  be  placed  towards  the  North,  and  the  Operator  repeats 
the  Oration  of  the  Hierophant  to  the  Candidate.  “The  voice  of  the  Exorcism  said  unto  me,  Let  me  shroud 
myself  in  darkness,  peradventure  thus  shall  I manifest  myself  in  light.  I am  the  only  being  in  an  abyss  of 
Darkness.  From  the  Darkness  came  I forth  ere  my  birth,  from  the  silence  of  a primal  sleep.  And  the  Voice 
of  Ages  answered  unto  my  soul,  Creature  of  Talismans,  the  Light  shineth  in  the  darkness,  but  the 
darkness  comprehendeth  it  not.  Let  the  Mystic  Circumambulation  take  place  in  the  path  of  Darkness  with 
the  symbolic  light  of  Occult  Science  to  lead  the  way.” 

L - Then,  taking  up  the  Light  (not  from  the  Altar)  in  right  hand,  circumambulate.  Now  take  up 
Telesmata  or  Material  Basis,  carry  it  round  the  circle,  place  it  on  the  ground  due  South,  then  bar  it,  purify 
and  consecrate  with  Water  and  Fire  afresh,  lift  it  with  left  hand,  turn  and  facing  West,  say,  “Creature  of 
Talismans,  twice  consecrate,  thou  mayest  approach  the  gate  of  the  West.” 

M - He  now  passes  to  the  West  with  Telesmata  in  left  hand,  faces  S.E.,  partly  unveils  Telesmata, 
smites  it  once  with  the  flat  blade  of  the  Sword,  and  pronounces,  “Thou  canst  not  pass  from  concealment 
unto  manifestation,  save  by  virtue  of  the  name  Elohim.  Before  all  things  are  the  Chaos  and  the  Darkness, 
and  the  Gates  of  the  Land  of  Night.  I am  He  whose  Name  is  Darkness.  I am  the  great  One  of  the  Paths  of 
the  Shades.  I am  the  Exorcist  in  the  midst  of  the  Exorcism.  Take  on  therefore  manifestation  without  fear 
before  me,  for  I am  he  in  whom  fear  in  Not.  Thou  hast  known  me  so  pass  thou  on.”  This  being  done,  he 
replaces  the  veil. 

N - Then  pass  round  the  Circle  with  Telesmata,  halt  due  North,  place  Talisman  on  ground,  bar, 
purify,  and  consecrate  again  with  Water  and  with  Fire,  and  say,  “Creature  of  Talismans,  thrice  consecrate, 
thou  mayest  approach  the  Gate  of  the  East.”(H  old  Talisman  aloft.) 


38 


VOLUME  SIX 


O - Hold  Telemata  in  left  hand,  Lotus  Wand  in  right,  assume  Hierophant’s  form.  Partly 
unveil  Talisman,  smite  with  flat  of  sword,  and  say,  “Thou  canst  not  pass  from  concealment  unto 
manifestation  save  by  virtue  of  the  name  YHVH.  After  the  formless  and  the  Void  and  the 
Darkness,  then  cometh  the  knowledge  of  the  Light.  I am  that  Light  which  riseth  in  darkness.  I am 
the  Exorcist  in  the  midst  of  the  Exorcism.  Take  on  therefore  manifestation  before  me,  for  I am 
the  wielder  of  the  forces  of  the  Balance.  Thou  hast  known  me  now  so  pass  thou  on  unto  the 
Cubical  Altar  of  the  Universe.” 

P - He  then  recovers  Talisman  or  Material  Basis,  passes  on  to  the  Altar,  laying  it  thereon 
as  before  shewn.  He  then  passes  to  East  of  Altar,  hold  left  hand  over  Talisman,  and  sword  over  it 
erect.  Then  doth  he  rehearse  a most  potent  conjuration  and  invocation  of  that  Spirit  to  render 
irresistable  this  Telesmata  or  Material  Basis,  or  to  render  manifest  this  natural  phenomenon  of.  . . 
using  and  reiterating  all  the  Divine,  Angelic,  and  Magical  Names  appropriate  to  this  end,  neither 
omitting  the  signs,  seals,  sigils,  lineal  figures,  signatures,  and  the  like  from  that  conjuration. 

Q - The  Magician  now  elevates  the  covered  Telesma  or  Material  Basis  towards  Heaven, 
then  removes  the  Veil  entirely,  yet  leaving  it  corded,  crying  with  a loud  voice.  “Creature  of 
Talismans,  (or  Material  Basis),  long  hast  thou  dwelt  in  darkness.  Quit  the  Night  and  seek  the 
Day.”  He  then  replaces  it  on  the  Altar,  holds  the  Magical  Sword  erect  above  it,  the  Pommel 
immediately  above  the  centre  thereof,  and  says,  “By  all  the  Names,  Powers,  and  rites  already 
rehearsed,  I conjure  upon  thee  power  and  might  irresistible.”  Then  say  the  Mystic  Words. 

R - Saith  the  Magician,  “As  the  Light  hidden  in  darkness  can  manifest  therefrom,  so  shalt 
thou  become  irresistible.”  He  then  takes  up  the  Telesmata,  or  the  Material  Basis,  stands  to  East 
of  the  Altar,  and  faces  West.  Then  shall  he  rehearse  a long  conjuration  to  the  Powers  and  Spirits 
immediately  superior  unto  that  one  which  he  seeks  to  invoke,  to  make  the  Telesmata  powerful. 
Then  he  places  the  Talisman  or  Material  Basis  between  the  Pillars,  himself  at  the  East,  facing 
West,  then  in  the  sign  of  the  Enterer,  doth  he  project  the  whole  current  of  his  Will  upon  the 
Talisman.  Thus  he  continueth  until  such  time  as  he  shall  perceive  his  will  power  weakening, 
when  he  protects  himself  by  the  Sign  of  Silence,  and  then  drops  his  hands.  He  now  looks  toward 
the  Talisman,  and  a flashing  Light  or  Glory  should  be  seen  playing  and  flickering  on  the 
Talisman  or  Material  Basis,  and  in  the  Natural  Phenomena  a slight  commencement  of  the 
Phenomena  should  be  waited  for.  If  this  does  not  occur,  let  the  Magician  repeat  the  Conjuration 
of  the  Superiors  from  the  place  of  the  Throne  of  the  East.  And  this  conjuration  may  be  repeated 
thrice,  each  time  ending  with  a new  projection  of  Will  in  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer,  etc.  But  if  at  the 
third  time  of  repetition  the  Talisman  or  Material  Basis  does  not  flash,  then  be  it  known  that  there 
is  an  error  in  the  working.  So  let  the  Master  of  Evocations  replace  the  Talisman  or  Material 
Basis,  upon  the  Altar  holding  the  Sword  as  usual,  and  thus  doing,  let  him  address  an  humble 
prayer  unto  the  Great  Gods  of  Heaven  to  grant  unto  him  the  force  necessary  to  correctly 
complete  the  work.  He  is  then  to  take  back  the  Talisman,  to  between  the  Pillars,  and  repeat  the 
former 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


process,  when  assuredly  the  Light  will  flash.  Now  as  soon  as  the  Magician  shall  see  the  Light,  he  shall 
quit  the  station  of  the  Hierophant  and  consecrate  afresh  with  water  and  with  fire. 

S - This  being  done,  let  the  Talisman  or  Material  Basis  have  the  cord  removed  and  smite  it  with 
the  Sword  and  proclaim  “By  and  in  the  Names  of.  . . I invoke  upon  thee  the  power  of  .“  He  then 
circumambulates  thrice,  holding  the  Talisman  or  Material  Basis  in  his  right  hand. 

T - Then  the  Magician,  standing  in  the  place  of  the  Hierophant,  but  fixing  his  gaze  upon  the 
Talisman  or  Material  Basis  which  should  be  placed  on  the  ground  within  the  Circle,  should  now  read  a 
potent  invocation  of  some  length,  rehearsing  and  reiterating  the  Divine  and  other  Names  consonant  with 
the  working.  The  Talisman  should  now  flash  visibly,  or  the  Natural  Phenomena  should  definitely 
commence.  Then  let  the  Magician  proclaim  aloud  that  the  Talisman  has  been  duly  and  properly  charged, 
or  the  Natural  Phenomena  induced. 

U -The  Magician  now  addresses  an  Invocation  unto  the  Lords  of  the  plane  of  the  Spirit  to  compel 
him  to  perform  that  which  the  Magician  requires. 

V - The  Operator  now  carefully  formulates  his  demands,  stating  clearly  what  the  Talisman  is 
intended  to  do,  or  what  Natural  Phenomena  he  seeks  to  produce. 

W - The  Master  of  Evocations  now  addresses  a conjuration  unto  the  Spirit,  binding  him  to  hurt  or 
injure  naught  connected  with  him,  or  his  assistants,  or  the  place.  He  then  dismisses  the  Spirits  in  the  name 
of  Yehovashah  and  Yeheshuah,  but  wraps  up  Talisman  first,  and  no  Banishing  Ritual  shall  be  performed, 
so  as  not  to  discharge  it,  and  in  the  case  of  Natural  Phenomena  it  will  usually  be  best  to  state  what 
duration  is  required.  And  the  Material  Basis  should  be  preserved  wrapped  in  white  linen  or  silk  all  the 
time  that  the  Phenomenon  is  intended  to  act.  And  when  it  is  time  for  it  to  cease,  the  Material  Basis  - if 
water,  is  to  be  poured  away;  if  Earth,  ground  to  powder  and  scattered  abroad;  if  a hard  substance  as  a 
metal,  it  must  be  decharged,  banished  and  thrown  aside;  if  a flame  of  fire,  it  shall  be  extinguished;  or  if  a 
vial  containing  air,  it  shall  be  opened  and  after  that  well  rinsed  out  with  pure  water. 

III.  SHIN 

ALEPH  - IN  VISIBILITY 

A - The  Shroud  of  Concealment. 

B - The  Magician. 

C - The  Guards  of  Concealment. 

D - The  Astral  Light  to  be  moulded  into  the  Shroud. 

E - The  Equilibriation  of  the  Symbols  in  the  Sphere  of  Sensation. 

F - The  Invocation  of  the  Higher;  the  placing  of  a Barrier  without  the  Astral  Form;  the  clothing  of 
the  same  with  obscurity  through  the  proper  invocation. 


40 


VOLUME  SIX 


G - Formulating  clearly  the  idea  of  becoming  Invisible.  The  formulating  of  the  exact  distance  at 
which  the  shroud  should  surround  the  Physical  Body.  The  consecration  with  Water  and  Fire,  so  that  their 
vapour  may  begin  to  form  a basis  for  the  shroud. 

H - The  beginning  to  formulate  mentally  a shroud  of  concealment  about  the  operator.  The 
affirmation  aloud  of  the  reason  and  object  of  the  working. 

I - Announcement  that  all  is  ready  for  the  commencement  of  the  operation.  Operator  stands  in  the 
place  of  the  Hierophant  at  this  stage,  placing  his  left  hand  in  the  centre  of  the  white  triangle  and  holding 
in  his  right  the  Lotus  Wand  by  the  black  end,  in  readiness  to  concentrate  around  him  the  shroud  of 
Darkness  and  Mystery.  In  this  operation  as  in  the  two  others  under  the  dominion  of  Shin,  a Pentacle  or 
Telesma  suitable  to  the  matter  in  hand,  may  be  made  use  of,  the  which  is  treated  as  is  directed  for 
Telesmata. 

J - The  Operator  now  recites  an  Exorcism  of  a Shroud  of  Darkness  to  surround  him  and  render 
him  invisible,  and,  holding  the  Wand  by  the  black  end,  let  him,  turning  round  thrice  completely, 
formulate  triple  circle  around  him,  saying,  “In  the  Name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  etc.,  I conjure  thee, 
0 Shroud  of  Darkness  and  of  Mystery,  that  thou  encirclest  me  so  that  I may  become  invisible,  so  that 
seeing  me,  men  see  me  not,  neither  understand,  but  that  they  may  see  the  thing  that  they  see  not,  and 
comprehend  not  the  thing  that  they  behold!  So  mote  it  be.” 

K - Now  move  to  the  North,  face  East,  and  say,  “I  have  set  my  feet  in  the  North,  and  have  said  I 
will  shroud  myself  in  Mystery  and  concealment.”  Then  repeat  the  Oration,  “The  Voice  of  my  Higher 
Soul,  etc.,”  and  then  command  the  Mystic  Circumambulation. 

L - Move  round  as  usual  to  the  South,  halt  formulating  thyself  as  shrouded  in  darkness,  on  the 
right  hand  the  Pillar  of  Fire,  and  on  the  left  the  Pillar  of  Cloud,  but  reaching  from  Darkness  to  the  Glory 
of  the  Heavens. 

M - Now  move  from  between  the  Pillars  thou  hast  formulated  to  the  West,  face  West,  and  say, 
“Invisible  I cannot  pass  by  the  Gate  of  the  Invisible  save  by  the  virtue  of  the  name  of  ‘Darkness.”  Then 
formulating  forcibly  about  thee  the  shroud  of  Darkness,  say,  “Darkness  is  my  Name,  and  concealment, 
lam  the  Great  One  Invisible  of  the  Paths  of  the  Shades.  I am  without  fear,  though  veiled  in  darkness,  for 
within  me,  though  unseen  is  the  magic  of  Light.” 

N - Repeat  process  in  L. 

O - Repeat  process  in  M but  say,  “I  am  Light  shrouded  in  darkness.  I am  the  wielder  of  the  forces 
of  the  balance.” 

P - Now,  concentrating  mentally  about  thee  the  Shroud  of  Concealment,  pass  to  the  West  of  the 
Altar  in  the  place  of  the  Neophyte,  face  East,  remain  standing,  and  rehearse  a conjuration  by  suitable 
Names  for  the  formulating  of  a shroud  of  Invisibility  around  and  about  Thee. 

Q - Now  address  the  Shroud  of  Darkness,  thus:  “Shroud  of  Concealment.  Long  hast  thou  dwelt 
concealed.  Quit  the  Light,  that  thou  mayest  conceal  me  before  men.”  Then  carefully  formulate  the  shroud 
of  concealment  around  thee  and  say,  “I  receive  thee  as  a covering  and  as  a guard.”  Then  the  Mystic 
Words. 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


R - Still  formulating  the  shroud,  say,  “Before  all  Magical  manifestation  cometh  the  knowledge  of 
the  hidden  light.”  Then  move  to  the  Pillars  and  give  the  signs  and  steps,  words,  etc.  With  the  Sign  of  the 
Enterer,  project  now  thy  whole  will  in  one  great  effort  to  realise  thyself  actually  fading  out,  and  becoming 
invisible  to  mortal  eyes;  and  in  doing  this  must  thou  obtain  the  effect  of  thy  physical  body  actually 
gradually  becoming  partially  invisible  to  thy  natural  eyes,  as  though  a veil  or  cloud  were  formulating 
between  it  and  thee  (and  be  very  careful  not  to  lose  thy  self-control  at  this  point).  But  also  at  this  point  is 
there  a certain  Divine  Exstasis  and  an  exaltation  desirable,  for  herein  is  a sensation  of  an  exalted  strength. 

S - Again  formulate  the  shroud  as  concealing  thee  and  enveloping  thee,  and  thus  wrapped  up 
therein,  circumambulate  the  circle  thrice. 

T - Intensely  formulating  the  Shroud,  stand  at  the  East  and  proclaim,  “Thus  have  I formulated 
unto  myself  a shroud  of  Darkness  and  of  Mystery,  as  a concealment  and  guard.” 

U - Now  rehearse  an  invocation  of  all  the  Divine  Names  of  Binah,  that  thou  mayest  retain  the 
Shroud  of  Darkness  under  thy  own  proper  control  and  guidance. 

- State  clearly  to  the  shroud  what  it  is  thy  desire  to  perform 
therewith. 

W - Having  obtained  the  desired  effect,  and  gone  about  invisible,  it  is  required  that  thou  shouldst 
conjure  the  Powers  of  the  Light  to  act  against  that  shroud  of  Darkness  and  Mystery  so  as  to  disintegrate  it, 
lest  any  force  seek  to  use  it  as  a medium  for  an  obsession,  etc.  Therefore  rehearse  a conjuration  as 
aforesaid,  and  then  open  the  shroud  and  come  forth  out  of  the  midst  thereof,  and  then  disintegrate  that 
shroud,  by  the  use  of  a conjuration  to  the  forces  of  Binah  to  disintegrate  and  scatter  the  particles  thereof, 
but  affirming  that  they  shall  again  be  readily  attracted  at  thy  command.  But  on  no  account  must  that 
shroud  of  awful  Mystery  be  left  without  such  disintegration,  seeing  that  it  would  speedily  attract  an 
occupant  which  would  become  a terrible  vampire  praying  upon  him  who  had  called  it  into  being.  And 
after  frequent  rehearsals  of  this  operation,  the  thing  may  almost  be  done  “per  Motem.” 

MEM 

TRANSFORMATIONS 

A - The  Astral  Form. 

B - The  Magician. 

C - The  Forces  used  to  alter  the  Form. 

D - The  Form  to  be  taken. 

E - The  Equilibriation  of  the  Symbolism  in  the  Sphere  of  Sensation. 

F - Invocation  of  the  Higher.  The  definition  of  the  Form  required  as  a delineation  of  blind  forces, 
and  the  awakening  of  the  same  by  its  proper  formulation. 

G - Formulating  clearly  to  the  mind  the  Form  intended  to  be  taken.  The  Restriction  and 


42 


VOLUME  SIX 


Definition  of  this  as  a clear  form  and  the  actual  baptism  by  Water  and  by  Fire  with  the  Order  Name  of  the 
Adept. 

H - The  actual  Invocation  aloud  of  the  form  desired  to  be  formulated  before  you,  the  statement  of 
the  Desire  of  the  Operator  and  the  reason  thereof. 

I - Announcement  aloud  that  all  is  now  ready  for  the  operation  of  the  Transformation  of  the 
Astral  Body.  The  Magician  mentally  places  the  form  as  nearly  as  circumstances  permit  in  the  position  of 
the  Enterer,  himself  taking  the  place  of  the  Hierophant,  holding  his  Wand  by  the  black  portion  ready  to 
commence  the  Oration  aloud. 

J - Let  him  now  repeat  a powerful  exorcism  of  the  shape  into  which  he  desires  to  transform 
himself,  using  the  Names,  etc.,  belonging  to  the  Plane,  Planet,  or  other  Eidolon,  most  in  harmony  with  the 
shape  desired.  Then  holding  the  Wand  by  the  black  End,  and  directing  the  flower  over  the  head  of  the 
form,  let  him  say,  “In  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  Arise  before  me,  0 Form  of.  . . into  which  I 
have  elected  to  transform  myself.  So  that  seeing  me  men  may  see  the  thing  that  they  see  not,  and 
comprehend  not  the  thing  they  behold.” 

K - The  Magician  saith,  “Pass  toward  the  North,  shrouded  in  darkness,  0 Form  of.  into  which  I 
have  elected  to  transform  myself.”  Then  let  him  repeat  the  usual  Oration  from  the  Throne  of  the  East. 
Then  command  the  Mystic  circumambulation. 

L - Now  bring  the  Form  around  to  the  South,  arrest  it,  and  formulate  it  there,  standing  between 
two  great  Pillars  of  Fire  and  Cloud.  Purify  it  with  Water  and  by  Fire,  by  placing  these  elements  on  either 
side  of  the  Form. 

M - Passes  to  West,  face  South  East,  formulate  the  form  before  thee,  this  time  endeavouring  to 
render  it  physically  visible.  Repeat  speeches  of  Fliereus  and  Hegemon. 

N - Same  as  L. 

0 - Same  as  M. 

P - Pass  to  the  East  of  Altar,  formulating  the  Form  as  near  in  the  position  of  the  Neophyte  as  may 
be.  Now  address  a solemn  invocation  and  conjuration  by  Divine  Names,  etc.,  appropriate  to  render  the 
form  fitting  for  thy  Transformation  therein. 

Q - Remain  East  of  Altar,  address  the  Form  “Child  of  Earth,  etc.,”  endeavoring  now  to  see  it 
physically.  Then  at  the  words,  “We  receive  Thee,  etc.”  he  draws  the  form  towards  him  so  as  to  envelop 
him,  being  careful  at  the  same  time  to  invoke  the  Divine  Light  by  the  rehearsal  of  the  Mystic  Words. 

R - Still  keeping  himself  in  the  form  of  the  Magician  say,  “Before  all  Magical  Manifestation 
cometh  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Light.”  He  then  moves  to  the  Pillars  and  gives  Signs,  etc., 
endeavoring  with  the  whole  force  of  his  Will  to  feel  himself  actually  and  physically  in  the  shape  of  the 
Form  desired.  And  at  this  point  he  must  see  as  if  in  a cloudy  and  misty  manner  the  outline  of  the  form 
enshrouding  him,  though  not  yet  completely  and  wholly  visible.  When  this  occurs,  but  not  before,  let  him 
formulate  himself  as  standing  between  the  two  vast  Pillars  of  Fire  and  Cloud. 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


S - He  now  again  endeavours  to  formulate  the  Form  as  if  visibly  enshrouding  him;  and  still, 
astrally,  retaining  the  form,  he  thrice  circumambulates  the  place  of  working. 

T - Standing  at  the  East,  let  him  thoroughly  formulate  the  shape,  which  should  now  appear 
manifest,  and  as  if  enshrouding  him,  even  to  his  own  vision;  and  then  let  him  proclaim  aloud,  “Thus  have 
I formulated  unto  myself  this  Transformation.” 

U - Let  him  now  invoke  all  the  Superior  Names,  etc.,  of  the  Plane  appropriate  to  the  Form  that  he 
may  retain  it  under  his  proper  control  and  guidance. 

V - He  states  clearly  to  the  Form  what  he  intends  to  do  with  it. 

W - Similar  to  the  former  W section  on  Invisibility,  save  that  the  conjurations,  etc.,  are  to  be 
made  to  the  appropriate  plane  of  the  form  instead  of  to  Binah. 

SHIN 

SPIRITUAL  DEVELOPMENT 

A - The  Sphere  of  Sensation. 

B - The  Augoeides. 

C - The  Sephiroth,  etc.  employed. 

D - The  Aspirant,  or  Natural  Man. 

E - The  Equilibriation  of  the  Symbols. 

F - The  Invocation  of  the  Higher.  The  limiting  and  controlling  of  the  lower  and  the  closing  of  the 
material  senses,  to  awaken  the  spiritual. 

G - Attempting  to  make  the  Natural  Man  grasp  the  Higher  by  first  limiting  the  extent  to  which 
mere  intellect  can  help  him  herein;  then  by  purification  of  his  thoughts  and  desires.  In  doing  this  let  him 
formulate  himself  as  standing  between  the  Pillars  of  Fire  and  Cloud. 

H - The  Aspiration  of  the  whole  Natural  Man  towards  the  Higher  Self,  and  a prayer  for  Light  and 
guidance  through  his  higher  Self,  addressed  to  the  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

I-  The  Aspirant  affirms  aloud  his  earnest  prayer  to  obtain  Divine  Guidance,  kneels  at  the  West  of 
the  Altar;  in  the  position  of  the  Candidate  in  the  Enterer,  and  at  the  same  time  astrally  projects  his 
consciousness  to  the  East  of  the  Altar,  and  turns,  facing  his  body,  to  the  West,  holding  astrally  his 
physical  left  hand  with  his  astral  left.  And  he  raises  his  Astral  right  hand  holding  the  presentment  of  his 
Lotus  Wand  by  the  White  portion  thereof,  and  raised  in  the  Air  erect. 

J - Let  the  aspirant  now  slowly  recite  an  oration  unto  the  Gods  and  unto  the  Higher  Self  (as  that  of 
the  Second  Adept  in  the  entering  of  the  Vault)  but  as  if  with  his  Astral  Consciousness,  which  is  projected 
to  the  East  of  the  Altar.  If  at  this  point  the  Aspirant  should  feel  a sensation  as  of  faintness  coming  on,  let 
him  at  once  withdraw  the  projected  Astral  and  properly  master  himself  before  proceeding  any  further. 
Now  let  the  Aspirant,  concentrating  all  his  intelligence  in  his  body,  lay  the  blade  of  his  Sword  thrice  on 
the  Daath  point  of  his  neck,  and  pronounce  with  his  whole  will,  the  words  “So  help  me,  the  Lord  of  the 
Universe  and  my  own  higher  soul.”  Let  him  then  rise,  facing  East,  and  stand  for  a few 


44 


VOLUME  SIX 


moments  in  silence,  raising  his  left  hand  open,  and  his  right  holding  the  Sword  of  Art,  to  their  full  length 
above  his  head;  his  head  thrown  back,  his  eyes  lifted  upwards.  Thus  standing  let  him  aspire  with  his 
whole  will  towards  his  best  and  highest  Ideal  of  the  Divine. 

K - Then  let  the  Aspirant  pass  unto  the  North,  and  facing  East  solemnly  repeat  the  Oration  of  the 
Hierophant,  as  before  endeavouring  to  project  the  speaking  conscious  self  to  the  place  of  the  Hierophant 
(in  this  case  to  the  Throne  of  the  East.)  Then  let  him  slowly  mentally  formulate  before  him  the  Eidolon  of 
a Great  Angel  Torchbearer,  standing  before  him  as  if  to  lead  and  light  the  way. 

L - Following  it,  let  the  Aspirant  circumambulate,  and  pass  to  South,  then  let  him  halt,  and  aspire 
with  his  whole  will,  first  to  the  Mercy  side  of  the  Divine  Ideal,  and  then  to  the  Severity  thereof.  And  then 
let  him  imagine  himself  as  standing  between  two  great  Pillars  of  Fire  and  Cloud,  whose  bases  indeed  are 
buried  in  black  ever  rolling  clouds  of  darkness,  which  symbolises  the  chaos  of  the  World  of  Assiah,  but 
whose  summits  are  lost  in  glorious  light  undying,  penetrating  unto  the  White  Glory  of  the  Throne  of  the 
Ancient  of  Days. 

M - Now  doth  the  Aspirant  move  unto  the  West,  faces  S.E.,  and  repeats  both  the  speeches  of 
Hiereus  and  Hegemon. 

N - After  another  circumambulation,  the  Adept  aspirant  halts  at  the  South  and  repeats  the 
meditation  in  L. 

O - And  so  he  passes  unto  the  East,  and  repeats  alike  the  words  of  the  Hierophant  and  the 
Hegemon. 

P - And  so  let  him  pass  to  the  West  of  the  Altar,  ever  led  by  the  Angel  Torchbearer.  And  he 
projects  his  Astral,  and  he  implants  therein  his  consciousness,  and  his  body  kneels  what  time  his  soul 
passes  between  the  Pillars.  And  he  prayeth  the  Great  Prayer  of  the  Hierophant. 

Q - And  now  doth  the  Aspirant’s  Soul  re-enter  unto  his  gross  form;  and  he  dreams  in  Divine 
Exstasis  of  the  Glory  Ineffable  which  is  in  the  Bornless  beyond;and  so  meditating  doth  he  arise,  and  lifts 
to  the  Heavens  his  hands,  and  his  eyes,  and  his  hopes,  and  concentrating  his  Will  on  the  Glory,  low 
murmurs  he  the  Mystic  Words  of  Power. 

R - So  also  doth  he  presently  repeat  the  words  of  the  Hierophant  concerning  the  Lamp  of  the 
Kerux,  and  so  also  passeth  he  by  the  East  of  the  Altar  unto  between  the  Pillars;  and  standing  between 
them  (or  formulating  them  if  they  be  not  there  as  it  appears  unto  him)  so  raises  he  his  heart  unto  the 
Highest  Faith,  and  so  he  meditates  upon  the  highest  Godhead  he  can  dream  of.  Then  let  him  grope  with 
his  hands  in  the  darkness  of  his  ignorance,  and  in  the  Enterer  sign  invoke  the  Power  that  it  remove  the 
darkness  from  his  spiritual  vision.  So  let  him  then  endeavour  to  behold  before  him  in  the  Place  of  the 
Throne  of  the  East,  a certain  light  or  Dim  glory,  which  shapeth  itself  into  a Form.  And  this  can  be 
beholden  only  by  the  mental  vision.  Yet,  owing  unto  the  spiritual  exaltation  of  the  Adept,  it  may 
sometimes  appear  as  if  he  beheld  it  with  mortal  eye.  Then  let  him  withdraw  awhile  from  such 
contemplation  and  formulate  for  his  equilibriation  once  more  the  Pillars  of  the  Temple  of  Heaven. 


45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


S - And  so  again  doth  he  aspire  to  see  the  Glory  conforming  and  when  this  is  accomplished,  he 
thrice  circumambulates,  reverently  saluting  with  the  Enterer  the  Place  of  Glory. 

T - Now  let  the  Aspirant  stand  opposite  unto  the  Place  of  that  Light,  and  let  him  make  deep 
meditation  and  contemplation  thereon.  Presently  also  imagining  it  to  enshroud  and  envelope  him,  and 
again  endeavouring  to  identify  himself  with  its  Glory.  So  let  him  exalt  himself  in  the  likeness  of  an 
Eidolon  of  a colossal  Being,  and  endeavour  to  realise  that  this  is  the  only  True  Self,  and  that  the  Natural 
Man  is  as  it  were  the  base  and  throne  thereof,  and  let  him  do  this  with  due  and  meet  reverence  and  awe. 
And  therefore  he  shall  presently  proclaim  aloud  “Thus  at  length  have  I been  permitted  to  begin  to 
comprehend  the  form  of  my  Higher  Self.” 

U - Now  doth  the  Aspirant  make  entreaty  of  that  Augoeides  to  render  comprehensible  what  things 
may  be  necessary  for  his  instruction  and  comprehension. 

V - And  he  consults  It  in  any  matter  he  may  have  especially  sought  for  guidance  from  the 

Beyond. 

W - And  lastly,  let  the  Aspirant  endeavour  to  formulate  a link  between  the  Glory  and  his  self- 
hood; and  let  him  renew  his  obligation  of  purity  of  mind  before  it,  avoiding  in  this  any  tendency  to 
fanaticism  or  spiritual  pride.  And  let  the  Adept  remember  that  this  process  here  set  forth  is  on  no  account 
to  be  applied  to  endeavouring  to  come  in  contact  with  the  higher  soul  of  another.  Else  thus  assuredly  will 
he  be  led  into  error,  hallucination,  or  even  madness. 

IY-VAU 

DIVINATION 

A - The  Form  of  Divination. 

B - The  Diviner. 

C - The  Forces  acting  in  the  Divination. 

D - The  subject  of  the  Divination. 

E - The  preparation  of  all  things  necessary,  and  the  right  understanding  of  the  process  so  as  to 
formulate  a connecting  link  between  the  process  employed  and  the  Macrocosm. 

F - The  Invocation  of  the  Higher;  arrangement  of  the  scheme  of  divination  and  initiation  of  the 
forces  thereof. 

G - The  first  entry  into  the  matter.  First  assertion  of  limits  and  correspondences:  beginning  of  the 
working. 

H - The  actual  and  careful  formulation  of  the  question  demanded;  and  consideration  of  all  its 
correspondences  and  their  classifications. 

I - Announcement  aloud  that  all  the  correspondences  taken  are  correct  and  perfect;  the  Diviner 
places  his  hand  upon  the  instrument  of  Divination;  standing  at  the  East  of  the  Altar,  he  prepares  to  invoke 
the  forces  required  in  the  Divination. 


46 


VOLUME  SIX 


J - Solemn  invocation  of  the  necessary  spiritual  forces  to  aid  the  Diviner  in  the  Divination.  Then 
let  him  say,  “Arise  before  me  clear  as  a mirror,  0 magical  vision  requisite  for  the  accomplishment  of  this 
divination.” 

K - Accurately  define  the  term  of  the  question;  putting  down  clearly  in  writing  what  is  already 
known,  what  is  suspected  or  implied,  and  what  is  sought  to  be  known.  And  see  that  thou  verify  in  the 
beginning  of  the  judgment  that  part  which  is  already  known. 

L - Next  let  the  Diviner  formulate  clearly  under  two  groups  or  heads  (a)  the  arguments  for,  (b)  the 
arguments  against,  the  success  of  the  subject  of  one  divination,  so  as  to  be  able  to  draw  a preliminary 
conclusion  therefrom  on  either  side. 

M - First  formulation  of  a conclusive  judgment  from  the  premises  already  obtained. 

N - Same  as  section  L. 

0 - Formulation  of  a second  judgment,  this  time  of  the  further  developments  arising  from  those 
indicated  in  the  previous  process  of  judgment,  which  was  a preliminary  to  this  operation. 

P - The  comparison  of  the  first  preliminary  judgment  with  one  second  judgment  developing 
therefrom,  so  as  to  enable  the  Diviner  to  form  an  idea  of  the  probable  action  of  forces  beyond  the  actual 
plane,  by  the  invocation  of  an  angelic  figure  consonant  to  the  process.  And  in  this  matter  take  care  not  to 
mislead  thy  judgment  through  the  action  of  thine  own  preconceived  ideas;  but  only  relying,  after  due 
tests,  on  the  indication  afforded  thee  by  the  angelic  form.  And  know,  unless  the  form  be  of  an  angelic 
nature  its  indication  will  not  be  reliable,  seeing,  that  if  it  be  an  elemental,  it  will  be  below  the  plane 
desired. 

Q - The  Diviner  now  completely  and  thoroughly  formulates  his  whole  judgment  as  well  for  the 
immediate  future  as  for  the  development  thereof,  taking  into  account  the  knowledge  and  indications  given 
him  by  the  angelic  form. 

R - Having  this  result  before  him,  let  the  Diviner  now  formulate  a fresh  divinatiOn  process,  based 
on  the  conclusions  at  which  he  has  arrived,  so  as  to  form  a basis  for  a further  working. 

S - Formulates  the  sides  for  and  against  for  a fresh  judgment,  and  deduces  conclusion  from  fresh 
operation. 

T - The  Diviner  then  compares  carefully  the  whole  judgment  and  decisions  arrived  at  with  their 
conclusions,  and  delivers  now  plainly  a succinct  and  consecutive  judgment  thereon. 

U - The  Diviner  gives  advice  to  the  Consultant  as  to  what  use  he  shall  make  of  the  judgment. 

V - The  Diviner  formulates  clearly  with  what  forces  it  may  be  necessary  to  work  in  order  to 
combat  the  Evil,  or  fix  the  Good,  promised  by  the  Divination. 

W - Lastly,  remember  that  unto  thee  a divination  shall  be  as  a sacred  work  of  the  Divine  Magic  of 
Light,  and  not  to  be  performed  to  pander  unto  thy  curiosity  regarding  the  secrets  of  another.  And  if  by  this 
means  thou  shalt  arrive  at  a knowledge  of  another’s  secrets,  thou  shalt  respect  and  not  betray  them. 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


V-HEH  (f) 

ALCHEMY 

A - The  Curcurbite  or  the  Alembic. 

B - The  Alchemist. 

C - The  processes  and  forces  employed. 

D - The  matter  to  be  transmuted. 

E - The  selection  of  the  Matter  to  be  transmuted,  and  the  formation,  cleansing  and  disposing  of  all 
the  necessary  vessels,  materials,  etc.,  for  the  working  of  the  process. 

F - General  Invocation  of  the  Higher  Forces  to  Action.  Placing  of  the  Matter  within  the  curcurbite 
or  philosophic  egg,  and  invocation  of  a blind  force  to  action  therein,  in  darkness  and  silence. 

G - The  beginning  of  the  actual  process.  The  regulation  and  restriction  of  the  proper  degree  of 
Heat  and  Moisture  to  be  employed  in  the  working.  First  evocation  followed  by  first  distillation. 

H - The  taking  up  of  the  residuum  which  remaineth  after  the  distillation  from  the  curcurbite  or 
alembic;  the  grinding  thereof  to  form  a powder  in  a mortar.  This  powder  is  then  to  be  placed  again  in  the 
curcurbite.  The  fluid  already  distilled  is  to  be  poured  again  upon  it.  The  curcurbite  or  philosophic  egg  is  to 
be  closed. 

I - The  curcurbite  or  Egg  Philosophic  being  hermetically  sealed,  the  Alchemist  announces  aloud 
that  all  is  prepared  for  the  invocation  of  the  forces  necessary  to  accomplish  the  work.  The  Matter  is  then 
to  be  placed  upon  an  Altar  with  the  elements  and  four  weapons  thereon;  upon  the  white  triangle  and  upon 
a flashing  Tablet  of  a general  nature,  in  harmony  with  the  matter  selected  for  the  working.  Standing  now 
in  the  place  of  the  Hierophant  at  the  East  of  the  Altar,  the  Alchemist  should  place  his  left  hand  upon  the 
top  of  the  curcurbite,  raise  his  right  hand  holding  the  Fotus  Wand  by  the  Aries  band  (for  in  Aries  is  the 
beginning  of  the  life  of  the  year),  ready  to  commence  the  general  invocation  of  the  forces  of  the  divine 
Fight  to  operate  in  the  work. 

J - The  pronouncing  aloud  of  the  Invocation  of  the  requisite  general  forces,  answering  to  the  class 
of  alchemical  work  to  be  performed.  The  conjuring  of  the  necessary  Forces  to  act  in  the  curcurbite  for  the 
work  required.  The  tracing  in  the  air  above  it  with  appropriate  weapon  the  necessary  lineal  figures,  signs, 
sigils  and  the  like.  Then  let  the  Alchemist  say: 

“So  help  me  the  Ford  of  the  Universe  and  my  own  Higher  Soul.”  Then  let  him  raise  the 
curcurbite  in  the  air  with  both  hands,  saying:  “Arise  herein  to  action,  0 ye  forces  of  the  Fight  Divine.” 

K - Now  let  the  matter  putrefy  in  the  Balneum  Mariae  in  a very  gentle  heat,  until  darkness 
beginneth  to  supervene;  and  even  until  it  becometh  entirely  black.  If  from  its  nature  the  mixture  will  not 
admit  of  entire  blackness,  examine  it  astrally  till  there  is  the  astral  appearance  of  the  thickest  possible 
darkness,  and  thou  mayest  also  evoke  an  elemental 


48 


VOLUME  SIX 


form  to  tell  thee  if  the  blackness  be  sufficient.  But  be  thou  sure  that  in  this  latter  thou  art  not  deceived, 
seeing  that  the  nature  of  such  an  elemental  will  be  deceptive  from  the  nature  of  the  symbol  of  Darkness, 
wherefore  ask  thou  of  him  nothing  further  concerning  the  working  at  this  stage  but  only  concerning  the 
blackness,  and  this  can  be  further  tested  by  the  elemental  itself,  which  should  be  either  black  or  clad  in  an 
intensely  black  robe.  In  this  evocation,  use  the  names,  etc.,  of  Saturn.  When  the  mixture  be  sufficiently 
black,  then  take  the  curcurbite  out  of  the  Balneum  Mariae  and  place  it  to  the  North  of  the  Altar  and 
perform  over  it  a solemn  invocation  of  the  forces  of  Saturn  to  act  therein;  holding  the  wand  by  the  black 
band,  then  say:  “The  voice  of  the  Alchemist”  etc.  The  curcurbite  is  then  to  be  unstopped  and  the  Alembic 
Head  fitted  on  for  purposes  of  distillation.  In  all  such  invocations  a flashing  tablet  should  be  used 
whereon  to  stand  the  curcurbite.  Also  certain  of  the  processes  may  take  weeks,  or  even  months  to  obtain 
the  necessary  force,  and  this  will  depend  on  the  Alchemist  rather  than  on  the  matter. 

L - Then  let  the  Alchemist  distil  with  a gentle  heat  until  nothing  remaineth  to  come  over.  Let  him 
then  take  out  the  residuum  and  grind  it  into  a powder;  replace  this  powder  in  the  curcurbite,  and  pour 
again  upon  it  the  fluid  previously  distilled.  The  curcurbite  is  then  to  be  placed  again  in  a Balneum  Mariae 
in  a gentle  heat.  When  it  seems  fairly  re-dissolved  (irrespective  of  colour)  let  it  be  taken  out  of  the  bath.  It 
is  now  to  undergo  another  magical  ceremony. 

M - Now  place  the  curcurbite  to  the  West  of  the  Altar,  holding  the  Lotus  Wand  by  the  black  end, 
perform  a magical  invocation  of  the  Moon  in  her  decrease  and  of  Cauda  Draconis.  The  curcurbite  is  then 
to  be  exposed  to  the  moonlight  (she  being  in  her  decrease)  for  nine  consecutive  nights,  commencing  at 
full  moon.  The  Alembic  Head  is  then  to  be  fitted  on. 

N - Repeat  process  set  forth  in  section  L. 

O - The  curcurbite  is  to  be  placed  to  the  East  of  the  Altar,  and  the  Alchemist  performs  an 
invocation  of  the  Moon  in  her  increase,  and  of  Caput  Draconis  (holding  Lotus  Wand  by  white  end)  to  act 
upon  the  matter.  The  curcurbite  is  now  to  be  exposed  for  nine  consecutive  nights  (ending  with  the  Full 
Moon)  to  the  Moon’s  rays.  (In  this,  as  in  all  similar  exposures,  it  matters  not  if  such  night  be  overciouded, 
so  long  as  the  vessel  be  placed  in  such  a position  as  to  receive  the  direct  rays  if  the  cloud  withdraw.) 

P - The  curcurbite  is  again  to  be  placed  on  the  white  triangle  upon  the  Altar.  The  Alchemist 
performs  an  invocation  of  the  forces  of  the  Sun  to  act  in  the  curcurbite.  It  is  then  to  be  exposed  to  the  rays 
of  the  sun  for  twelve  hours  each  day;  from  8:30  a.m.  to  8:30  p.m.  (This  should  be  done  preferably  when 
the  sun  is  strongly  posited  in  the  Zodiac,  but  it  can  be  done  at  some  other  times,  though  never  when  he  is 
in  Scorpio,  Libra,  Capricornus,  or  Aquarius.) 

Q - The  curcurbite  is  again  placed  upon  the  white  triangle  upon  the  Altar.  The  Alchemist  repeats 
the  words:  “Child  of  Earth,  long  hast  thou  dwelt,  etc.”  Then  holding  above  it  the 


49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Lotus  Wand  by  the  white  end,  he  say:  “I  formulate  in  thee  the  invoked  forces  of  Light,”  and  repeats  the 
mystic  words.  At  this  point  keen  and  bright  flashes  of  light  shoula  appear  in  the  curcurbite,  and  the 
mixture  itself  (as  far  as  its  nature  will  permit)  should  be  clear.  Now  invoke  an  Elemental  from  the 
curcurbite  consonant  to  the  Nature  of  the  Mixture,  and  judge  by  the  nature  of  the  colour  of  its  robes  and 
their  brilliancy  whether  the  matter  has  attained  to  the  right  condition.  But  if  the  flashes  do  not  appear,  and 
if  the  robes  of  the  elemental  be  not  brilliant  and  flashing,  then  let  the  curcurbite  stand  within  the  white 
triangle  for  seven  days;  having  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Apex  of  the  triangle  a flashing  tablet  of  the  Sun, 
and  in  the  left  one  of  the  Moon.  Let  it  not  be  moved  or  disturbed  all  those  seven  days;  but  not  in  the  dark, 
save  at  night.  Then  let  the  operation  as  aforementioned  be  repeated  over  the  curcurbite,  and  this  process 
may  be  repeated  altogether  three  times  if  the  flashing  light  cometh  not.  For  without  this  latter  the  work 
would  be  useless.  But  if  after  three  repetitions  it  still  appear  not,  it  is  a sign  that  there  hath  been  an  error  in 
the  working,  such  being  either  in  the  disposition  of  the  Alchemist  or  in  the  management  of  the  curcurbite. 
Wherefore  let  the  lunar  and  the  solar  invocations  and  exposures  be  repeated  when  without  doubt,  if  these 
be  done  with  care  (and  more  especially  those  of  Caput  Draconis  and  Cauda  Draconis  with  those  of  the 
Moon  as  taught,  for  these  have  great  force  materially)  then  without  doubt  shall  that  flashing  light  manifest 
itself  in  the  curcurbite. 

R - Holding  the  Lotus  Wand  by  the  white  end,  the  Alchemist  now  draws  over  the  curcurbite  the 
symbol  of  the  Flaming  Sword  as  if  descending  into  the  mixture.  Then  let  him  place  the  curcurbite  to  the 
East  of  the  Altar.  The  Alchemist  stands  between  the  pillars,  and  performs  a solemn  invocation  of  the 
forces  of  Mars  to  act  therein.  The  curcurbite  is  then  to  be  placed  between  the  Pillars  (or  the  drawn 
symbols  of  these  same)  for  seven  days,  upon  a flashing  tablet  of  Mars.  After  this  period,  fit  on  the 
Alembic  Head,  and  distil  first  in  Balneum  Mariae,  then  in  Balneum  Arenae  till  such  time  as  the  mixture 
be  all  distilled  over. 

S - Now  let  the  Alchemist  take  the  fluid  of  the  distillate  and  let  him  perform  over  it  an  invocation 
of  the  forces  of  Mercury  to  act  in  the  clear  fluid,  so  as  to  formulate  therein  the  aichemic  Mercury,  even 
the  Mercury  of  the  Philosophers.  (The  residuum  or  the  Dead  Head  is  not  to  be  worked  with  at  present,  but 
is  to  be  set  apart  for  future  use.)  After  the  invocation  of  the  Aichemic  Mercury  a certain  brilliance  should 
manifest  itself  in  the  whole  fluid,  that  is  to  say,  it  should  not  only  be  clear,  but  also  brilliant  and  flashing. 
Now  expose  it  in  an  hermetic  receiver  for  seven  days  to  the  light  of  the  Sun;  at  the  end  of  which  time 
there  should  be  distinct  flashes  of  light  therein.  (Or  an  egg  philosophic  may  be  used;  but  the  receiver  of 
the  Alembic  if  close  stopped  will  answer  this  purpose.) 

T - Now  the  residuum  or  Dead  Head  is  to  be  taken  out  of  the  curcurbite,  ground  small  and 
replaced.  An  invocation  of  the  Forces  of  Jupiter  is  then  to  be  performed  over  that  powder.  It  is  then  to  be 
kept  in  the  dark  standing  upon  a flashing  Tablet  of  Jupiter  for  seven  days.  At  the  end  of  this  time  there 
should  be  a slight  flashing  about  it,  but  if  this  come  not  yet,  repeat  this  operation  up  to  three  times,  when  a 
faint  flashing  of  Light  is  certain  to  come. 


50 


VOLUME  SIX 


U - A flashing  Tablet  of  each  of  the  four  Elements  is  now  to  be  placed  upon  an  altar  as  shown  in 
the  figure,  and  thereon  are  also  to  be  placed  the  magical  elemental  weapons,  as  is  also  clearly  indicated. 
The  receiver  containing  the  distillate  is  now  to  be  placed  between  the  Air  and  Water  Tablets,  and  the 
curcurbite  with  the  Dead  Head  between  the  Fire  and  Earth  Tablets.  Now  let  the  Alchemist  perform  an 
invocation  using  especially  the  Supreme  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram,  with  the  lesser  magical  implement 
appropriate.  First,  of  the  forces  of  Fire  to  act  in  the  curcurbite  on  the  Dead  Head.  Second  of  those  of 
Water  to  act  on  the  distillate.  Third,  of  the  forces  of  the  Spirit  to  act  in  both  (using  the  white  end  of  Fotus 
Wand).  Fourth,  of  those  of  the  Air  to  act  on  the  distillate;  and  lastly,  those  of  the  Earth  to  act  on  the  Dead 
Head.  Fet  the  Curcurbite  and  the  receiver  stand  thus  for  five  consecutive  days,  at  the  end  of  which  time 
there  should  be  flashes  manifest  in  both  mixtures.  And  these  flashes  should  be  lightly  coloured. 


V - The  Alchemist,  still  keeping  the  vessels  in  the  same  relative  positions,  but  removing  the 
Tablets  of  the  elements  from  the  Altar,  then  substitutes  one  of  Ket  her.  This  must  be  white  with  golden 
charges,  and  is  to  be  placed  on  or  within  the  white  triangle  between  the  vessels.  He  then  addresses  a most 
solemn  invocation  to  the  forces  of  Kether  to  render  the  result  of  the  working  that  which  he  shall  desire, 
and  making  over  each  vessel  the  symbol  of  the  Flaming  Sword.  This  is  the  most  important  of  all  the 
Invocations.  It  will  only  succeed  if  the  Alchemist  keepeth  himself  closely  allied  unto  his  Higher  Self 
during  the  working  of  the  invocation  and  of  making  the  Tablet.  And  at  the  end  of  it,  if  it  have  been 
successful,  a keen  and  translucent  flash  will  take  the  place  of  the  slightly  coloured  flashes  in  the  receiver 
of  the  curcurbite;  so  that  the  fluid  should  sparkle  as  a diamond,  whilst  the  powder  in  the  curcurbite  shall 
slightly  gleam. 


51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


W - The  distilled  liquid  is  now  to  be  poured  from  the  receiver  upon  the  residuum  of  the  Dead 
Head  in  the  curcurbite,  and  the  mixture  at  first  will  appear  cloudy.  It  is  now  to  be  eiposed  to  the  Sun  for 
ten  days  consecutively  (ten  is  Tiphareth  translating  the  influence  of  Kether).  It  is  then  again  to  be  placed 
upon  the  white  triangle  upon  the  Altar,  upon  a flashing  Tablet  of  Venus  to  act  therein.  Let  it  remain  thus 
for  seven  days,  at  the  end  of  whieh  time  see  what  forms  and  colour  and  appearance  the  Liquor  hath  taken, 
for  there  should  now  arise  a certain  softer  flash  in  the  liquid,  and  an  elemental  may  be  evoked  to  test  the 
condition.  When  this  softer  flash  is  manifest,  place  the  curcurbite  into  the  Balneum  Mariae  to  digest  with 
a very  gentle  heat  for  seven  days.  Place  it  then  in  the  Balneum  Mariae  to  distil,  beginning  with  a gentle, 
and  ending  with  a strong  heat.  Distil  thus  till  nothing  more  will  come  over,  even  with  a most  violent  heat. 
Preserve  the  fluid  in  a closely  stoppered  vial.  It  is  an  Elixir  for  use  according  to  the  substance  from  which 
it  was  prepared.  If  from  a thing  medicinal,  a medicine;  if  from  a metal,  for  the  purifying  of  metals;  and 
herein  shalt  thou  use  thy  judgment.  The  residuum  thou  shalt  place  without  powdering  into  a crucible,  well 
sealed  and  luted.  And  thou  shalt  place  the  same  in  thine  Athanor,  bringing  it  first  to  a red,  and  then  to  a 
white  heat,  and  this  thou  shalt  do  seven  times  in  seven  consecutive  days,  taking  out  the  crucible  each  day 
as  soon  as  thou  hast  brought  it  to  the  highest  possible  heat,  and  allowing  it  to  cool  gradually.  And  the 
preferable  time  for  this  working  should  be  in  the  heat  of  the  day.  On  the  seventh  day  of  this  operation 
thou  shalt  open  the  crucible  and  thou  shalt  behold  what  Form  and  Colour  thy  Caput  Mortum  hath  taken.  It 
will  be  like  either  a precious  stone  or  a glittering  powder.  And  this  stone  or  powder  shall  be  of  Magical 
Virtue  in  accordance  with  its  nature. 

Finished  is  that  which  is  written  concerning  the  Formulae  of  the  Magic  of  Light. 


52 


VOLUME  SIX 


Z-l 


THE  ENTERER  OF  THE  THRESHOLD 

The  General  Exordium 
The  Speech  in  the  Silence: 

The  Words  Against  the  Son  of  Night: 

The  Voice  of  Thoth  before  the  Universe  in  the  presence  of  the  Eternal  Gods: 

The  Formulae  of  Knowledge: 

The  Wisdom  of  Breath: 

The  Radix  of  Vibration: 

The  Shaking  of  the  Invisible: 

The  Rolling  Asunder  of  the  Darkness: 

The  Becoming  Visible  of  Matter: 

The  Piercing  of  the  Coils  of  the  Stooping  Dragon: 

The  Breaking  forth  of  the  Light: 

All  these  are  in  the  Knowledge  of  Thoth. 

The  Particular  Exordium 
At  the  Ending  of  the  Night: 

At  the  limits  of  the  Light: 

Thoth  stood  before  the  Unborn  Ones  of  Time! 

Then  was  formulated  the  Universe: 

Then  came  forth  the  Gods  thereof: 

The  Aeons  of  the  hornless  Beyond: 

Then  was  the  Voice  vibrated: 

Then  was  the  Name  declared. 

At  the  Threshold  of  the  Entrance, 

Between  the  Universe  and  the  Infiflite, 

In  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer,  stood  Thoth, 

As  before  him  were  the  Aeons  proclaimed. 

In  Breath  did  he  vibrate  them: 

In  Symbols  did  he  record  them: 

For  betwixt  the  Light  and  the  Darkness  did  be  stand. 

The  complete  explanation  of  the  symbolism  of,  and  the  Formulae  contained  in,  the  Grade  of 
Neophyte  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn. 

“Enterer  of  the  Threshold”  is  the  name  of  the  Grade  of  Neophyte.  “The  Hall  of  the  Neophytes”  is 
called  “The  Hall  of  the  Dual  Manifestation  of  Truth,”  that  is  of  the  Goddess  Thmaah,  whose  name  has 
three  forms  according  to  the  nature  of  her  operation.  This  is  explained  under  the  chapter  concerning  the 
Hegemon. 


53 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Of  the  Temple  in  reference  to  the  Sephiroth.  The  Temple,  as  arranged  in  the  Neophyte  Grade  of 
the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  is  placed  looking  towards  the  YH  of  YHVH  in  Malkuth  in 
Assiah.  That  is,  as  Y and  H answer  unto  the  Sephiroth  Chokmah  and  Binah  in  the  Tree,  (and  unto  Abba 
and  Aima,  through  whose  knowledge  alone  that  of  Kether  may  be  obtained.)  Even  so,  the  Sacred  Rites  of 
the  Temple  may  gradually,  and  as  it  were,  in  spite  of  himself,  lead  the  Neophyte  unto  the  knowledge  of 
his  Higher  Self.  Like  the  other  Sephiroth,  Malkuth  hath  also  its  subsidiary  Sephiroth  and  Paths.  Of  these 
Ten  Sephiroth,  the  Temple  as  arranged  in  the  Neophyte  Grade,  includeth  only  the  four  lower  Sephiroth  in 
the  Tree  of  Life,  viz:  Malkuth,  Yesod,  Hod,  and  Netzach,  and  the  Outer  side  of  Paroketh,  the  Veil. 
Paroketh  formeth  the  East  of  the  Temple.  Lirst  in  importance  cometh  the  symbolism  of  the  East. 

The  Three  Chiefs  who  govern  and  rule  all  things,  the  Viceroys  in  the  Temple  of  the  unknown 
Second  Order  beyond,  are  the  reflections  therein  of  the  Powers  of  Chesed,  Geburah  and  Tiphareth.  They 
represent:  the  Imperator  - Geburah  and  the  Grade  6-5:  the  Praemonstrator  - Chesed  and  the  Grade  7-4:  the 
Cancellarius  - Tiphareth  and  the  Grade  5-6. 

Now  the  Imperator  governeth,  because  in  Netzach,  which  is  the  highest  grade  of  the  First  Order, 
4-7,  is  the  Fire  reflected  from  Geburah.  The  Praemonstrator  is  Second,  because  in  Hod,  which  is  the  next 
highest  Grade,  3-8,  is  the  Water  reflected  from  Chesed.  The  Third  is  the  Cancellarius,  because  in  Yesod, 
2-9,  is  the  Air  reflected  from  Tiphareth.  Thus  the  Order  is  governed  by  a Triad,  one  in  intention  but 
having  different  functions:  the  Imperator  to  command:  the  Praemonstrator  to  instruct:  the  Cancellarius  to 
record. 

The  proper  mantle  of  Office  of  the  Imperator  is  the  flame  scarlet  Robe  of  Fire  and  Severity,  as  on 
him  do  the  energy  and  stability  of  the  Temple  depend:  and  if  he  has  sub-Officers  to  assist  him,  they 
partake  of  his  symbolism.  His  Mantle  is  the  symbol  of  unflinching  Authority,  compelling  the  obedience 
of  the  Temple  to  all  commands  issued  by  the  Second  Order;  and  upon  the  left  breast  thereof,  is  the  Cross 
and  Triangle  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  both  white,  representing  the  purification  of  the  Temple  in  the  Outer 
Order  by  Fire.  He  may  wear  a Lamen  similar  to  that  of  Hierophant,  of  the  same  colours,  but  depending 
from  a scarlet  collar,  and  he  may  bear  a Sword  similar  to  that  of  Hiereus.  His  place  in  the  Temple  is  at  the 
extreme  right  of  the  Dais  and  at  the  Equinox  he  takes  the  Throne  of  Hierophant  when  that  Office  is 
vacated. 

The  proper  Mantle  of  Office  of  the  Praemonstrator  is  the  bright  blue  Robe  of  Water,  representing 
the  reflection  of  the  Wisdom  and  Knowledge  of  Chesed.  His  duty  is  that  of  Teacher  and  Instructor  of  the 
Temple,  always  limited  by  his  Obligation  to  keep  secret  the  Knowledge  of  the  Second  Order  from  the 
Outer  Order.  He  superintends  the  working  of  the  Outer  Order,  seeing  that  in  it  nothing  be  relaxed  or 
profaned;  and  duly  issues  to  the  Temple  any  instruction  regarding  the  Ritual  received  by  him  from  the 
Greatly  Honoured  Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order.  He  is  therefore  to  the  Temple  the  Reflector  of  the  Wisdom 
beyond.  His  sub-officers  partake  of  his  symbolism.  The  White  Cross  and  Triangle  on  his  left  Breast  on 


54 


VOLUME  SIX 


the  Robe  represents  the  purification  of  the  Outer  Order  by  Water.  He  may  wear  a Lamen  like  that  of 
Hierophant,  but  blue  upon  an  orange  field  and  depending  from  a collar  of  blue.  He  may  bear  a Sceptre 
surmounted  by  a Maltese  Cross  in  the  Elemental  colours. 

The  proper  Mantle  of  Office  of  the  Cancellarius  is  the  yellow  Robe  of  Air.  Upon  him  depend  the 
Records  of  the  Temple,  the  order  of  its  working,  the  arrangements  of  its  Meetings  and  the  circulation  of 
its  manuscripts.  He  is  the  Recorder  and,  more  immediately  than  either  of  the  preceding  Chiefs,  the 
Representative  of  the  executive  authority  of  the  Second  Order  over  the  Outer.  His  duty  is  to  see  that  in  no 
case  knowledge  of  a Grade  be  given  to  a Member  who  has  not  properly  attained  to  it.  He  is  the  immediate 
circulator  of  all  communications  from  the  Second  Order.  His  sub-officers  partake  of  his  symbolism.  His 
White  Cross  and  Triangle  represent  the  purification  of  the  Outer  Order  by  Air.  Cancellarius  may  wear  a 
Lamen  like  that  of  Hierophant,  but  of  yellow  on  a purple  field,  and  depending  from  a purple  collar;  and  he 
may  bear  a Sceptre  surmounted  by  a Hexagram  of  amber  and  gold. 

The  Sceptres  of  the  Chiefs  should  be  of  the  same  colour  as  their  Mantles,  with  a gold  band  to 
represent  Tiphareth,  being  the  first  Grade  of  the  Inner  Order.  The  Sword  of  the  Imperator  should  have  a 
plain  scarlet  hilt,  with  gold  or  brass  mountings,  while  the  Sceptre  of  the  Praemonstrator  should  be  blue 
with  a gold  band.  The  proper  seat  of  the  Chiefs  is  beside  the  Hierophant,  and  if  desired  the  Imperator  and 
Cancellarius  may  be  seated  to  the  right  and  Praemonstrator  and  Immediate  Past  Hierophant  to  his  left  — 
the  Cancellarius  and  Immediate  Past  Hierophant  being  nearest  to  the  Hierophant  on  their  respective  sides. 
The  Chiefs  stand  before  the  Veil  in  the  East  of  the  Temple,  as  the  Representatives  of  the  Inner  Order  and 
therefore  no  meeting  can  be  held  without  one  of  them.  Preferably  all  Three  Chiefs  should  be  present.  The 
other  Officers  of  the  Temple  exist  only  by  their  authority  and  permission. 

Because  the  East  of  the  Temple  is  the  outer  side  of  Paroketh,  all  Members  of  the  Second 
Order  wear  the  Crossed  Sashes  of  a Lord  of  the  Paths  of  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  only  — no 
higher  Grade  being  allowed  to  be  shown  in  a Temple  of  the  First  Order.  Members  of  the 
Second  Order  should  be  seated  in  the  East  of  the  Temple  when  practicable.  Any  Past 
Hierophant  may  wear  a Mantle  of  a Hierophant  and  a Jewel  of  that  Lamen,  but  not  a large 
Collar  Lamen.  Immediate  Past  Hierophant  may  have  a Sceptre  of  a Hierophant. 

The  Chiefs,  or  Members  asked  to  represent  them  on  the  Dais,  wear  white  gowns.  The  cords  and 
tassels  of  all  Mantles  of  Chiefs  or  Officers  should  be  white  to  symbolise  spiritual  purity  and  influence  of 
the  Divine  and  Shining  Light.  Members  of  the  Outer  Order  wear  a black  gown  or  tunic,  with  a Sash 
indicating  their  Grade  across  it.  The  Black  Sash  crosses  from  the  left  shoulder  (from  the  side  of  the  Black 
Pillar,  as  they  first  received  it),  and  the  White  Sash  from  the  Right  shoulder. 

Egyptian  Head-Dresses,  or  Nemysses  are  worn  by  the  Chiefs  and  Officers,  those  of  the  Chiefs 
being  of  the  colour  of  their  Mantles  striped  with  the  complementary  colour;  those  of 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  Officers  being  striped  equally  black  and  white.  Members  may  wear  similar  nemysses  in  black  and 
white  or  plain  black  squares  of  approved  pattern. 

The  Key  to  the  formation  of  the  tunic  and  nemyss  is  the  Crux  Ansata  for  the  nemyss  makes  the 
oval,  and  the  arms  and  body  of  the  tunic,  the  cross. 

THE  SYMBOLISM  OF  THE  TEMPLE 

The  Bases  of  the  two  Pillars  are  respectively  in  Netzach  and  Hod;  the  White  Pillar  being  in 
Netzach  and  the  Black  Pillar  in  Hod.  They  represent  the  Two  Pillars  of  Mercy  and  Severity.  The  bases  are 
cubical  and  black  to  represent  the  Earth  Element  in  Malkuth.  The  columns  are  respectively  black  and 
white  to  represent  the  manifestation  of  the  Eternal  Balance  of  the  Scales  of  Justice.  Upon  them  should  be 
represented  in  counter-changed  colour  any  appropriate  Egyptian  designs,  emblematic  of  the  Soul. 

The  scarlet  tetra-hedronal  capitals  represent  the  Fire  of  Test  and  Trial:  and  between  the  Pillars  is 
the  porchway  of  the  Region  Immeasurable.  The  twin  lights  which  burn  on  their  summits  are  “The 
Declarers  of  the  Eternal  Truth.”  The  bases  of  the  tetrahedra,  being  triangular,  that  on  the  White  pillar 
points  East,  while  that  on  the  Black  points  West.  They  thus  complete  the  Hexagram  of  Tiphareth  though 
separate,  as  is  fitting  in  “The  Hall  of  the  Dual  Manifestation  of  Truth.” 

The  Altar,  whose  form  is  that  of  a double  cube,  is  placed  in  the  Eastern  part  of  Malkuth,  as  far  as 
the  Neophyte  is  concerned.  But  to  the  Adeptus  Minor,  its  blackness  will  veil  on  the  East  citrine,  on  the 
South  olive,  on  the  North  russet,  while  the  West  side  alone,  and  the  base,  will  be  black,  while  the  summit 
is  of  a brilliant  whiteness. 

The  Symbols  upon  the  Altar  represent  the  Forces  and  Manifestation  of  the  Divine  Light, 
concentrated  in  the  White  Triangle  of  the  Three  Supernals  as  the  synthesis;  wherefore,  upon  this  sacred 
and  sublime  Symbol,  is  the  obligation  of  the  Neophyte  taken  as  calling  therein  to  witness  the  Forces  of 
the  Divine  Light. 

The  Red  Cross  of  Tiphareth  (to  which  the  Grade  of  5-6  is  referred)  is  here  placed  above  the  White 
Triangle,  not  as  dominating  it,  but  as  bringing  it  down  and  manifesting  it  unto  the  Outer  Order;  as  though 
the  Crucified  One,  having  raised  the  symbol  of  self-sacrifice,  had  thus  touched  and  brought  into  action  in 
matter,  the  Divine  Triad  of  Light. 

Around  the  Cross  are  the  Symbols  of  the  Four  Letters  of  the  Name  YHVH  —the  Shin  of 
Yeheshuah  being  only  implied  and  not  expressed  in  the  Outer  Order.  At  the  East  is  the  Mystical  Rose, 
allied  by  its  scent  to  the  Element  of  Air.  At  the  South  is  the  Red  Lamp,  allied  by  its  Flame  with  the 
Element  of  Fire.  At  the  West  is  the  Cup  of  Wine,  allied  by  its  fluid  form  to  the  Element  of  Water.  At  the 
North  are  Bread  and  Salt,  allied  by  their  substance  to  the  Element  of  Earth.  The  Elements  are  placed  upon 
the  Altar  according  to  the  Winds. 


56 


VOLUME  SIX 


“For  Osiris  on-Nophris  who  is  found  perfect  before  the  Gods,  bath  said:  These  are  the  Elements 
of  my  Body,  Perfected  through  Suffering,  Glorified  through  Trial.  For  the  scent  of  the  Dying  Rose  is  as 
the  repressed  Sigh  of  my  suffering:  And  the  flame-red  Fire  as  the  Energy  of  mine  Undaunted  Will:  And 
the  Cup  of  Wine  is  the  pouring  out  of  the  Blood  of  my  Heart,  Sacrificed  unto  Regeneration,  unto  the 
Newer  Life:  And  the  Bread  and  Salt  are  as  the  Foundations  of  my  Body,  Which  I destroy  in  order  that 
they  may  be  renewed.  For  1 am  Osiris  Triumphant,  even  Osiris  on-Nophris,  the  Justified  One:  I am  He 
who  is  clothed  with  the  Body  of  Flesh,  Yet  in  whom  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Great  Gods:  lam  The  Lord  of  Life, 
triumphant  over  Death.  He  who  partaketh  with  me  shall  arise  with  me.  I am  the  Manifestor  in  Matter  of 
Those  Whose  Abode  is  the  Invisible:  1 am  purified:  I stand  upon  the  Universe:  I am  its  Reconciler  with 
the  Eternal  Gods:  1 am  the  Perfector  of  Matter:  And  without  me,  the  Universe  is  not.” 

Technically,  the  Door  is  supposed  to  be  situated  behind  the  seat  of  Hiereus  in  the  West;  but  it 
may  be  in  any  part  of  the  Hall,  seeing  that  the  walls  represent  the  Barrier  to  the  Exterior.  “The  Gate  of  the 
Declarers  of  Judgment”  is  its  name  — and  its  symbolic  form  is  that  of  a straight  and  narrow  Doorway, 
between  two  Mighty  Pylons.  “The  Watcher  against  the  Evil  Ones”  is  the  name  of  the  Sentinel  who  guards 
it  and  his  form  is  the  symbolic  one  of  Anubis. 

THE  STATIONS  OF  THE  OFFICERS 
The  Hierophant  is  placed  in  the  East  of  the  Temple,  on  the  outer  side  of  the  Veil 
Paroketh,  to  rule  the  Temple  under  the  Presidency  of  the  Chiefs.  There  he  fills  the  place  of  a Lord 
of  the  Paths  of  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts,  acting  as  Inductor  to  the  Sacred 
Mysteries.  The  Insignia  and  Symbols  of  Hierophant  are: 


Lurivn  nl  Ibe  JlimiptMal 


The  Throne  of  the  East  in  the  Path  of  Samekh,  outside  the  Veil.  The  Mantle  of  bright  flame 
scarlet,  bearing  a white  cross  on  the  left  breast.  The  Lamen  suspended  from  a white  Collar.  The  Crown 
headed  Sceptre.  The  Banner  of  the  East.  The  position  of  the  Throne  on  the  Path  Samekh  is  fitting  for  the 
Inductor  to  the  Mysteries,  as  there  being  placed  in  that  balanced  and  central  position  of  that  Path  by  which 
alone  is  safe  entrance  to  the  mystical  knowledge  of  the  Light  in  Tiphareth.  Being  placed  before  Paroketh 
at  the  point  of  its  rending,  it  there  marks  the  shining  forth  of  the  Light  through  the  Veil;  and  that 
translation 


57 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


of  the  Three  Supernals  to  the  Outer  Order,  which  is  represented  by  the  red  Calvary  Cross  and  the  White 
Triangle  upon  the  Altar.  Thus  the  station  of  Hierophant’s  Throne,  fitly  represents  the  Rising  of  the  Sun  of 
Life  and  Light  upon  our  Order. 

The  Robe  of  scarlet  represents  the  flaming  energy  of  the  Divine  Light,  shining  forth  into  infinite 
Worlds.  Upon  the  left  breast  is  a White  Cross  to  represent  purification  unto  the  Light,  and  this  Cross  may 
be  one  of  the  following  forms: 


The  CALVARY  CROSS  alludes 

either  to  the  cross  of  six  squares  of  Tiphareth  or  to  the  Cross  of  the  Rivers. 


The  PYRAMIDAL  CROSS  of  the  Elements,  to  represent  the  descent  of 
the  Divine  and  Angelic  Forces  into  the  pyramid  symbol. 


The  EQUILATERAL  CROSS  of  the  Elements,  symbolising  their  purification 
through  the  Light  of  the  Four 
lettered  Name  YHVH  in  Tiphareth. 

o 

The  MALTESE  CROSS  of  four  arrowheads,  representing  the  keen  and  swift 
impact  of  the  Light,  coming  from  behind  the  Veil,  through  the  Elements  symbolised 
by  the  arrow  of  Sagittarius  in  the  Path  of  Samekh. 

It  is  indifferent  which  of  the  Crosses  be  employed,  seeing  that  each  represents  the  operation  of  the 
Light  through  the  Veil. 

The  Sceptre  represents  the  forces  of  the  Middle  Pillar.  It  is  scarlet  with  gold  bands  to  represent 
the  places  of  the  Sephiroth  Daath,  Tiphareth  and  Yesod,  the  pommel  being  Malkuth.  The  shaft  represents 
the  Paths  Gimel,  Samekh  and  Tau.  The  Grip  by  which  it  is  wielded,  is  the  path  Tau,  representing  the 
Universe  governed  by  and  attracting  the  forces  of  the  Light.  The  Names  of  Sephiroth  and  Paths  are  not 
marked  thereon,  but  the  Hierophant  Initiate  of  the  Second  Order  should  remember  the  sublimity  of  the 
symbolism  while  he  wields  it.  It  represents  him  as  touching  thereby  the  Divine  Light  of  Kether  and 
attracting  it  through  the  Middle  Pillar  to  Malkuth.  It  is  called  “The  Sceptre  of  Power”  and  invests  him 
with  the  power  of  declaring  the  Temple  Open  or  Closed  in  any  Grade,  if  time  be  short,  and  this  is  done  by 
saying:  “By  the  power  in  me  vested  by  this  Sceptre,  I declare  this  Temple  duly  opened  (or  closed).” 


58 


VOLUME  SIX 


This  method  of  Opening  and  Closing  “by  Sceptre”  should  only  be  used  in  great  emergency  where 
time  presses.  It  should  not  be  used  in  a Ceremony  where  Elemental  Spirits  have  been  invoked  — 
especially  not  in  the  Closing. 

The  Lamen  is  partially  explained  in  the  Portal  Ceremony  thus:  “The  Hierophant’s  Lamen  is  a 
synthesis  Of  Tiphareth,  to  which  the  Calvary  cross  of  six  squares,  forming  the  cube  opened  out,  is  fitly 
referred.  The  two  colours,  red  and  green,  the  most  active  and  the  most  passive,  whose  conjuction  points 
out  the  practical  application  of  the  knowledge  of  equilibrium,  are  symbolic  of  the  reconciliation  of  the 
celestial  essences  of  Fire  and  Water.  For  the  reconciling  yellow  unites  with  blue  in  green,  which  is  the 
complementary  colour  to  red,  and  with  red  in  orange  which  is  the  complementary  colour  to  blue.  The 
small  inner  circle  placed  upon  the  Cross  alludes  to  the  Rose  that  is  conjoined  therewith  in  the  symbolism 
of  the  Rose  and  Cross  of  our  Order.” 

But  in  addition  to  this,  it  represents  the  blazing  light  of  the  Fire  of  the  Sun  bringing  into  being  the 
green  vegetation  of  the  otherwise  barren  Earth.  And  also  the  power  of  self-  sacrifice  requisite  in  one  who 
would  essay  to  initiate  into  the  Sacred  Mysteries.  So  as  the  Sceptre  represents  the  Authority  and  Power  of 
the  Light,  the  Lamen  affirms  the  qualifications  necessary  to  him  who  wields  it,  and  therefore  is  it 
suspended  from  a white  collar,  to  represent  the  Purity  of  the  White  Brilliance  from  Kether.  Hence  it 
should  always  be  worn  by  the  Hierophant. 

The  Banner  of  the  East  is  also  partially  explained  in  the  Portal:  “The  field  of  the  Banner  of  the 
East  is  White,  the  colour  of  light  and  purity.  As  in  the  previous  case,  the  Calvary  Cross  of  six  squares  is 
the  number  of  six  of  Tiphareth,  the  yellow  Cross  of  Solar  gold,  and  the  cubical  stone,  bearing  in  its  centre 
the  sacred  Tau  of  Life,  and  having  bound  together  upon  it  the  form  of  the  Macrocosmic  Hexagram,  the 
red  triangle  of  Fire  and  the  blue  triangle  of  Water  — the  Ruach  Elohim  and  the  Waters  of  Creation.” 

In  addition  to  this  explanation,  it  affirms  the  Mode  of  Action  employed  by  the  Divine  Light  in  its 
operation  by  the  Forces  of  Nature.  Upon  it  is  the  symbol  of  the  Macrocosm  so  coloured  as  to  affirm  the 
action  of  the  Fire  of  the  Spirit  through  the  Waters  of  Creation  under  the  harmony  of  the  Golden  Cross  of 
the  Reconciler.  Within  the  centre  of  the  Hexagram  is  a Tau  cross  in  White,  to  represent  its  action  as  a 
Triad;  and  the  whole  is  placed  on  a white  field  representing  the  Ocean  of  the  Am  Soph  Aour.  The  Banner 
is  suspended  from  a gold  colured  bar  by  red  cords,  and  the  pole  and  base  should  be  white.  The  base 
represents  the  purity  of  the  foundation  — the  shaft,  the  Purified  Will  directed  to  the  Higher.  The  golden 
cross-bar  is  that  whereon  the  Manifested  Law  of  Perfection  rests;  the  Banner  itself,  the  Perfect  Law  of  the 
Universe,  the  red  cords  and  tassels  the  Divine  Self  renunciation,  whose  trials  and  sufferings  form,  as  it 
were,  the  Ornament  of  the  Completed  Work.  The  whole  represents  the  ascent  of  the  Initiate  into  Perfect 
Knowlege  of  the  Light.  Therefore  in  the  address  of  the  Hiereus  the  Neophyte  hears  “Even  the  Banner  of 
the  East  sinks  in  Adoration  before  Him,”  as  though  that  symbol,  great  and  potent  though  it  be,  were  yet 
but  an  inferior  presentment  of  the  Higher,  fitted  to  our  comprehension.  “Expounder  of 


59 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  Sacred  Mysteries”  is  the  name  of  the  Hierophant,  and  he  is  “Osiris”  (Aeshoorist)  in  the  Nether  World. 
(The  Coptic  St  added  as  a suffix  to  a name  indicates  the  influence  from  Kether.) 

The  Station  of  Hiereus  is  at  the  extreme  West  of  the  Temple  and  in  the  lowest  point  of  Malkuth 
where  he  is  enthroned  in  its  darkest  part,  in  the  quarter  represented  black  in  the  Minutum  Mundum 
Diagram.  Representing  a Terrible  and  Avenging  God  at  the  Confines  of  Matter,  at  the  borders  of  the 
Qlippoth  he  is  enthroned  upon  Matter  and  robed  in  Darkness,  and  about  his  feet  are  Thunder  and 
Lightning,  the  impact  of  the  Paths  of  Shin  and  Qoph,  Fire  and  Water,  terminating  respectively  in  the 
russet  and  olive  quarters  of  Malkuth.  There,  therefore,  is  he  placed  as  a mighty  and  avenging  Guardian  to 
the  Sacred  Mysteries.  The  Symbols  and  Insignia  of  the  Hiereus  are:  The  Throne  of  the  West  in  the  Black 
of  Malkuth,  where  it  borders  on  the  Kingdom  of  Shells,  The  Black  Robe  of  Darkness,  bearing  a white 
cross  on  the  left  breast;  The  Sword  of  Strength  and  Severity;  The  Lamen  suspended  from  a Scarlet  Collar. 
The  Banner  of  the  West.  The  position  of  the  Throne  of  the  West  at  the  limits  of  Malkuth  is  fitting  for  the 
Avenger  of  the  Gods,  for  he  is  placed  there  in  eternal  affirmation  against  the  Evil  Ones  “Hitherto  shall  ye 
come  and  no  further.”  The  Throne  is  also  placed  there  as  a seat  of  witness  and  of  punishment  decreed 
against  Evil. 

The  Robe  or  Mantle  is  of  Darkness,  threatening  and  terrible  to  the  Outer,  as  concealing  an 
avenging  Force  ever  ready  to  break  forth  against  the  Evil  Ones.  On  the  left  breast  is  a white  Cross  to 
represent  the  Purification  of  Matter  unto  the  Light.  The  Sword  represents  the  Forces  of  the  Pillar  of 
Severity  as  a whole,  but  the  places  of  the  Sephiroth  are  not  necessarily  indicated  thereon.  The  guard  is 
Hod  and  may  be  of  brass;  the  Grip  is  the  Path  of  Shin  and  may  be  of  scarlet,  and  the  pommel,  Malkuth, 
may  be  black.  The  grip  by  which  it  is  wielded,  being  the  Path  Shin,  represents  the  Universe  governed  by 
the  flaming  force  of  Severity,  and  represents  the  Hiereus  as  wielding  the  Forces  of  Divine  Severity.  “The 
Sword  of  Vengeance”  is  its  name. 

The  Lamen  is  partially  explained  in  the  Portal  thus:  “The  Outer  Circle  includes  the  four 
Sephiroth,  Tiphareth,  Netzach,  Hod,  and  Yesod,  of  which  the  first  three  mark  the  angles  of  the  triangle 
inscribed  within,  while  the  connecting  Paths  Nun,  Ayin,  and  Peh  form  its  sides.  In  the  extreme  centre  is 
the  Path  Samekh  through  which  is  the  passage  for  the  Rending  of  the  Veil.  It  is  therefore  a fitting  Lamen 
for  Hiereus  as  representing  the  connecting  link  between  the  First  and  Second  Orders,  while  the  white 
triangle  established  in  the  surrounding  Darkness  is  circumscribed  in  its  turn  by  the  Circle  of  Fight.  In 
addition  to  this  explanation,  the  Lamen  represents  “The  Light  that  shineth  in  Darkness  though  the 
Darkness  comprehendeth  it  not.”  It  affirms  the  possibility  of  the  Redemption  from  Evil  and  even  that  of 
Evil  itself,  through  self-sacrifice.  It  is  suspended  from  a scarlet  Collar  as  representing  its  dependence  on 
the  Force  of  Divine  Severity  over-awing  the  evil.  It  is  a symbol  of  tremendous  Strength  and  Fortitude,  and 
is  a synthesis  of  the  Office  of  Hiereus  as  regards  the  Temple,  as  opposed  to  his  Office  as  regards  the  outer 
world.  For  these  reasons  it  should  always  be  worn  by  Hiereus. 


60 


VOLUME  SIX 


I jiilell  hi. I HiervUS 


The  Banner  of  the  West  completes  the  symbols  of  Hiereus.  It  is  thus  explained  in  the  Zelator 
Grade:  “The  White  Triangle  refers  to  the  three  Paths  connecting  Malkuth  with  the  other  Sephiroth;  while 
the  red  cross  is  the  Hidden  Knowledge  of  the  Divine  Nature  which  is  to  be  obtained  through  their  aid.  The 
Cross  and  Triangle  together  represent  Life  and  Light.”  In  addition  to  this  explanation  from  the  Zelator 
Grade,  it  represents  eternally  the  possibility  of  Rescuing  the  Evil;  but  in  it  the  Tiphareth  cross  is  placed 
within  the  White  Triangle  of  the  Supernals  as  thereby  representing  that  Sacrifice  is  made  only  unto  the 
Higher.  The  red  Cross  may  be  bordered  with  gold  in  this  instance,  to  represent  the  Perfect  Metal  obtained 
in  and  through  the  Darkness  of  Putrefaction.  Black  is  its  field  which  thus  represents  the  Darkness  and 
Ignorance  of  the  Outer,  while  the  White  Triangle  is  again  the  Light  which  shineth  in  the  Darkness  but 
which  is  not  comprehended  thereby.  Therefore  is  the  Banner  of  the  West  the  symbol  of  Twilight  as  it 
were,  the  equation  of  Light  and  Darkness.  The  pole  and  the  base  are  black,  to  represent  that  even  in  the 
Depths  of  Evil  can  that  symbol  stand.  The  cord  is  black,  but  the  transverse  bar  and  the  lance-point  may  be 
golden  or  brass  and  the  tassels  scarlet  as  in  the  case  of  the  Banner  of  the  East,  and  for  the  same  reasons. 

The  Banner  of  the  West,  when  it  changes  its  position  in  the  Temple,  represents  that  which  bars 
and  threatens,  and  demands  fresh  sacrifice  ere  the  Path  leading  to  the  Higher  be  attained. 

“Avenger  of  the  Gods”  is  the  name  of  the  Hiereus,  and  he  is  Horus  in  the  Abode  of  Blindness 
unto,  and  Ignorance,  of  the  Higher.  Hoor  is  his  name. 

The  station  of  Hegemon  is  between  the  two  Pillars  whose  bases  are  in  Netzach  and  Hod,  at  the 
intersection  of  the  Paths  Peh  and  Samekh,  as  it  were  at  the  Beam  of  the  Balance,  at  the  Equilibrium  of  the 
Scales  of  Justice;  at  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  Lowest  Reciprocal  Path  with  that  of  Samekh,  which 
forms  a part  of  the  Middle  Pillar.  She  is  placed  there  as  the  Guardian  of  the  Threshold  of  Entrance  and  the 
Preparer  of  the  Way  for  the  Enterer.  Therefore  the  Reconciler  between  Light  and  Darkness,  and  the 
Mediator  between  the  Stations  of  Hierophant  and  Hiereus.  The  Symbols  and  Insignia  of  Hegemon  are: 


Lhiiwh  iif  llr^fiiwn 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Robe  of  Pure  Whiteness,  bearing  on  the  left  breast  a Red  Cross.  The  Mitre  Headed  Sceptre. 
The  Lamen  suspended  from  a Black  Collar. 

The  Robe  represents  the  Spiritual  Purity  which  is  required  in  the  Aspirant  to  the  Mysteries  and 
without  which  qualification  none  can  pass  between  the  Eternal  Pillars.  It  represents  the  Divine  Light 
which  is  attracted  thereby  and  brought  to  the  aid  of  the  Candidate.  It  symbolises  the  Self-Sacrifice  that  is 
offered  for  another  to  aid  him  in  the  attainment  of  the  Light.  It  also  signifies  the  atonement  of  error,  the 
Preparer  of  the  Pathway  unto  the  Divine.  Upon  the  left  Breast  is  a Cross,  usually  the  Calvary  form,  of  red 
to  represent  the  energy  of  the  lower  Will,  purified  and  subjected  to  that  which  is  Higher  and  thus  is  the 
Office  of  Hegemon  especially  that  of  the  Reconciler. 

The  Mitre-headed  Sceptre  is  the  distinctive  ensign  of  the  Office  of  the  Hegemon  on  the  Tree  of 
Life  and  represents  the  forces  of  the  Pillar  of  Mercy.  It  should  be  of  scarlet  with  gold  bands  and  pommel. 
The  bands  represent  the  places  of  the  Sephiroth  Chesed  and  Netzach  the  shaft  being  formed  by  the  Paths 
Vau  and  Kaph,  the  grip  by  which  it  is  wielded  being  the  Path  Qoph,  while  the  pommel  is  Malkuth.  The 
Mitre  is  gold  with  red  mountings  and  each  point  terminates  in  a ball.  The  mitre  is  charged  with  a red 
calvary  cross  of  six  squares.  This  Mitre  represents  the  Wisdom  of  Chokmah  as  a duplicated  aspect  of 
Kether,  attracted  by  the  symbol  of  self-sacrifice.  The  Sceptre  is  wielded  by  the  forces  of  Llux  and  Reflux, 
shown  by  the  grip  being  referred  to  the  Path  Qoph,  and  it  represents  the  attraction  into  the  Universe  of  the 
Lorces  of  Divine  Mercy.  The  Sephiroth  and  Paths  are  marked  only  as  bands,  and  owing  to  its  meaning, 
should  be  carried  by  Hegemon  whenever  conducting  the  Candidate,  as  representing  to  the  latter  the 
attraction  of  the  Lorces  of  his  Higher  Self.  It  is  called  “The  Sceptre  of  Wisdom.” 

The  Lamen  is  explained  in  part  in  the  Grade  of  Philosophus  thus: 

“The  peculiar  emblem  of  the  Hegemon  is  the  Calvary  Cross  of  Six  Squares  within  a Circle.  This 
Cross  embraces  Tiphareth,  Netzach,  Hod  and  Yesod,  and  rests  upon  Malkuth.  Also  the  Calvary  Cross  of 
Six  Squares  forms  the  cube  and  is  thus  referred  to  the  Six  Sephiroth  of  Microprosopus  which  are  Chesed, 
Geburah,  Tiphareth,  Netzach,  Hod  and  Yesod.” 

In  addition  to  this  explanation,  it  represents  the  black  Calvary  Cross  of  Suffering  as  the  Initiator 
by  Trial  and  Self-abnegation,  and  the  Opener  of  the  Way  into  the  comprehension  of  the  Lorces  of  the 
Divine  Light.  It  is  therefore  suspended  from  a black  Collar  to  show  that  Suffering  is  the  Purgation  of  Evil. 

“Before  the  Lace  of  the  Gods  in  the  Place  of  the  Threshold”  is  the  name  of  Hegemon,  and  she  is 
the  Goddess  Thma-Ae-St  having  the  following  Coptic  forms:  Thma-Ae-St  - this  as  regards  the  Middle 
Pillar  and  the  influence  from  Kether.  Thma-aesh  - this  more  fiery  as  regards  her  influence  with  respect  to 
the  Pillar  of  Severity.  Thmaa-ett  - this  more  fluidic  with  regard  to  her  influence  with  respect  to  the  Pillar 
of  Mercy.  She  is  the  Wielder  of  the  Sceptre  of  Dual  Wisdom  from  Chokmah  and  therefore  is  the  Mitre 
head  split  in  two  and  not  closed,  to  indicate  the  Dual  Manifestation  of  Wisdom  and  Truth,  even  as  the 
Hall  of  the  Neophytes  is  called  “the  Hall  of  the  Dual  Manifestation  of  the  Goddess  of  Truth.” 


62 


VOLUME  SIX 


The  Three  Inferior  Officers  do  not  wear  Mantles,  but  only  Lamens  suspended  from  black  Collars. 
The  designs  are  in  white  on  a black  field  to  show  that  they  are  Administrators  of  the  Forces  of  Light 
acting  through  the  Darkness,  under  the  Presidency  of  the  Superior  Officers. 

The  Lamen  of  Kerux,  is  thus  explained  in  the  Grade  of  Theoricus: 

“The  Tree  of  Life  and  the  Three  Mother  Letters  are  the  Keys  wherewith  to  unlock  the  Caduceus 
of  Hermes.  The  upper  point  of  the  Wand  rests  on  Kether  and  the  Wings  stretch  out  to  Chokmah  and 
Binah,  thus  comprehending  the  Three  Supernal  Sephiroth.  The  lower  seven  are  embraced  by  the  Serpents 
whose  heads  fall  on  Chesed  and  Geburah.  They  are  the  twin  Serpents  of  Egypt  and  the  currents  of  Astral 
Light.  Furthermore,  the  Wings  and  the  top  of  the  Wand  form  the  letter  Shin,  the  symbol  of  Fire;  the 
Heads  and  upper  halves  of  the  Serpents  form  Aleph  the  symbol  of  Air;  while  their  tails  enclose  Mem,  the 
symbol  of  Water  -the  Fire  of  Life  above,  the  Waters  of  Creation  below,  and  the  Air  symbol  vibrating 
between  them.” 


In  addition  to  this,  the  Caduceus  of  Kerux  represents  the  balanced  forces  of  Eternal  Light  working 
invisibly  in  the  Darkness  - even  as  the  Light  borne  before  the  hoodwinked  Candidate  at  his  Initiation,  is 
symbolic  of  the  Light  which  guides  him  in  the  darkness  of  the  world  though  he  sees  it  not  nor  knows  it. 
This  Caduceus  is  the  Rod  of  Hermes,  containing  invisible  and  unsuspected  forces,  the  rules  of  whose 
administration  may  be  revealed  through  meditation.  It  is  the  outer  form  of  the  Wand  surmounted  by  the 
Winged  Globe  below  which  the  twin  Serpents  are  shown  - the  Wand  of  the  Chief  Adept  in  the  5-6  Grade. 

The  Lamen  of  Stolistes  is  thus  explained  in  the  Grade  of  Practicus:  “The  Cup  of  Stolistes  partakes 
in  part  of  the  symbolism  of  the  Layer  of  Moses  and  the  Sea  of  Solomon.  On  the  Tree  of  Life  it  embraces 
nine  of  the  Sephiroth  exclusive  of  Kether.  Yesod  and  Malkuth  form  the  triangle  below,  the  former  the 
apex,  the  latter  the  base.  Like  the  Caduceus,  it  further  represents  the  three  Elements  of  Water,  Air,  and 
Fire.  The  crescent  is  the  Water  which  is  above  the  Firmament;  the  circle  is  the  Firmament,  and  the 
triangle  is  the  consuming  Fire  below,  which  is  opposed  to  the  Celestial  Fire  symbolised  by  the  upper  part 
of  the  Caduceus.” 


Lamen  of  SlifillH 


63 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


In  addition  to  this  explanation,  the  Cup  represents  the  Receptacle  and  Collector  of  the  more 
Fluidic  Forces  of  the  Light,  and  is  the  symbol  of  an  inexhaustible  Bowl  of  Libation  from  which  Reservoir 
the  Adept  may  draw  the  Reserved  Forces  of  the  Light  - which  matter  again  calls  for  meditation. 

The  Lamen  of  Dadouchos  is  thus  explained  in  the  Grade  of  Zelator:  “The  Hermetic  Cross,  which 
is  also  known  as  Fylfot,  Hammer  of  Thor,  and  Swastika,  is  formed  of  17  squares  taken  from  a square  of 
25  lesser  squares.  These  17  fitly  represent  the  Sun,  the  Four  Elements  and  the  Twelve  Signs  of  the 
Zodiac.” 

In  addition  to  this,  the  Lamen  has  a more  extended  meaning.  The  Hermetic  Cross,  the  Bolt  of 
Whirling  Flame,  which  is  represented  by  the  cross  of  Four  Axes  whose  heads  may  be  either  double  or 
single  and  turned  in  either  direction,  is  a symbol  of  terrific  Strength,  and  represents  the  Fire  of  the  Spirit 
cleaving  its  way  in  all  directions  through  the  Darkness  of  Matter.  Therefore  is  it  borne  on  the  Lamen  of 
Dadouchos  whose  office  is  that  of  Purification  and  Consecration  by  Fire,  and  from  it  also  may  be  drawn 
by  meditation  several  formulae  of  strength. 


lAitnrn  isf  I Iwjhmrbw 


The  Kerux  is  the  principal  form  of  Anubis,  as  the  Sentinel  is  the  subsidiary  form. 

Kerux  is  Ano-Oobist  Empe-Eeb-Te  - “Anubis  of  the  East.”  Sentinel  is  Ano-Oobi  Em-Pemen-Te  - 
“Anubis  of  the  West.” 

The  Kerux  is  the  Herald,  the  Guardian  and  Watcher  within  the  Temple,  as  Sentinel  is  the  Watcher 
without  - and  therefore  is  his  charge  the  proper  disposition  of  the  furniture  and  stations  of  the  Temple.  He 
is  also  the  Proclaimer. 


Lumen  uf  Senlinel 


The  Red  Lamp  to  signify  the  Hidden  Fire  over  which  he  watches.  The  Magic  Staff  of  Power  to 
represent  a Ray  of  the  Divine  Light  which  kindles  the  Hidden  Fire.  Two  Potions  whereby  to  produce  the 
effect  of  Blood. 

He  is  the  Guardian  of  the  Inner  side  of  the  Portal  - the  sleepless  Watcher  of  the  Gods  and 


64 


VOLUME  SIX 


the  Preparer  of  the  Pathway  to  Divine  Wisdom.  “Watcher  for  the  Gods”  is  the  name  of  Kerux,  and  he  is 
Ano-Oobist,  the  Herald  before  them. 

The  Stolistes  is  stationed  in  the  Northern  Part  of  the  Hall  to  the  North-West  of  the  Black  Pillar 
whose  base  is  in  Hod,  and  is  there  as  the  Affirmer  of  the  powers  of  Moisture,  Water,  reflected  through  the 
Tree  into  Hod.  The  Cup  is  the  Receptacle  of  this,  filled  from  Hod  so  as  to  transmit  its  forces  into  Malkuth, 
restoring  and  purifying  the  vital  forces  therein  by  Cold  and  Moisture.  “Goddess  of  the  Scale  of  the 
Balance  at  the  Black  Pillar”  is  the  name  of  Stolistes  and  she  is  “The  Light  Shining  through  the  Waters 
upon  Earth,”  Aura-Mo-Ooth,  and  there  is  a connection  between  her  and  the  Aurim  or  Urim  of  the 
Hebrews. 

The  Dadouchos  is  stationed  towards  the  midst  of  the  Southern  part  of  the  Hall,  to  the  South-West 
of  the  White  Pillar  whose  base  is  in  Netzach  and  is  there  as  the  Affirmer  of  the  Powers  of  Fire,  reflected 
down  the  Tree  to  Netzach.  The  Censer  is  the  Receptacle  thereof  the  transmitter  of  the  Fires  of  Netzach  to 
Malkuth,  restoring  and  purifying  the  vital  force  therein  by  Heat  and  Dryness.  “Goddess  of  the  Scale  of  the 
Balance  at  the  White  Pillar”  is  the  name  of  Dadouchos  and  she  is  “Perfection  through  Fire  manifesting  on 
Fai  th,”  Thaum-Aesch-Nia-eth.  And  there  is  a connection  between  her  and  the  Thummim  of  the  Hebrews. 

The  Stolistes  has  the  care  of  the  Robes  and  Insignia  of  the  Temple  as  symbolising  by  their 
cleansing  and  purification  the  Purging  away  of  the  Evil  of  Malkuth  by  the  Waters  of  the  Spirit. 

The  Dadouchos  has  charge  of  all  lights,  fires  and  incense,  as  representing  the  purifying  and 
purging  of  Malkuth  by  Fire  and  the  Light  of  the  Spirit.  These  Officers  also  purify  the  Temple,  the 
Members  and  the  Candidate  by  Water  and  by  Fire,  as  it  is  written: 

“I  indeed  baptise  you  with  Water,  but  One  shall  come  after  me  who  shall  baptise  ye  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  with  Fire.” 

This  completes  the  names  and  titles  of  the  Officers  of  a Temple  and  they  are  Seven  in  number  and 
may  all  be  taken  by  a Frater  or  Soror.  As  they  represent  Powers  and  not  persons,  the  feminine  form  of  the 
Greek  names  is  not  usually  used,  for  the  powers  are  positive  (male)  or  negative  (female)  according  to  the 
God-form  used.  Thus  Hierophant,  Hiereus,  and  Kerux  are  more  natural  offices  for  Fratres,  while 
Hegemon,  Stolistes  and  Dad  ouchos  are  more  natural  for  Sorores  but  the  office  itself  carries  no 
implication  of  sex  and  sometimes  the  psychic  balance  of  a ceremony  may  be  better  maintained  when  a 
Frater  is  Hegemon  and  a Soror  Hierophant. 

The  Hierophant  must  be  of  the  5-6  Grade  and  a Zelator  Adeptus  Minor.  The  Hiereus  must  be  at 
least  Philosophus,  and  the  Hegemon  at  least  Practicus,  and  preferably  Philosophus.  Kerux  must  be  at  least 
Theoricus  while  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  must  be  Zelator,  a Neophyte  being  qualified  only  for  Sentinel. 
In  case  the  feminine  forms  of  the  names  of  the  Officers  should  wish  to  be  known,  they  are  as  follows: 

V.H.  Hierophant  or  V.H.  Hierophantria 
H.  Hiereus  or  H.  Hiereia 


65 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


H.  Hegemon  or  H.  Hegemone 
Kerux  or  Kerukaina 
Stolistes  or  Stolistria 
Dadouchos  or  Dadouche 
Sentinel  or  Phulax 

(N.  B.  These  alternative  or  feminine  forms  were  rarely  used  in  the  early  Order,  and  in  the  newly 
formed  modern  Temples  will  probably  never  be  used.  l.R.) 

OF  THE  THREE  CHIEFS 

The  Three  Chiefs  are  in  the  Temple  and  rule  it,  yet  they  are  not  comprehended  in,  nor  understood 
by,  the  Outer  Order.  They  represent,  as  it  were,  Veiled  Divinities  sending  a form  to  sit  before  the  Veil 
Paroketh,  and,  like  the  Veils  of  isis  and  Nephthys,  impenetrable  save  to  the  Initiate.  The  synthesis  of  the 
Three  Chiefs  may  be  said  to  be  in  the  form  of  Thoth  Who  cometh  from  behind  the  Veil  at  the  point  of  its 
Rending.  Yet  separately,  they  may  be  thus  referred: 

The  Imperator,  from  his  relation  to  Geburah,  may  be  referred  to  the  Goddess  Nephthys. 

The  Praemonstrator,  from  his  relation  to  Chesed,  may  be  referred  to  the  Goddess  isis. 

The  Cancellarius,  from  his  property  of  Recorder,  may  be  referred  to  the  God  Thoth. 

No  ceremony  of  the  Outer  Order  may  take  place  without  a Chief,  preferably  the  Three  Chiefs  or 
their  Vice-gerants,  present  and  on  account  of  the  Stations  on  the  Dais,  it  is  well  to  have  these  stations 
filled  by  an  Adept,  should  a Chief  be  absent.  These  Stations  and  those  of  the  Officers  are  called  the 
Visible  Stations  of  the  Gods,  and  descriptions  of  the  forms  which  an  Adept  Officer  builds  up  as  a focus  of 
force  are  given  in  another  paper. 

THE  INVISIBLE  STATIONS 

These  are: 

1 . The  Stations  of  the  Kerubim. 

2.  The  Stations  of  the  Children  of  Horns. 

3.  The  Stations  of  the  Evil  One. 

4.  The  Station  of  Harpocrates. 

5.  The  Stations  of  Isis,  Nephthys,  Aroueris. 

First,  the  Kerubim:  (These  are  shown  in  the  colour  plate  section  of  this  book.)  The  Stations  of  the 
Man,  the  Lion,  the  Bull,  and  the  Eagle  are  at  the  Four  Cardinal  Points  without  the  Hall,  as  invisible 
Guardians  of  the  limits  of  the  Temple.  They  are  placed  according  to  the  winds  - beyond  the  Stations  of 
Hierophant,  Dadouchos,  Hiereus,  and  Stolistes  - and  in  this  order  do  their  symbols  appear  in  all  Warrants 
of  Temples. 

The  Kerub  of  Air  formulates  behind  the  Throne  of  Hierophant.  She  has  a young  girl’s 


66 


VOLUME  SIX 


countenance  and  form,  with  large  and  shadowing  wings;  and  she  is  a power  of  the  Great  Goddess  Hathor 
who  unites  the  powers  of  Isis  and  Nephthys.  To  the  Sign  Aquarius  is  she  referred  as  a correlative,  which 
represents  Springs  of  Water  breaking  upOn  Earth;  though  as  a Zodiacal  Sign  it  is  referred  to  Air,  the 
container  of  Rain.  The  Egyptian  name  of  the  sign  Aquarius  is  Phritithi.  “Thou  shalt  not  confound  the 
Kerubim  with  their  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  notwithstanding  that  the  latter  be  under  the  Presidency  of  the 
former,  seeing  that  the  Kerub  representeth  a far  more  Sublime  Potency,  yet  acting  by  a harmonious 
sympathy  through  the  particular  Sign  allotted  unto  their  correspondence.” 

The  Kerub  of  Fire  has  the  face  and  form  of  a Lion  with  large  and  clashing  wings.  He  formulates 
behind  the  Throne  of  Dadouchos  and  he  is  a power  of  the  Great  Goddess  Tharpesh  or  Tharpheshest,  the 
latter  syllable  being  nearly  Pasht.  The  action  of  the  Lion  Kerub  is  through  the  Flaming  Fire  of  Leo  of 
which  the  Egyptian  name  is  Labo-Ae. 

The  Kerub  of  Water  has  the  face  and  form  of  a Great  Eagle  with  large  and  glistening  wings  and 
he  formulates  behind  the  throne  of  Hiereus.  He  is  a power  of  the  Great  God  Thoomoo  (TMU),  and  his 
operation  is  by  the  Sign  of  Scorpio,  which  is  called  in  Egyptian  Szlae-Ee. 

The  Kerub  of  Earth  has  a face  and  form  of  a Bull  with  heavy  and  darkening  wings.  He  formulates 
behind  the  Throne  of  Stolistes  and  he  is  a power  of  the  Great  God  Aphapshi  and  his  operation  is  by  the 
Sign  Taurus  called  Ta-Aur  in  Egyptian. 

Second,  the  Children  of  Horus:  Between  the  Invisible  Stations  of  the  Kerubim  are  those  of  the 
Four  Vice-gerants  of  the  Elements  and  they  are  situated  at  the  Four  Corners  of  the  Temple,  at  the  places 
marked  by  the  Four  Rivers  of  Eden  in  the  Warrant.  The  body  of  a Warrant,  authorising  the  formation  and 
establishment  of  a Temple,  represents  the  Temple  itself  - of  which  the  Guardians  are  the  Kerubim  and  the 
Vice-gerents  in  the  places  of  the  Rivers. 

Ameshet  (man-headed)  is  placed  in  the  North  East,  between  the  Man  and  the  Bull.  Ameshet  or 
Amesheth.  The  spelling  is  Coptic  and  differs  according  to  the  force  intended  to  be  invoked  by  the  letters. 

Tou-mathaph, jackal-headed,  is  placed  in  the  South  East  between  the  Man  and  the  Lion. 
Toumathph  or  Tmoumathv. 

Ahephi,  Ape-faced,  is  placed  in  the  South  West  between  the  Lion  and  the  Eagle.  Ahephi  or 
Ahaphix. 

Kabexnuv,  Hawk-faced,  is  placed  in  the  North-West,  between  the  Eagle  and  the  Bull.  Kabexnuv 
or  Dabexnjemouv. 

Third,  the  Station  of  the  Evil  One.  This  station  is  in  the  place  of  Yesod  and  is  called  the  Station  of 
the  Evil  One,  the  slayer  of  Osiris.  He  is  the  Tempter,  Accuser  and  Punisher  of  the  Brethren,  and  in  Egypt 
is  represented  mostly  with  the  head  of  a Water-Dragon,  the  body  of  a Lion  or  Leopard,  and  the  hind-parts 
of  a Water-horse.  He  is  the  Administrator  of  the  power  of  the  Evil  Triad: 


67 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Stooping  Dragon,  Apophrassz.  The  Slayer  of  Osiris  - Szathan  Typhon.  The  brutal  power  of 
Demonic  Force  - Bessz. 

The  Synthesis  of  this  Evil  Triad  “The  Mouth  of  the  Power  of  Destruction”  is  called  Ommoo- 
Szathan. 

Fourth,  the  Station  of  Harpocrates.  The  invisible  Station  of  Harpocrates  is  in  the  Path  of  Sarnckh. 
between  the  Station  of  Hegemon  and  the  Invisible  Station  of  the  Evil  Triad.  Harpocrates  is  the  God  of 
Silence  and  Mystery,  whose  Name  is  the  Word  of  this  Grade  of  Neophyte.  He  is  the  younger  brother  of 
Horns,  Hoor-Po-Krattist. 

Fifth,  the  Stations  of  isis  and  Nephythys.  The  Stations  of  isis  and  Nephthys  are  respectively  at  the 
Places  of  the  Pillars  in  Netzach  and  Hod,  and  these  Great  Goddesses  are  not  otherwise  shown  in  the 
Grade,  save  in  connection  with  the  Praemonstrator  and  Imperator,  as  operating  through  the  Hierophant, 
seeing  that  isis  corresponds  to  the  Pillar  of  Mercy  and  Nephthys  to  that  of  Severity;  and  therefore  the 
positions  of  the  Pillars  or  Obelisks  are  but,  as  it  were,  the  Places  of  their  feet. 

The  Station  of  Aroueris.  The  invisible  Station  of  Aroueris(Horus  the  Elder)  is  beside  the 
Hierophant  as  though  representing  the  power  of  Osiris  to  the  Outer  Order  - for  while  the  Hierophant  is  an 
Adeptus,  he  is  shown  only  as  Lord  of  the  Paths  of  the  Portal  - so  that,  when  the  Hierophant  moves  from 
the  Throne  of  the  East,  he  is  no  longer  Osiris  but  Aroueris.  Yet  when  the  Hierophant  is  on  the  Dais,  the 
Station  of  Aroueris  is  that  of  the  Immediate  Past  Hierophant  who  sits  on  the  Hierophant’s  left.  Aroo- 
ouerist. 

This  ends  the  Constitutory  Symbolism  of  a Temple  in  the  Grade  of  Neophyte.  Should  a Member 
have  occasion  to  quit  his  place,  he  shall  do  it  moving  with  the  course  of  the  Sun.  As  he  passes  the  place  of 
Hierophant,  he  shall  salUte  with  the  Sign.  And  when  he  enters  or  quits  the  Temple,  he  shall  salute  the 
Hierophant’s  Throne  when  within  the  Portal. 

THE  SYMBOLISM  OF  THE  OPENING  OF  THE  GRADE  OF  NEOPHYTE 

The  Opening  Ceremony  begins  with  the  Cry  of  the  “Watcher  Within”  who  should  come  to  the 
right  front  of  Hierophant  and  raise  his  Wand.  This  Symbol  of  the  Ray  of  the  Divine  Light  from  the  White 
Triangle  of  the  Three  Supernals  thus  descends  into  the  Darkness  and  warns  the  Evil  and  uninitiated  to 
retire,  so  that  the  White  Triangle  may  be  formulated  upon  the  Altar  through  the  combined  effect  of  the 
formulae  of  the  Opening  Ceremony. 

Having  done  this,  he  sees  that  the  Entrance  is  properly  guarded.  And  then  the  Hierophant  calls  to 
the  Hiereus  to  test  the  Members  by  the  Signs,  the  knowledge  of  which  shows  that  they,  though  in  the 
Land  of  Blindness  and  Ignorance,  have  yet  seen  that  Triangle  of  Divine  Light  from  the  Three  Supernals 
formulated  in  Darkness.  It  is  then  noted  that  the  names  of  the  three  chief  Officers  begin  with  the  Letter  of 
Breath  in  the  Coptic. 

In  the  name  of  Osiris  this  letter  is  mute,  and  silent  and  Concealed,  as  it  were,  by  ‘H’  the  Eta.  In 
the  name  Horus,  it  is  manifest  and  violently  aspirated,  while  in  the  name  Thmaest,  it  is  partly  one  and 
partly  the  other,  for  it  is  compounded  with  the  Letter  ‘T’  in  Theta. 


68 


VOLUME  SIX 


H “Ae”  is  attributed  to  Chesed  - to  Aries,  and  to  Earth  and  Saturn.  This  is  intended  to  affirm  the 
Unknown  Life,  which  is  Inspired  from  the  Beyond,  sent  out  to  Aries,  the  commencement  of  the  Spring  in 
the  year,  the  Life  which  after  being  Inspired,  is  breathed  forth  again;  and  also  the  possible  use  of  that 
Breath,  between  the  Inspiration  and  the  Expiration,  in  the  combination  between  it  and  the  Forces  of  the 
Microcosm. 

The  whole  is  a rehearsal  of  the  properties  of  the  reflection  of  the  element  Air  down  through  the 
Middle  Pillar  of  the  Sephiroth,  representing  the  reflection  of  the  Air  from  Kether,  through  Tiphareth  to 
Yesod,  and  even  to  the  Citrine  part  of  Malkuth.  For  the  subtle  Aether  is,  in  Kether,  inspired  from  the 
Divine  Light  beyond;  hence  reflected  into  Tiphareth,  wherein  it  is  combined  with  the  Reflexes  from  the 
Alchemical  Principles  in  that  great  Receptacle  of  the  Forces  of  the  Tree,  in  Yesod.  It  affirms  the 
foundation  of  a formula  and  from  Malkuth  it  is  breathed  forth  or  reflected  back. 

And  this  formula  the  Adept  can  use.  Standing  in  his  Sphere  of  Sensation  he  can,  by  his 
knowledge  of  the  Sacred  Rites,  raise  himself  unto  the  contemplation  of  Yechidah  and  from  thence  aspire 
(in  the  sense  of  Adspire,  i.e.,  to  attract  towards  you  in  breathing)  downwards  into  himself  the  Lower 
Genius  as  though  temporarily  to  inhabit  himself  as  its  Temple. 

Another  formula  of  Vibration  is  here  hidden.  Let  the  Adept,  standing  upright,  his  arms  stretched 
out  in  the  form  of  a Calvary  Cross,  vibrate  a Divine  Name,  bringing  with  the  formulation  thereof  a deep 
inspiration  into  his  lungs.  Let  him  retain  the  breath,  mentally  pronouncing  the  Name  in  his  Heart,  so  as  to 
combine  it  with  the  forces  he  desires  to  awake  thereby.  Then  sending  it  downwards  through  his  body  past 
Yesod,  but  not  resting  there,  but  taking  his  physical  life  for  a material  basis,  send  it  on  into  his  feet.  There 
he  shall  again  momentarily  formulate  the  Name.  Then,  bringing  it  rushing  upwards  into  the  lungs,  thence 
shall  he  breathe  it  forth  strongly,  while  vibrating  that  Divine  Name.  He  will  send  his  breath  steadily 
forward  into  the  Universe  so  as  to  awaken  the  corresponding  forces  of  the  Name  in  the  Outer  World. 
Standing  with  arms  out  in  the  form  of  a cross,  when  the  breath  has  been  imaginatively  sent  to  the  feet  and 
back,  bring  the  arms  forward  in  “The  Sign  of  the  Enterer”  while  vibrating  the  Name  out  into  the  Universe. 
On  completing  this,  make  the  “Sign  of  Silence”  and  remain  still,  contemplating  the  Force  you  have 
invoked. 

This  is  the  secret  traditional  mode  of  pronouncing  the  Divine  Names  by  vibration,  but  let  the 
Adept  beware  that  he  applies  it  only  to  the  Divine  Names  of  the  Gods.  If  he  does  this  thing  ignorantly  in 
working  with  Elemental  or  Demonic  Names,  he  may  bring  into  himself  terrible  forces  of  Evil  and 
Obsession.  The  Method  described  is  called  “The  Vibratory  Formula  of  the  Middle  Pillar.” 

After  noting  the  Names  of  the  Three  Chief  Officers,  comes  the  recapitulation  of  the  Stations  and 
duties  of  the  Officers,  thus  occultly  affirming  the  establishment  of  the  Temple  so  that  the  Divine  Light 
may  shine  into  the  Darkness.  Then  follows  the  purification  and  consecration  of  the  Hall  by  Water  and  by 
Fire,  thus  marking  the  limitation  of  the  Four  Cardinal  Points  at  the  Four  Quarters,  and  the  Equilibriation 
of  the  Elements.  This  is  the 


69 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Baptism  of  the  Place  and,  as  it  were,  the  Preparation  of  a fitting  Shrine  for  the  Forces  of  the  Divine  Light. 
While  all  this  goes  forward,  especially  after  the  Flierophant’ s “for  by  Names  and  Images  are  all  powers 
awakened  and  re-awakened,”  the  Officers  become  clothed  in  their  God-forms  and  the  Invisible  Stations 
awake. 

The  Procession  of  Officers  is  then  formed  in  the  North  in  readiness  for  the  “Mystic 
Circumambulation  in  the  Path  of  Light”  (that  is  to  say,  none  of  the  partakers  is  hoodwinked).  It  is  formed 
in  the  North,  beginning  from  the  Station  of  Stolistes,  the  symbol  of  the  Waters  of  Creation  attracting  the 
Divine  Spirit,  and  therefore  alluding  to  the  Creation  of  the  World  by  the  Spirit  and  the  Waters.  The 
Mystic  Reverse  Circumambulation  forms  its  Procession  in  the  South,  beginning  from  the  Station  of 
Dadouchos,  as  symbolic  of  the  Ending  and  Judgment  of  the  World  by  Fire.  But  also,  the  Mystic 
Circumambulation  commences  by  the  Paths  of  Shin  and  Resh,  as  though  bringing  into  action  the  Solar 
Fire;  while  the  Reverse  Circumambulation  commences  beside  those  of  Qoph  and  Tzaddi  as  though 
bringing  the  Watery  Reflux  into  action. 

The  Order  of  the  Mystic  Circumambulation.  First  comes  Anubis,  the  Watcher  within;  next 
Thmaest,  the  Goddess  of  the  Hall  of  Truth;  then  Horns;  then  the  Goddesses  of  the  Scales  of  the  Balance, 
then  Members,  if  the  Hall  be  large  enough,  and  at  the  end  the  Watcher  Without,  Sentinel.  It  is  as  though  a 
gigantic  Wheel  were  revolving,  as  it  is  said: 

“One  Wheel  upon  Earth  beside  the  Kerub.”  The  Name  of  the  Sphere  of  the  Primum  Mobile, 
Rashith  ha-Gilgalim,  signifies  the  heads  or  beginnings  of  Whirling  Motions  or  Revolutions.  Of  this 
Wheel  in  the  Mystic  Circumambulation,  the  ascending  side  begins  from  below  the  Pillar  of  Nephthys,  and 
the  descending  side  from  below  the  Pillar  of  Isis;  but  in  the  Reverse  Circumambulation,  the  contrary. 

Now  the  nave  or  axis  of  this  Wheel  is  about  the  Invisible  Station  of  Harpocrates  - as  though  that 
God,  in  the  Sign  of  Silence  were  there  placed  affirming  the  Concealment  of  that  Central  Axis  of  the 
Wheel,  which  alone  revolves  not. 

The  Mystic  Circumambulation  is  called  symbolic  of  the  Rise  of  Light  and  from  it  is  drawn 
another  formula  for  the  circulation  of  the  breath.  It  is  the  formula  of  the  Four  Revolutions  of  the  Breath 
(not,  of  course,  of  the  actual  air  inspired,  but  of  the  subtle  Aethers  which  may  be  drawn  thence  and  of 
which  it  is  the  Vehicle  - the  aethers  which  awaken  centres  in  the  subtle  body  through  the  formula).  This 
formula  should  be  preceded  by  that  of  the  Middle  Pillar,  described  previously. 

By  this  method,  having  invoked  the  Power  you  wish  to  awaken  in  yourself,  and  contemplated  it, 
begin  its  circumambulation  thus:  Fill  the  lungs  and  imagine  the  Name  vibrating  in  the  contained  Air. 
Imagine  this  vibration  going  down  the  left  leg  to  the  sole  of  the  left  foot  - thence  passing  over  to  the  sole 
of  the  right  foot  - up  the  right  leg  to  the  lungs  again,  whence  it  is  out-breathed.  Do  this  four  times  to  the 
rhythm  of  the  Four-fold  breath. 

The  object  of  the  Mystic  Circumambulation  is  to  attract  and  make  the  connection  betwen  the 
Divine  Fight  above  and  the  Temple.  Therefore  the  Hierophant  does  not  quit  his  post  to  take  part  therein, 
but  remains  there  to  attract  by  his  Sceptre  the  Fight  from  beyond 


70 


VOLUME  SIX 


the  Veil.  Each  member  in  passing  gives  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer,  thus  projecting  the  Light  forward  on  his 
Path  from  East  to  West,  as  he  receives  it  from  the  Hierophant’s  Throne.  Horus  passes  only  once,  for  he  is 
the  Son  of  Osiris  and  inherits  the  Light  by  birthright  from  him.  Therefore  he  goes  at  once  to  his  station  to 
fix  the  Light  there.  Thmaest,  the  Goddess  of  Truth,  passes  twice  because  her  rule  is  of  the  Balance  of  the 
Two  Scales,  and  she  retires  to  her  Station  between  the  Pillars  there  to  complete  the  reflex  of  the  Middle 
Column.  The  Watcher  within  and  the  rest  circumambulate  thrice  as  affirming  the  completion  of  the 
Reflection  of  the  Perfecting  of  the  White  Triangle  of  the  Three  Supernals  upon  the  Altar. 

Then  follows  the  Adoration  of  God  the  Vast  One,  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  - at  which  again  all  give  the 
Sign  of  the  Enterer,  the  Sign  of  the  Projection  of  the  Lorce  of  the  Light.  Then  only  does  the  Watcher 
declare  that  the  Sun  has  arisen  and  that  the  Light  shineth  in  Darkness.  Now  comes  the  Battery  of  the 
Neophyte  Grade  - the  single  knock  of  Hierophant  repeated  by  Hiereus  and  Hegemon.  This  affirms  the 
establishment  of  the  White  Triangle  and  therefore  the  Completion  of  the  Opening  Ceremony.  The  Mystic 
Words  “Khabs  Am  Pekht”  which  accompany  the  knocks  seal  the  image  of  the  Light.  Their  significance 
imples,  by  various  Qabalistic  methods  of  analysis,  as  well  as  by  a certain  reading  of  the  Coptic  and 
Egyptian  hieroglyphics,  “Light  in  Extension”  or  “May  Light  be  extended  in  Abundance  upon  you.” 

Konx  Om  Pax  is  the  Greek  corrupted  pronunciation  of  this,  put  here  to  link  it  with  its  right  origin. 

The  Grade  of  Neophyte  has  0 or  the  Circle  for  its  Number,  as  if  hiding  all  things  under  the  negative 
symbol.  This  is  placed  within  a circle  and  a square  connected  by  equal  lines,  as  if  affirming  the  hidden 
quality  of  their  origin  in  Kether  where  all  things  are  One,  and  the  consequent  universal  application  of  the 
Secret  Lormulae. 


Cn*-B 


7 ns 

fluiE  Gold 


MtfftNbTWnH 


m 


Hluv 


' BTui1 


CWttLUVtlll^ 

mzzzfcz 

(fdlP 


WEAPONS  OF  THE  MAIN  OFFICERS 


71 


wHilf 
(W  *HtK, 


VOLUME  SIX 


Z-3 

THE  SYMBOLISM  OF  THE  ADMISSION  OF  THE  CANDIDATE 
ADMISSION  OF  THE  CANDIDATE 

The  Candidate  is  waiting  without  the  Portal  under  the  care  of  the  Sentinel  - “The  Watcher 
Without”.  That  is,  under  the  care  of  the  form  of  Anubis  of  the  West,  symbolically  that  he  may  keep  off 
the  “Dog-Faced  Demons,”  the  opposers  of  Anubis,  who  rise  from  the  confines  where  matter  ends,  to 
deceive  and  drag  down  the  Soul.  The  Ritual  of  the  31st  Path  says:  “Since  ever  dragging  down  the  Soul 
and  leading  it  from  sacred  things,  from  the  confines  of  matter  arise  the  terrible  Dog-Faced  Demons  never 
showing  a true  image  unto  mortal  gaze.” 

The  Hierophant  gives  a single  knock  to  announcethe  just  commencement  of  a vibration  in  the 
Sphere  of  Sensation  of  the  Candidate.  He  then  states  that  he  holds  the  Dispensation  from  the  G.H.  Chiefs 
of  the  Second  Order,  to  affirm  that  the  effect  of  the  ensuing  Ceremony  upon  the  Candidate  is  duly 
authorised  by  the  Higher  Powers  for  the  purpose  of  Initiation  which  shall  ultimately  lead  to  the 
knowledge  of  his  Higher  Self.  He  is  admitted  to  the  Grade  of  Neophyte  which  has  no  number,  concealing 
the  commencement  of  all  things  under  the  similitude  of  no  thing. 

The  Hegemon,  the  representative  of  the  Goddess  of  Truth  and  Justice,  is  consequently  sent  to 
superintend  the  preparation  of  the  Candidate,  thus  symbolising  that  she  is  the  Presider  of  Equilibrium  to 
administrate  the  process  of  Initiation,  by  the  commencement  of  the  forces  of  equilibrium  in  the  Candidate 
himself,  through  the  symbols  of  rectitude  and  self-control.  But  the  actual  preparation  of  the  Candidate 
should  be  performed  by  the  Sentinel  - the  “Watcher  Without”  - to  show  that  this  preparation  must  be 
accomplished  before  the  establishment  of  equilibrium  can  occur.  Therefore,  does  the  Hegemon 
superintend  the  preparation  rather  than  perform  it  actually.  A triple  cord  is  bound  round  the  body  of  the 
Neophyte,  symbolising  the  binding  and  restriction  of  the  lower  nature.  It  is  triple  in  reference  to  the  White 
Triangle  of  the  Three  Supernals.  Then,  also,  are  the  eyes  bandaged  to  symbolise  that  the  light  of  the 
material  world  is  but  darkness  and  illusion  compared  with  the  radiance  of  the  Divine  Light.  The 
preparation  also  represents  a certain  temporary  binding  and  restriction  of  the  natural  body. 

The  Hierophant,  being  a Member  of  the  Second  Order  and  therefore  initiated  into  the  Secret 
Knowledge  of  the  symbolism,  shall,  together  with  any  Officers  and  Members  also  of  the  Inner  Order, 
remember  what  tremendous  Gods  and  Goddesses  they  represent  - the  Divine  Forces  of  the  Eternal  in  the 
administration  of  the  Universe.  The  Ritual  should  be  read  in  a loud,  clear,  stern  and  solemn  voice  so  as  to 
impress  the  Candidate  with  the  solemnity  of  the  occasion.  In  this,  there  should  be  no  foolish  nervousness 
or  hesitation,  but  the  Ritual  as  performed  by  an  initiated  Hierophant  should  become  in  his  hands 
something  more  than  this. 


73 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Thus  should  he  act.  Let  him  remember  what  particular  God  he  represents.  Exalting  his  mind  unto 
the  contemplation  thereof,  let  him  think  of  himself  as  a vast  figure,  standing  or  moving  in  the  likeness  of 
that  God,  colossal,  his  head  lost  in  the  clouds,  with  the  light  flashing  round  it  from  the  head-dress  of  the 
God  - his  feet  resting  upon  Earth  in  darkness,  thunder  and  rolling  clouds,  and  his  form  wrapped  in  flashes 
of  lightning  - the  while  vibrating  the  Name  of  the  God.  Thus  standing,  let  him  endeavour  to  hear  the  voice 
of  the  God  whom  he  represents  and  of  the  God-Forms  of  the  other  officers  as  previously  explained. 

Let  him  speak,  then,  not  as  if  unto  an  assembly  of  mortals  but  as  to  an  assembly  of  Gods. 

Let  his  voice  be  so  directed  as  to  roll  through  the  Universe  to  the  utmost  confines  of  space. 

Let  the  Candidate  represent  unto  him,  as  it  were,  a world  whom  he  is  beginning  to  lead  unto 
the  knowledge  of  its  governing  Angel.  As  it  is  written  “The  lightning  lighteneth  out  of  the 
East  and  shineth  even  unto  the  West,  even  so,  shall  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  be.” 

The  Candidate  during  the  Ceremony  is  addressed  as  Child  of  Earth,  as  representing  the  earthly  or 
terrestrial  nature  of  man  - he  who  comes  forward  from  the  darkness  of  Malkuth  to  endeavour  to  regain  the 
knowledge  of  the  Light.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  speech  of  the  Hegemon,  because  the  Path  of  the 
Initiate  is  but  darkness  and  foolishness  to  the  natural  man.  The  single  knock  given  by  the  Hegemon 
without  the  door  represents  the  consenting  will  of  the  natural  man  to  receive  the  force  formulated  by  the 
Hierophant,  and  is  answered  by  the  Kerux  within  as  if  a witness  were  confirming  the  same.  This  being 
done,  the  Kerux,  as  a witness,  demands  authority  from  the  Hierophant  to  admit  the  Candidate  into  the 
Hall  of  Truth  and  Justice.  The  Hierophant,  in  granting  the  permission,  seals  the  Candidate  with  a new 
name  given  to  the  physical  body  of  the  outward  man,  but  signifying  the  aspirations  of  his  Soul.  As  a 
consequence  of  the  affirmation  of  the  Motto  as  the  Name  of  the  Candidate  in  the  Hall  of  Truth,  Osiris  at 
once  sends  forward  the  Goddess  of  the  Scales  of  the  Balance  to  baptise  him  with  Water  and  the 
companion  Goddess  to  consecrate  him  with  Fire.  As  it  is  written  “Unless  a man  be  born  of  Water  and  of 
the  Spirit,  he  shall  in  no  wise  enter  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.” 

The  Kerux  instantly  bars  the  Candidate’s  passage  to  mark  that  though  he  has  been  admitted,  the 
natural  man  of  unpurified  desires  cannot  be  a dweller  in  the  Hall  of  Truth.  The  Goddesses  of  the  Scales 
immediately  purify  and  consecrate  him,  which  operation  calls  into  action  the  forces  of  the  Pillars  in  his 
own  sphere  of  sensation.  This  is  the  first  of  four  consecrations  because  when  the  Pillars  of  the  Tree  are 
projected  onto  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  there  are  four  pillars,  of  which  the  Middle  Pillar  is  the  axis.  (N.B. 
There  is  a painting  depicting  this  idea  in  the  section  of  coloured  plates.  I.R.) 

At  this  point  of  the  Ceremony,  the  astral  appearance  of  the  Candidate  is  that  of  a form  wrapped  in 
darkness  as  if  extinguished  thereby,  and  having  unto  his  right  and  unto  his  left  the  faint  semblance  of  the 
Two  Great  Pillars  of  Fire  and  of  Cloud,  whence  issue  faint  rays  into  the  Darkness  which  covers  him. 
Immediately  above  his  Sphere  of  Sensation  there  will  appear  a ray  of  bright  light  as  if  preparing  to 
penetrate  the  darkness  covering  him.  The 


74 


VOLUME  SIX 


result  of  this  will  be  that  the  Candidate,  during  the  whole  of  the  ceremony  of  Admission,  will  usually 
appear  to  be  somewhat  automatic  and  vague. 

The  reception  and  consecration  take  place  symbolically  in  the  darkest  part  of  Malkuth.  The 
moment  this  is  finished,  the  Candidate  is  conducted  to  the  foot  of  the  Altar,  that  is  under  the  citrine  part  of 
Malkuth  which  receives  the  impact  of  the  Middle  Pillar.  Now,  the  Hegemon  throughout  the  Ceremony 
acts  as  guide,  prompter  and  answerer  for  the  Candidate.  His  office  toward  the  Candidate  is  analogous  to 
that  of  his  Higher  Soul  wherefore  also,  the  Hegemon  holds  in  his  hand  the  mitre -headed  sceptre  to  attract, 
since  it  is  the  sceptre  of  Wisdom,  the  Higher  Self  of  the  Candidate. 

At  this  moment,  as  the  Candidate  stands  before  the  Altar,  as  the  simulacrum  of  the  Higher  Self  is 
attracted,  so  also  arises  the  form  of  the  Accuser  in  the  place  of  the  Evil  Triad.  This  similarly  attracts  the 
simulacrum  of  the  Evil  Persona  of  the  Candidate  - and  were  it  not  for  the  power  of  the  42  lettered  name  in 
the  Palaces  of  Yetzirah  (the  Gods  of  which  name  are  usually  called  the  “Great  Assessors  of  Judgment”) 
the  actual  evil  Persona  would  at  once  formulate  and  be  able  to  obsess  the  Ruach  of  the  Candidate.  For, 
seeing  that  at  this  time,  the  simulacrum  of  the  Higher  Soul  is  attracting  the  Neschamah  of  the  Candidate, 
the  human  will  is  not  as  powerful  in  the  Ruach  for  the  moment,  because  the  Aspirant  of  the  Mysteries  is 
now,  as  it  were,  divided.  That  is,  his  Neschamah  is  directed  to  the  contemplation  of  his  Higher  Self 
attracted  by  the  Hegemon.  His  natural  body  is  bound  and  blinded,  his  Ruach  threatened  by  the 
simulacrum  of  the  Evil  Persona  attracted  by  OmooSzathan,  and  a species  of  shadow  of  himself  thrown 
forward  to  the  place  of  the  Pillars,  where  the  Scales  of  Judgment  are  set.  At  the  same  time  that  the  first 
consecration  establishes  a semblance  of  the  Pillars  to  his  right  and  left,  it  also  has  drawn  forth  from  him  a 
semblance  of  himself  to  the  place  vacated  by  the  Hegemon  between  the  Pillars. 

Here  then  stands  the  shadow  of  the  Candidate  while  the  Scales  of  the  Balance  oscillate  unseen. 
Unseen  also  and  colossal,  there  is  imaged  before  him  Thoth,  as  Metatron,  in  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer  of  the 
Threshold,  ready,  according  to  the  decision  of  the  human  will,  to  permit  or  withhold  the  descent  of  the 
Lower  Genius  of  the  Candidate.  Meanwhile,  the  Great  Assessors  of  Judgment  examine  into  the  truth  of 
the  accusations  formulated  by  the  Evil  and  averse  antithesis.  The  Assessors  of  Judgment  come  not  under 
the  head  of  invisible  stations,  but  during  the  Obligation  and  circumambulation  of  the  Candidate,  until  he 
is  brought  to  the  Light,  they  hover  immediately  about  the  limits  of  the  Temple  and  their  evil  antithesis 
immediately  below.  Therefore,  when  the  Candidate  stands  before  the  Altar  before  the  Obligation,  is  the 
decision  actually  taken  by  the  human  will  of  the  Candidate.  Rarely  in  his  life  has  he  been  nearer  death, 
seeing  that  he  is,  as  it  were,  disintegrated  into  his  component  parts.  The  process  of  symbolic  judgment 
takes  place  during  the  speech  of  the  Hierophant  to  the  Candidate,  the  answer  of  the  Hegemon  and  his 
consent  to  take  the  Obligation. 

The  moment  the  Candidate  thus  consents,  the  Hierophant  advances  between  the  Pillars  as  if  to 
assert  that  the  Judgment  is  concluded.  He  advances  by  the  invisible  station  of 


75 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Harpocrates  to  that  of  the  Evil  Triad,  which  he  symbolically  treads  down,  so  that  as  Aroueris  he  stands 
upon  the  Opposer.  He  then  comes  to  the  East  of  the  Altar,  interposing  between  the  place  of  the  Evil  Triad 
and  the  Candidate.  At  the  same  time,  the  Hiereus  advances  on  the  Candidate’s  left,  the  Hegemon  on  his 
right,  thus  formulating  about  him  the  symbol  of  the  Higher  Triad  before  he  places  his  hand  upon  the 
symbol  of  the  Three  Supernals  upon  the  Altar.  Again,  before  doing  so,  he  has  been  bidden  to  kneel  in 
adoration  of  that  symbol,  as  if  the  natural  man  abrogated  his  will  before  that  of  the  Divine  Consciousness. 

As  he  kneels  in  the  presence  of  the  Triad  of  Aroueris,  Thmaa-est  and  Horus,  he  places  his  left 
hand  in  that  of  his  Initiator  as  affirming  his  passive  reception  of  the  Ritual,  but  his  right  hand  is  on  the 
white  triangle  as  symbolising  his  active  aspiration  towards  his  Higher  Self.  His  head  is  bowed  as 
representing  the  voluntary  submission  of  the  human  will  to  the  Divine  and  for  this  latter  reason  he  repeats 
in  the  Obligation  his  name  in  the  outer  world. 

The  Hierophant  gives  one  knock,  affirming  that  the  submission  unto  the  higher  is  perfect.  Only  at 
this  moment,  does  the  invisible  and  colossal  figure  of  Thoth  cease  to  be  in  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer  and 
give  the  Sign  of  Silence,  permitting  the  first  real  descent  of  the  Genius  of  the  Candidate,  who  descends  to 
the  invisible  station  of  Harpocrates  as  a witness  of  the  Obligation. 

The  Hiereus  and  the  Hierophant  return  to  their  Thrones,  and  therefore  it  is  not  Aroueris,  but 
Osiris  himself  that  addresses  the  speech  to  the  Candidate  - “The  Voice  of  my  Higher  Self,”  etc.,  which 
confirms  the  link  established  between  the  Neschamah  and  the  Genius  by  formulating  the  conception 
thereof  into  the  Ruach.  For  this,  Osiris  speaks  in  the  character  of  the  Higher  Soul,  the  symbolic  form  of 
which  is  standing  between  the  Pillars  before  him.  The  affirmation  of  the  Higher  Soul  as  the  God  of  the 
man  does  not  mean  that  this  is  the  only  God,  but  rather  that  it  is  the  only  presentment  of  Him  which  the 
natural  man  can  grasp  at  all.  Neither  is  it  just  to  say  that  the  Higher  Soul  is  one  with  God,  seeing  that  the 
part  is  by  no  means  the  whole,  nor  can  the  whole  be  accurately  and  sufficiently  described  as  an 
assemblage  of  parts.  Let  not  the  reverence  for  the  God  of  thy  self  cause  thee  by  a misconception  to  lose 
thy  reverence  for  the  Gods  who  live  forever  - the  Aeons  of  Infinite  Years.  Herein  is  a great  error  and  one 
which  may,  in  the  end,  bring  about  the  fall  of  the  Genius,  a sin  which  entails  none  the  less  terrible 
consequences  because  it  is  a sin  of  the  higher  plane  where  the  choice  is  not  between  good  and  evil  but 
between  the  higher  and  the  lower  forms  of  good. 

Therefore  is  the  Mystic  Circumambulation  in  the  Path  of  Darkness  led  by  the  Kerux  with  the 
symbolic  light,  as  formulating  that  the  Higher  Soul  is  not  the  only  Divine  Light  but  rather  a spark  from 
the  Ineffable  Flame  - and  the  Kerux,  in  his  turn,  is  but  the  Watcher  of  the  Gods.  After  the  Kerux  comes 
the  Hegemon,  the  translator  of  the  Higher  Self,  leading  the  Candidate;  and  then  come  the  Goddesses  of 
the  scales  of  the  Balance,  the  Stolistes  and  the  Dadouchos.  They  move  once  round;  the  formation  in  the 
darkness  of  the  Binah  angle  of  the  White  Triangle  of  the  Three  Supernals.  The  Hierophant  knocks  once  as 
they  pass  him 


76 


VOLUME  SIX 


in  affirmation  of  Mercy  - the  Hiereus  in  affirmation  of  Severity;  and  the  invisible  Assessors  each  give  the 
Sign  of  the  Enterer  as  the  Candidate  passes  on  his  way.  At  the  second  passing  of  the  Hierophant,  the 
knock  affirms  the  commencement  of  the  angle  of  Chokmah. 

The  Kerux  bars  the  Candidate’s  approach  to  the  West  to  mark  that  the  natural  man  cannot  obtain 
the  understanding  of  even  the  Son  of  Osiris  unless  by  purification  and  equilibrium.  Again  is  the  Candidate 
purified  and  consecrated,  the  Pillars  about  his  Sphere  of  Sensation  being  rendered  more  manifest.  After 
this  second  consecration,  the  Candidate  is  allowed  to  approach  the  place  of  “The  Twilight  of  the  Gods” 
and  for  a brief  space  the  hoodwink  is  slipped  up,  to  present  a glimpse,  but  a glimpse  only,  of  the  Beyond. 
In  the  challenge  of  the  Hiereus  to  know  the  Name  is  signified  the  knowledge  of  the  formula.  For  if  the 
formula  of  Horus  be  not  with  the  Candidate,  that  of  Osiris  cannot  be  grasped.  But  to  the  Candidate  the 
power  of  Horus  as  yet  can  only  appear  as  a terrible  and  incomprehensible  force  -“The  Force  of  the 
Avenger  of  the  Gods,”  whence  the  speech  of  the  Hegemon  for  him.  The  Candidate  cannot  as  yet 
comprehend  that  before  Mildness  can  be  exercised  rightly,  the  forces  of  Severity  and  Mercy  must  be 
known  and  wielded,  but  to  accomplish  this  the  greatest  courage  and  energy  is  required  and  not  hysterical 
weakness  and  absence  of  resolution  in  action.  Hence  in  the  answer  of  the  Hiereus  is  an  affirmation  of  the 
necessity  of  courage  and  of  the  danger  of  fear,  and  he  gives  one  knock  to  seal  the  vibration  of  that  force 
imaged  in  the  Candidate’s  Sphere  of  Sensation. 

The  next  barring  and  consecration  of  the  Candidate  is  an  extension  of  the  previous  one  and  the 
commencement  of  the  formulation  of  the  angle  of  Kether.  The  hood-wink  is  again  slipped  up  giving  a still 
further  glimpse  of  the  nature  of  the  Divine  Light,  though  to  the  mind  of  the  Candidate,  an  imperfect  one. 
Therefore  it  is  to  him,  as  expressed  in  the  answer  of  the  Hegemon,  a light  dimly  seen  through  the 
Darkness,  yet  heralding  a Glory  beyond.  The  speech  of  the  Hierophant  formulates  the  forces  of  the  hidden 
central  Pillar. 

After  this,  the  Candidate  passes  to  the  Altar  of  the  Universe,  which  receives  the  influences  of  the 
three  Pillars,  as  though  then  the  Ray  from  the  Divine  would  descend  into  the  darkness  of  the  mind,  for 
then,  but  not  till  then,  is  he  fitted  to  realise  what  are  the  first  things  necessary  to  the  “Search  for  the 
Shining  Light.” 

The  Hierophant  now  leaves  his  Throne  and  passes  between  the  Pillars,  either  halting  there  during 
the  prayer  or  halting  at  the  place  of  Harpocrates,  or  that  of  the  Evil  Triad,  or  East  of  the  Altar.  It  does  not 
particularly  matter  which,  but  one  of  them  may  seem  more  appropriate  to  a particular  Candidate  than 
another  and  the  Hierophant  will  usually  find  that  he  halts  at  the  right  place  instinctively. 

The  Hiereus  stands  on  the  left  of  the  Candidate,  the  Hegemon  on  his  right,  thus  forming  the  Triad 
of  the  Supernals.  The  Kerux,  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  represent  an  inferior  and  supporting  Triad  behind 
him  as  if  they  affirmed  that  he  has  passed  the  Judgment  of  the  Balance.  It  is  best,  though  not  absolutely 
necessary,  that  the  Hierophant  and  the  Hiereus  should  hold  their  Banners.  In  any  case,  it  should  be  done 
astrally. 

The  Higher  Self  of  the  Candidate  will  be  formulated  in  the  invisible  station  of  Harpocrates  behind 
the  Hierophant,  who  in  his  present  position  is  Aroueris.  The 


77 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hierophant  gives  a single  knock  to  seal  the  matter  and  then  invokes  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  Then  only 
is  the  hoodwink  removed  definitely. 

The  Hierophant,  Hiereus,  and  Hegemon  join  sceptres  and  sword  above  the  Candidate’s  head,  thus 
formulating  the  Supernal  Triad,  and  assert  his  reception  into  the  Order.  They  recite  the  mystic  words  to 
seal  the  current  of  the  Flowing  Light. 

The  Higher  Self  remains  in  the  station  of  Harpocrates,  and  at  this  point,  the  spirit-vision  should 
see  a gleaming  white  triangle  formulated  over  the  Candidate’s  head. 

The  Hierophant  now  calls  forward  the  Kerux,  cautioning  the  Candidate  that  the  Light  has 
preceded  him  without  his  knowledge.  It  represents  to  him  here,  a vague  formulation  of  ideas  which  as  yet 
he  can  neither  grasp  nor  analyse.  This  Light  is  not  a symbol  of  his  Higher  Self,  but  a Ray  from  the  Gods 
to  lead  him  thereto. 

Only  after  having  thus  been  brought  to  the  Light  is  the  Candidate  led  to  the  East  of  the  Altar  - the 
place  of  the  station  of  the  Evil  Triad  - to  affirm  that  with  this  Light  he  will  be  able  to  cast  out  and  trample 
on  his  own  Evil  Persona  which,  when  it  has  been  put  in  its  place,  will  then  become  a support  to  him.  It  is 
to  the  Hiereus,  “The  Avenger  of  the  Gods”  therefore,  that  the  duty  of  entrusting  the  Candidate  with  the 
secret  signs,  etc.,  is  delegated.  It  is  he  who  places  him  for  the  first  time  between  the  Pillars  and 
superintends  his  final  consecration  thus  bringing  the  peculiar  force  in  matter  of  the  Hiereus  to  the  aid  of 
the  Candidate,  so  that  he  may  more  safely  and  resolutely  combat  the  temptations  of  the  Evil  Persona. 

The  Hierophant  has  returned  to  his  Throne  while  the  Hegemon  holds  the  insignia  of  the  Hiereus 
as  he  confers  the  Signs,  etc.  She  thus  affirms  the  necessity  of  the  force  represented  by  the  Hiereus  to  the 
Candidate. 

The  Hierophant  on  the  Throne,  the  Hiereus  East  of  the  Black  Pillar  and  the  Hegemon  East  of  the 
White  Pillar,  again  form  a Triad  which  here  represents  the  reflection  of  the  Three  Supernals.  The  Higher 
Soul  is  formulated  between  the  Pillars  in  the  Place  of  Equilibrium.  The  Candidate  is  in  the  place  of  the 
Evil  Triad  and  the  Hiereus  now  advances  to  the  place  of  Harpocrates  between  the  Pillars  to  give  the 
words. 

After  the  giving  of  the  words  and  signs,  the  Hiereus  draws  the  Candidate  forward  between  the 
Pillars  and  for  the  second  time  in  the  Ceremony,  the  Higher  Soul  stands  near  and  ready  to  touch  him.  The 
Hiereus  returns  to  his  place  East  of  the  Black  Pillar  so  that  the  Three  Chief  Officers  may  formulate  and 
draw  down  to  the  Candidate,  by  their  insignia,  and  the  influence  of  their  symbols,  the  forces  of  the 
Supernal  Triad.  It  is  important,  therefore,  that  at  this  point,  they  should  be  in  these  places. 

The  Candidate  now  stands  between  the  Pillars,  bound  with  a rope  like  the  mummied  form  of 
Osiris,  between  Isis  and  Nephthys.  The  final  Consecration  now  takes  place  by  the  Goddess  of  the  Scales 
of  the  Balance.  The  Candidate  stands  for  the  first  time  during  the  Ceremony  at  the  point  representing  the 
equilibrium  of  the  balance.  Meanwhile,  the  Kerux  goes  to  the  North,  ready  for  the  circumambulation  so  as 
to  link  that  with  the  final  Consecration  of  the  Candidate.  The  final  Consecration  is  also  demanded  by  the 
Hiereus  Horus,  the  powerful  Avenger  of  Osiris,  as  still  menacing  the  Evil  Persona  of  the 


78 


VOLUME  SIX 


Candidate.  Its  effect  is  to  seal  finally,  in  balanced  formation,  the  Four  Pillars  in  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  of 
the  Candidate.  This  does  not  imply  that  they  were  not  naturally  there  before.  But  in  the  natural  man,  the 
symbols  are  unbalanced  in  strength  - some  being  weaker  and  some  stronger.  The  effect  of  the  Ceremony 
is  to  strengthen  the  weak,  to  purify  the  strong,  and  so  begin  to  equilibriate  them  and  at  the  same  time 
make  a link  between  them  and  the  corresponding  forces  of  the  Macrocosm. 

This  being  done,  the  Hierophant  commands  the  removal  of  the  Rope  which  has  hitherto  been 
purposely  retained,  symbolically  to  restrain  the  actions  of  the  natural  man,  whose  temptation  is  towards 
the  Evil  Persona. 

The  Four  Pillars  being  thus  firmly  established,  the  Candidate  is  invested  with  the  Badge  of  the 
White  Triangle  of  the  Three  Supernals  formulating  in  Darkness.  Now,  also,  the  Higher  Self  is  enabled  in 
reality  to  form  a link  with  him,  if  the  human  will  of  the  natural  man  be  in  reality  consenting  thereto.  The 
free-will  of  the  natural  man  is  never  obsessed  either  by  the  Higher  Soul  or  by  the  Ceremony,  but,  the  will 
consenting,  the  whole  of  the  Ceremony  is  directed  to  strengthening  its  action. 

As  the  badge  is  placed  upon  him,  it  is  as  if  the  two  Great  Goddesses,  Isis  and  Nephthys,  stretched 
forth  their  wings  over  Osiris  to  restore  him  again  to  life. 

The  Mystic  Circumambulation  follows  in  the  Path  of  Light  to  represent  the  rising  of  Light  in  the 
Candidate,  through  the  operation  of  self-sacrifice.  As  he  passes  the  Hierophant’s  throne  the  red  Calvary 
Cross  is  astrally  formed  above  the  astral  White  Triangle  on  his  forehead,  so  that  so  long  as  he  belongs  to 
the  Order,  he  may  bear  that  potent  and  sublime  symbol  as  a link  with  his  Higher  Self  and  as  an  aid  in 
searching  out  the  forces  of  the  Divine  Light  - if  he  will. 

The  Higher  Soul  or  Genius  now  returns  to  the  invisible  station  of  Harpocrates,  the  place  of  the 
hidden  Centre,  yet  continuing  to  retain  the  link  formed  with  the  Candidate.  The  address  of  the  Hierophant 
is  intended  simply  to  effect  the  distinct  formulation  of  the  symbols  of  the  Grade  of  Neophyte  in  the 
Candidate,  and  it  is  therefore  only  when  this  is  finished  that  the  Watcher  Anubis  announces  that  the 
Candidate  has  been  duly  admitted  as  an  initiated  Neophyte. 

The  Hiereus  is  charged  with  a warning  address  as  again  confirming  the  will  of  the  Candidate  and 
addressing  a final  menance  to  the  Evil  Persona.  The  Hierophant  then  states  clearly  what  the  Candidate 
must  begin  to  study.  He  affirms  that  the  symbols  must  be  equilibriated  in  the  Sphere  of  Sensation  before  a 
link  can  be  formulated  between  them  and  the  Forces  of  the  Macrocosm.  The  necessity  of  examination  is 
insisted  upon  so  that  this  may  be  completely  done. 

The  Kerux  then  pours  out  the  two  fluids  to  make  the  semblance  of  blood.  This  is  to  fix  in  the 
Candidate’s  sphere  the  symbols  of  the  forces  of  transmutation  in  Nature  and  also  to  make  an  astral  link 
between  these  and  the  Candidate’s  physical  life,  as  a guard  of  the  secrecy 


79 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


of  the  Mysteries.  This  particular  form  of  transmutation  is  used  as  showing  the  effect  of  a mixture  of  forces 
as  producing  a third  appearance  totally  different  from  them.  The  red  colour  is  symbolic  of  the  blood  of  the 
Candidate.  In  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  the  Candidate’s  blood  was  actually  drawn  at  this  time  and  preserved 
as  an  avenging  link  in  case  of  his  proving  unworthy.  Yet  our  transmutation  effects  the  matter  quite  as 
well,  seeing  that  the  astral  link  is  firmly  established. 

The  final  speech  of  the  Hierophant  is  further  intended  besides  its  apparent  meaning,  to  affirm  that 
a person  only  partially  initiated  is  neither  fitted  to  teach  nor  to  instruct  even  the  outer  and  more  ignorant 
in  Sublime  Knowledge.  He  is  certain,  through  misunderstanding  the  principles,  to  formulate  error  instead 
of  truth. 

CLOSING 

The  greater  part  of  the  closing  ceremony  is  explained  by  the  opening.  The  Reverse 
Circumambulation,  however,  is  intended  to  formulate  the  withdrawal  of  the  Light  of  the  Supernal  Triad 
from  the  Altar,  so  that  it  may  not  be  profaned  by  abiding  without  due  guard.  Not  that  the  Divine  Light 
would  suffer  thereby,  but  because  it  might  initiate  an  Avenging  Current  if  profaned.  This  is  what  is 
implied  by  the  Law  of  Moses  in  the  prohibition  about  offering  unconsecrated  Fire  either  before  or  within 
the  Veil  of  the  Tabernacle.  As  a vibratory  formula,  the  reverse  Circumambulation  represents  the  reversal 
of  the  current  and  the  restoration  of  the  Operator  to  his  ordinary  condition. 

The  Mystic  Repast  then  follows.  It  is  a communion  in  the  body  of  Osiris.  Its  Mystic  Name  is 
“The  Formula  of  the  Justified  One,”  and  it  is  sufficiently  explained  in  the  section  concerning  the  Altar. 

The  Kerux,  in  finishing,  inverts  the  Cup,  as  the  Watcher  of  the  Gods,  to  show  that  the  symbols  of 
self-sacrifice  and  of  regeneration  are  accomplished.  The  proclamation  is  confirmed  by  the  Hierophant  and 
the  Chief  Officers  giving  the  three  knocks,  emblematic  of  the  Mystic  Triad,  and  they  repeat  the  Mystic 
Words. 

The  Hierophant,  in  his  final  speech,  seals  the  link  first  formulated  between  the  Members  and  the 
Supernal  Triad  for  each  one  present  that  it  may  prove  to  him  or  her,  a guide  for  the  ultimate  attainment  of 
the  Supreme  Initiation  - if  he  will. 

THE  SYMBOLISM  AND  MEANING  OF  THE  STEP, 

SIGNS,  GRIP  OR  TOKEN,  AND  THE  WORDS 

They  have  this  three-fold  interpretation: 

1.  Apparent  meaning. 

2.  Spiritual  or  Mystical  reference. 

3.  Practical  application. 

Each  is  therefore  considered  under  three  heads. 


80 


VOLUME  SIX 


First,  the  foot  is  advanced  about  six  inches  representing  the  foot  on  the  side  of  Chesed  put 
forward  and  taking  a hesitating  step  in  darkness  - the  left  foot,  to  represent  the  power  of  Isis  or  the 
beginning  of  action  rather  than  Nephthys  as  the  end  thereof.  The  term  6 inches  is  employed  here  only  to 
render  it  more  intelligible  to  English  Initiates.  It  means  a convenient  measure  of  6,  and  preferably  6 times 
the  measure  of  the  Phalanx  of  the  thumb  -the  spirit  and  will. 

Second,  it  symbolises  the  beginning  of  the  stamping  down  of  the  Evil  Persona.  The  foot  is 
advanced  6 metrical  distances  answering  to  the  number  6 of  Tiphareth  - Osiris  - alluding  therefore  to  the 
self-sacrifice  necessary  to  accomplish  this. 

Third,  it  represents  the  practical  application  of  the  beginning  of  a magical  force.  Let  the  Adept,  in 
using  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer,  give  the  step  as  he  commences  the  Sign  and  let  him  imagine  himself 
colossal,  clothed  with  the  form  of  the  God  or  Goddess  appropriate  to  the  work  - his  head  reaching  to  the 
clouds  - his  feet  resting  upon  Earth.  And  let  him  take  the  step  as  if  he  stamped  upon  the  Earth  and  the 
Earth  quaked  and  rocked  beneath  him.  As  it  is  said  “Clouds  and  Darkness  are  round  about  Him  - 
lightnings  and  thunders  are  the  habitation  of  His  feet.”  Its  secret  name  is  “The  Step  of  the  Avenger.” 

THE  SALUTING  SIGN 

1 . That  of  groping  forward  in  search  of  truth. 

2.  It  represents  the  involution  and  bringing  forward  of  the  Light  into  the  material  to  aid  the  will  of 
the  Candidate  in  his  search  for  and  aspiration  towards  the  Higher. 

3.  Standing  as  before  described,  in  the  form  of  the  God,  and  elevating  the  mind  to  the 
contemplation  of  Kether,  take  the  step  like  a stroke  with  the  foot,  bring  the  arms  up  above  the  head  as  if 
touching  the  Kether,  and  as  the  step  is  completed  bring  the  hands  over  the  head  forwards.  Thrust  them  out 
directly  from  the  level  of  the  eyes  horizontally  - arms  extended,  fingers  straight,  palms  downwards,  the 
hands  directed  towards  the  object  it  is  wished  to  charge  or  to  affect.  At  the  same  time,  sink  the  head  till 
the  eyes  look  exactly  between  the  thumbs.  In  this  way,  the  rays  from  the  eyes,  from  each  finger  and  from 
the  thumbs,  must  all  converge  upon  the  object  attacked.  If  any  of  them  disperse,  it  is  a weakness. 

Thus  performed,  this  Sign  is  a symbol  of  tremendous  attacking  force  and  of  projection  of  will 
power,  and  it  should  be  employed  in  all  cases  where  force  of  attack  is  required  especially  in  charging  of 
Talismans  and  the  like.  Generally,  it  is  best  to  have  the  thumbs  and  all  the  fingers  extended  - but  if  a 
particular  effect  is  desired,  you  may  extend  only  the  fingers  appropriate  thereto,  keeping  the  rest  folded 
back  in  the  hand.  Herewith  also,  may  be  combined  the  attribution  of  the  Planets  to  the  head:  (Mars  to  the 
right  nostril.  Mercury  to 


81 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  Mouth,  etc.,  as  explained  in  the  Microcosm  Lecture),  sending  at  the  same  time  an  imaginary  ray  of 
colour  of  the  Planet  desired  from  the  part  of  the  head  attributed  to  it.  But,  when  finished,  be  careful  to 
withdraw  the  rays  again  or  they  will  remain  like  so  many  outlets  of  astral  force  and  thus  exhaust  you.  The 
best  way  to  protect  yourself  against  this  is  to  give  the  Sign  of  Silence  immediately.  For  the  first  Sign 
should  always  be  answered  by  the  second.  The  secret  names  of  the  Saluting  Sign  is  “The  Attacking  Sign” 
or  “The  Sign  of  the  Enterer  of  the  Threshold.” 

THE  SIGN  OF  SILENCE 

1.  This  is  simply  that  of  secrecy  regarding  the  Mysteries. 

2.  It  is  the  affirmation  of  the  station  of  Harpocrates,  wherein  the  Higher  Soul  of  the  Candidate  is 
formulated  in  part  of  the  admission  Ceremony.  It  is  the  symbol  of  the  Centre  and  the  “Voice  of  the 
Silence”  which  answers  in  secret  the  thought  of  the  heart. 

3.  The  Sign  of  Silence  withdraws  the  force  put  out  by  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer.  Take  upon 
thyself  as  before  taught  the  colossal  form  of  the  God  Harpocrates.  Bring  the  left  foot  sharply  back,  both 
heels  together  - beat  the  ground  once  with  the  left  foot  as  it  is  placed  beside  the  right.  Bring  the  left  hand 
to  the  mouth  and  touch  the  centre  of  the  lower  lip  with  the  left  fore -finger.  Close  the  other  fingers  and 
thumb,  and  drop  the  right  hand  to  the  side.  Imagine  that  a watery  vapor  encircles  and  encloses  you.  This  is 
the  reflux  of  the  current. 

This  Sign  is  also  used  as  a protection  against  attack.  The  Sign  represents  a concentration  of  astral 
light  about  the  person.  Having  given  the  Sign  as  above,  it  is  a protection  against  all  attack  and  danger  of 
obsession.  To  make  it  yet  stronger,  the  form  of  the  God  should  be  taken.  If  Spiritual  force  is  required, 
formulate  as  if  standing  on  a Lotus  or  rising  from  it.  For  force  in  contemplation  and  meditation,  formulate 
as  if  seated  upon  a Lotus.  But  for  more  material  force,  as  if  standing  upon  a Dragon  or  a Serpent  like 
some  statues  of  Harpocrates.  As  a defence  and  protection,  the  Sign  is  as  strong  as  the  banishing 
pentagram,  though  of  a different  nature.  And  as  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer  represents  attack,  so  does  this  sign 
represent  defence  thereto,  as  a shield  is  a defence  against  the  Sword.  From  this  Sign  is  a formula  of 
invisibility  derived. 

The  Secret  Names  of  this  Sign  are:  “The  Sign  of  the  God  of  Silence”  or  the  “Sign  of  Defence  or 
Protection.”  It  may  be  performed  with  any  finger  of  either  hand,  but  it  is  most  protective  when  the  left 
forefinger  is  used,  the  Water  of  Chesed,  for  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand  represent  more  violent  action, 
and  those  of  the  left  more  watery  action. 

It  may  here  be  remarked  that  the  so-called  Christian  Sign  of  Benediction,  consisting  of  the  thumb 
and  first  two  fingers  only,  projected,  is  the  affirmation  of  Osiris,  isis  and  Nephthys  - or  Spirit,  Fire,  and 
Water. 

With  regard  to  taking  on  mentally  the  forms  of  the  Gods,  it  may  here  be  noted  that  the 
process  is  of  great  assistance  and  use  in  all  magical  working,  whether  of  invokation  or  of 


82 


VOLUME  SIX 


evocation,  contemplation,  meditation,  skrying  in  the  spirit  vision,  alchemy,  etc.  For  the  forms  of  the  Gods 
do  here  represent  a certain  symbolic  material  action  of  the  Divine  Forces. 

THE  GRIP  AND  THE  PASSWORD 

1 . The  steps  are  taken  and  the  Grip  exchanged  simultaneously.  They  mean  seeking 

guidance  in  the  darkness  and  silence  of  the  Mysteries. 

2.  It  shows  that  a steady  and  resolute  will,  acting  in  union  with  good,  will  accomplish 

what  it  desires,  no  matter  how  often  it  fail  at  first.  It  inculcates  the  necessity  for  harmony  and 
brotherly  love  - of  doing  away  with  pettiness  and  of  too  much  self-concentration  - for  allowances  for  the 
weaknesses  of  others  within  limits  - of  shunning  resolutely  anything  in  the  nature  of  slander.  So  that  in 
the  grip  of  the  Neophyte  the  Initiates  meet  hand  to  hand  and  foot  to  foot  in  the  true  greeting  of  a brother 
or  sister,  and  not  in  the  veiled  hostility  of  an  enemy.  For,  in  the  working  of  the  Inner,  where  all  invoke  the 
same  forces  in  the  same  manner,  when  he  or  she  becomes  unsympathetic  with  the  rest,  there  is  a 
separation  from  them,  and  though  he  weaken  the  combination  of  working,  yet  he  still  more  certainly 
attracts  upon  himself  a reflex  current  from  the  Avengers  of  Evil. 

The  Names  of  the  God  of  Silence  which  is  the  Grand  Word  of  this  Grade  also  represents  the 
silence  of  the  Sacred  Mysteries  to  be  observed  towards  the  Outer  Order.  It  shows  also  the  necessity  for 
respect  towards  the  secrets  of  any  Frater  or  Soror  committed  to  your  care,  not  endeavouring  to  search 
them  out  for  purposes  of  curiosity  nor  repeating  them  when  discovered,  nor  in  any  way  referring  to  them 
so  as  to  wound  the  other,  nor  in  any  way  employing  them  as  a means  of  causing  humiliation,  but  to  keep 
them  as  a sacred  trust  and  not  to  be  deflected  by  them  from  acting  justly  and  harmoniously  together. 

3.  In  any  magical  ceremony,  or  other  working,  if  more  than  one  member  be  taking  part, 

all  present,  putting  themselves  into  the  form  of  the  God  as  taught,  should  exchange  Sign,  Grip 
and  Words,  so  as  to  establish  a current  of  harmony  and  the  affirmation  of  a mutual  direction  of  will 
towards  the  same  object. 


THE  PASSWORD 

1 . Merely  to  guard  the  secrets  of  the  Order  against  any  Members  resigned  or  not 
working;  hence  changed  each  Equinox. 

2.  It  is  an  affirmation  of  the  different  spiritual  as  well  as  the  different  physical 
constitutions  of  the  Candidates  - that  all  natures  cannot  be  the  same  without  evil  and  injury 

resulting  thereby  - but  that  each  nature  should  be  brought  to  its  own  Kether  - the  best  of  its  kind.  This  too, 
may  be  done  in  all  things.  It  is  the  basis  of  Alchemy. 

3.  It  should  be  pronounced  as  if  attracting  the  Solar  Force  - the  Light  of  Nature,  during 

the  6 months  following  the  Equinox  at  which  it  is  issued,  as  a link  with  the  Solar  Force,  between 
that  and  the  Order.  This  password,  therefore,  may  also  be  used  in  a magical  ceremony  as  attracting  the 
support  of  the  Light  of  Nature  acting  upon  natural  forces. 


83 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  CEREMONY  OF  THE  EQUINOX 

The  whole  formulae  of  the  Ceremony  of  the  Equinox  are  intended  to  create  a magical  link 
between  the  Sun,  as  the  Light  of  Nature,  and  the  Order;  and  it  should  be  celebrated  within  48  hours  at 
least  of  the  Sun’s  actual  entry  into  Aries  or  Libra.  The  single  knock  given  by  the  Hierophant  heralds  the 
initiation  of  a fresh  current.  The  Password,  as  already  explained,  is  the  symbol  of  the  connecting  link  of 
the  purpose  of  the  Ceremony  and  therefore,  before  beginning  a fresh  operation  to  attract  a fresh  current, 
the  Kerux  proclaims  that  the  former  password  is  abrogated.  In  the  whole  Ceremony,  save  at  the  exchange 
of  Insignia,  the  Hierophant,  Hiereus,  Hegemon,  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  remain  in  their  places  - the 
Kerux,  or  Watcher  of  the  Gods  being  the  only  one  who  moves. 

First  comes  the  establishment  of  a vertical  current  in  the  direction  of  the  Middle  Pillar  by  the 
exchange  of  words  between  the  Hierophant  and  Hiereus,  while  the  Hegemon,  who  is  in  the  whole 
Ceremony  of  the  Equinox  the  important  Officer,  by  reason  of  his  insignia,  seals  and  arrests  the  current  in 
the  centre  by  a single  knock  and  the  words  “I  am  the  Reconciler  between  them.”  Then  follows  the  cross 
current  established  between  the  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  - again  fixed  and  sealed  by  the  Hegemon,  thus 
symbolising  the  equilateral  cross  of  the  Elements  (of  which  the  centre  would  naturally  be  about  the 
invisible  station  of  Harpocrates)  but  is  arrested  by  the  Hegemon  between  the  Pillars.  The  cross  currents 
are  thus  thrown  into  the  image  of  the  Calvary  Cross  of  the  Rivers  to  ally  it  with  the  symbolism  of 
Tiphareth  and  of  the  Sephiroth. 

Then  the  Hierophant,  Dadouchos,  Hiereus,  and  Stolistes  formulate  a circle  enclosing  the  symbol, 
which  is  again  sealed  by  the  Hegemon.  Then  the  Officers,  being  careful  to  follow  the  course  of  the  Sun 
deposit  in  turn,  their  Insignia  upon  the  Altar,  taking  therefrom  instead  the  mystical  symbols  of  the  Body 
of  Osiris  corresponding  to  their  Cardinal  Points.  The  Hegemon  takes  the  Lamp  of  Kerux.  The  Kerux  then 
circumambulates,  halting  at  the  Cardinal  Points  and  facing  them,  representing  the  course  of  the  Sun 
through  the  Zodiac  in  order  to  attract  the  Solar  Ray,  but  under  the  control  of  its  Superior,  the  Light  of 
Osiris,  and  the  adorations  are  performed  at  the  Stations  of  the  Kerubim  to  mark  the  limits  of  the  Circle. 

This  time,  it  is  with  the  Lamp  of  the  Watcher  of  the  Gods  and  with  the  Sign  of  the  Calvary  Cross 
of  Tiphareth  that  the  Hegemon  seals  in  the  centre  the  Solar  Light.  The  formal  assertion  of  the  entry  of  a 
new  current  of  Light  is  proclaimed,  and  the  Mystic  Words  are  recited  to  close  the  ceremony. 

From  this  Ceremony  there  are  many  practical  formulae  derivable  which  will  be  easily 
comprehended  by  the  Z.A.M.  who  has  mastered  the  whole  of  this  lecture.  Only  let  him  remember  that  the 
formulae  of  the  Ceremony  of  the  Equinox  represents  the  sudden  attraction  and  sealing  of  a Force  in 
Nature  then  in  operation  - rather  than  a continuous  and  graduated  ceremony  to  build  up  the  same. 
Consequently  also,  it  is  well  to  use  the  password  then  in  being  as  an  adjunct  to  the  other  Names  employed 
in  magical  ceremonies  as  bringing  into  operation  the  link  with  the  Solar  Light. 


84 


VOLUME  SIX 


NOTES  ON  THE  OPENING  EXORDIUM  OF  “Z” 

The  Great  Thoth  is  the  highest  aspect  of  the  Hermes  of  the  most  ancient  Egyptian  Mysteries,  and 
corresponds  almost  to  the  Great  Angel  Metatron.  It  is  the  Archangel  of  Kether  in  the  Briatic  World.  The 
Mercury  of  the  Romans  must  not  be  confused  with  this  Great  Hermes. 

The  doctrines  of  Gnosticism  and  of  Valentinus  approached  those  of  the  pure  Qabalah.  In  them  we 
find  Speech  and  Silence.  Across  the  Abyss  of  Silence  comes  the  Primal  Speech.  The  Divine  Ones  here 
referred  to  are  the  Aeons  in  the  Atziluthic  World.  These  formulae  of  knowledge  are  designed  in  terms 
cognizable  to  us  in  the  lower  world. 

Eheieh  - implicit  and  explicit  sound.  “Every  being  pronounces  all  its  existence,  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  of  Life,  by  inspiration  and  expiration.” 

Macroprosopus  is  Aima  and  Abba,  Mother  - Father.  The  two  nostrils  pass  up  and  down  the  two 
breaths,  as  through  the  two  Great  Pillars.  These  throw  all  things  into  vibration;  compare  the  Rashith  ha- 
Gilgalim.  Piercing  of  the  Dragon’s  Coils  suggests  freeing  of  Malkuth,  which  is  also  referred  to  as  the 
Washing  of  the  Garments  of  the  Queen,  the  Inferror  Mother.  Then  comes  the  Breaking  Forth  of  the  Light. 
Over  Malkuth  as  Guardians  are  Metatron  and  Sandaiphon  as  the  Two  Pillars,  and  Nephesch  ha-Messiah, 
the  animal  soul  of  Messiah,  the  Shekinah  or  Presence  between  the  Kerubim. 

THE  PARTICULAR  EXORDIUM 

The  Borniess  Ones  of  Time  referred  to  are  those  Corruscations  of  the  Divine  Light  which  are 
above  Kether  of  Atziluth.  In  such  Supernal  Realms,  the  Am  Soph,  though  negative  to  us,  is  there 
intensely  positive.  Thence  came  forth  the  Gods,  the  Voice,  the  Aeons,  and  the  Name. 

The  Egyptian  Gods  are  generally  most  differentiated  by  their  Crowns:  Amen-Ra  by  the  high 
feathers,  Mo-ooth  (Maut)  has  the  same  headdress  as  Horns.  She  corresponds  to  Aima  Elohim.  The  high 
Hermes-Thoth  has  the  same  headress  as  Amoun  Kneph,  the  Sacred  Spirit.  Remember  that  Thoth,  Truth, 
has  two  aspects  - the  higher  and  the  lower.  The  higher  is  Absolute,  the  lower  is  suitable  to  human 
comprehension.  To  tell  the  higher  form  of  a truth  to  one  who  cannot  understand  it  is  to  lie  to  him  because, 
though  correctly  formulated,  it  will  not  be  correctly  received. 

The  Forms  of  Thmaah.  There  are  four  forms  of  spelling  for  the  Goddess  Thma-Est  whereby  she  is 
attributable  to  the  Four  Letters  of  the  Name,  and  therewith  to  the  Elements  and  the  Tree. 

Fire.  Chokmah.  Yod.  Thma-oe-Sh. 

Water.  Binah.  Heh.  Thma-oe-Tt. 


85 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Air.  Tiphareth.  Van.  Thm-a-oe-St. 

Earth,  Malkuth,  Heh  (final).  Thm-a-Oe. 

(The  Middle  Pillar) 

In  the  Equinox  Ceremony,  the  Hegemon  is  Air,  Spirit,  and  the  principal  officer.  She  reconciles 
from  East  to  West,  and  from  North  to  South,  and  in  a circular  formula. 


86 


VOLUME  SIX 


1 = 10 

Zelator  Grade 
Part  I 

E 


n SZi 


u 


BANNER. 

OF 

we«r 


9tMueR 

or 

Eivr- 


sr 


HIEHOPHftWT 


2.7* 


© 

SALT 


HIERXIiS 

hegemon 

□ 


VjJHlTC 

PlUAR 


STOUSTESl  KERUX  IBKPOUCHOS 


w 


Part  I 

OPENING  OF  THE  ZELATOR  GRADE 

(The  members,  having  assembled  and  robed,  each  is  seated  in  his  proper  place). 

Hiereus: 

(Knock) 

All  rise. 

Hiero: 

(Sitting)  Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  Zelator  Grade  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  assist  me  to  open  the  Temple  in  the 
Grade  of  Zelator.  Frater  Kerux,  see  that  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Kerux: 

Knocks,  without  opening  the  door. 

Sentinel 

(Knocks) 

Kerux: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant,  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 


87 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  see  that  none  below  the  Grade  of  Zelator  is  present. 

Hiereus: 

Fraters  and  Sorors,  give  the  signs  of  Zelator. 

All  give  signs  of  Zelator. 

Hiereus: 

(Gives  sign.)  Very  Honored  Hierophant,  no  one  below  the  Grade  of  Zelator  is  now  present. 

Hiero: 

(Gives  sign.)  Purify  and  consecrate  the  Temple  with  Water  and  with  Fire. 

Kerux: 

Advances  between  the  Pillars. 

Stol: 

Moves  to  North  side  of  Black  Pillar. 

Dad: 

Moves  to  South  side  of  White  Pillar. 

Kerux: 

Stol: 

Dad: 

Move  together  to  the  center  of  the  Hall  and  face  East.  All  salute. 

Dad: 

Makes  sign  of  the  cross  with  censer  and  swings  forward  3 times  and  says:  I consecrate  with  Fire. 

Stol: 

Makes  Cross  with  Cup,  and  sprinkles  with  water  three  times  towards  East,  saying:  I purify  with  Water. 
Kerux: 

Salutes  Zelator  sign. 

Kerux: 

The  Temple  is  cleansed. 

Kerux: 

Stol: 

Dad: 

Return  to  place,  Kerux  leading  and  passing  with  Neophyte  sign. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Element  of  this  Grade  be  named  that  it  may  be  awakened  in  the  spheres  of  those  present  and  in  the 
sphere  of  the  Order. 

Heg: 

The  Element  of  Earth. 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks)  Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Earth. 

All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

ADONA1  HA-ARETZ.  ADONAI MELEKH.  Unto  Thee  be  the  Kingdom  and  the  Power  (cross  on  self) 
and  the  Glory.  (He  makes  Cross  and  Circle  with  Scepter  before  him  as  he  says  MALKUTH,  etc.) 
MALKUTH,  GEBURAH,  GEDULAH.  The  Rose  of  Sharon  and  the  Lily  of  the  Valley,  Amen. 

All  give  Zelator  Signs. 

Kerux: 

Moves  to  altar  picks  up  salt  and  goes  to  North,  and  sprinkles  Salt  before  the  Tablet,  saying: 


88 


VOLUME  SIX 


Kerux: 

Let  the  Earth  Adore  Adonai ! 

Kerux: 

Places  salt  before  the  Tablet  of  the  North. 

Hiero: 

Leaves  his  place  and  goes  to  North.  He  stands  facing  the  center  of  the  Tablet  of  the  North. 

Kerux: 

Falls  in  behind  Hierophant. 

Hiereus: 

Moves  to  the  right  of  Hiero. 

Heg: 

Moves  to  left  of  Hiero. 

Stol: 

Falls  in  behind  Hiereus. 

Dad: 

Falls  in  behind  Hegemon. 

All  Officers  face  North. 

Hiero: 

Makes  sign  in  front  of,  and  concentric  with  Tablet  of  the  North,  an  in  voking  Pentagram  of  Earth,  saying: 

Hiero: 

And  the  Elohim  said.  Let  us  make  Adam  in  our  Image,  after  our  likeness  and  let  him  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of 
the  sea  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air  and  over  the  cattle  and  over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every  creeping  thing  that 
creepeth  over  the  Earth.  And  the  Elohim  created  Eth  Ha- Adam  in  their  Own  Image,  in  the  Image  of  the  Elohim 
created  they  them.  In  the  name  of  ADONAI  MELEKH  and  the  Bride  and  Queen  of  the  Kingdom,  Spirits  of  Earth 
adore  Adonai! 

Hiero: 

Hands  his  Scepter  to  Hiereus  and,  takes  the  Sword  of  Hiereus,  makes  the  Ox  in  center  of  Pentagram,  saying: 
Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  Auriel,  the  Great  Archangel  of  Earth,  and  by  the  sign  of  the  head  of  the  Ox  - Spirits  of  Earth,  adore 
Adonai ! 

Hiero: 

Returns  Sword  to  Hiereus  and  takes  Miter-headed  Scepter  from  Hegemon  and  makes  Cross  in  the  air,  saying: 
Hiero: 

In  the  Names  and  letters  of  the  Great  Northern  Quadrangle,  Spirits  of  Earth,  adore  Adonai! 

Hiero: 

Returns  Scepter  to  Hegemon,  and  takes  Cup  from  Stolistes,  making  Cross,  and  sprinkling  thrice  to  North,  saying: 
Hiero: 

In  the  Three  Great  Secret  Names  of  God,  borne  upon  the  Banners  of  the  North  - EMOR  DIAL  HECTEGA  - Spirits 
of  Earth,  adore  Adonai! 

Hiero: 

Returns  Cup  to  Stolistes  and  takes  Censer  from  Dadouchos,  and  making  three  forward  swings,  says: 

Hiero: 

In  the  name  of  IC  ZOD  HEH  CHAL,  Great  King  of  the  North,  Spirits  of  Earth  adore  Adonai! 

Hiero: 

Returns  Censer  to  Dadouchos,  and  takes  back  Scepter  from  Hiereus,  returns  to  Throne. 

All  Officers  return  to  places. 

Hiero: 

In  the  name  of  ADONAI  HA-ARETZ,  I declare  this  Temple  duly  opened  in  the  Grade  of  Zelator. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks  4,  3,  3) 

Heg: 

(Knocks  4,  3,  3) 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks  4,  3,  3) 


89 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ADVANCEMENT  - FIRST  PART 

(Hierophant  sits  East  of  Altar,  Hiereus  sits  North,  and  Hegemon  sits  South,  Stolistes  sits  North 
West,  Kerux  sits  West  and  Dadouchos  sits  South  West) 

Hiero: 

Fraters  and  Sorors,  our  Frater  (Sorer)  having  made  such  progress  in  the  Paths  of  Occult  Science  as  has 
enabled  him  (her)  to  pass  an  examination  in  the  required  knowledge,  is  now  eligible  for  advancement  to 
this  Grade,  and  1 have  duly  received  a dispensation  from  the  Greatly  Honored  Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order 
to  admit  him  (her)  in  due  form.  Honored  Hegemon,  superintend  the  preparation  of  the  Neophyte  and  give 
the  customary  alarm. 

Heg: 

Salutes  with  the  Zelator  sign,  and  leaves  the  room  by  South  and  West. 

Sentinel: 

Prepares  Neophyte  who  wears  sash  of  Neophyte  grade  and  is  blindfolded.  He  carries  the  Fylfot  Cross 
in  right  hand. 

Heg: 

Instructs  Neophyte  in  knocks  of  the  Grade. 

Kerux: 

Opens  the  door  to  be  just  ajar.) 

Heg: 

Let  me  enter  the  Portal  of  Wisdom. 

Kerux: 

1 will. 

Kerux: 

Opens  door  and  admits  them. 

Sentinel: 

Turns  down  lights. 

Hiero: 

Except  Adonai  build  the  house,  their  labor  is  but  lost  that  build  it.  Except  Adonai  keep  the  City,  the 
Watchman  waketh  in  vain.  Frater  (Sorer)  Neophyte,  by  what  aid  dost  thou  seek  admission  to  the  Grade  of 
Zelator  of  the  Golden  Dawn? 

Heg: 

(For  Neophyte)  By  the  guidance  of  Adonai;  by  the  possession  of  the  necessary  knowledge;  by  the 
dispensation  of  the  Greatly  Honored  Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order;  by  the  signs  and  tokens  of  the  Zelator 
Grade.  By  this  symbol  of  the  Hermetic  Cross. 

Kerux: 

Takes  Cross  from  him  places  it  on  the  Altar  and  returns  to  place. 

Hiero: 

Give  the  step  and  signs  of  a Neophyte.  (Neophyte  gives  them). 

Hiero: 

Frater  Kerux,  receive  from  the  Neophyte  the  Token,  Grand  Word,  and  Password  of  the  Neophyte  Grade. 

Kerux: 

Places  himself  in  front  of  Neophyte  and  says: 

Kerux: 

Give  me  the  grip  of  the  Neophyte. 

(Done) 

Kerux: 

Give  me  the  Word. 

(Done) 


90 


VOLUME  SIX 


Kerux: 

Give  me  the  Password. 

(Done) 

Kerux: 

Having  received  it,  he  turns  to  Hiero,  gives  Grade  Salute,  and  says: 

Kerux: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant,  I have  received  them. 

Hiero: 

(To  Hegemon ) Lead  the  Neophyte  to  the  West  and  set  him  between  the  Mystic  Pillars,  with  his  face 
towards  the  East. 

Heg: 

Places  Neophyte  between  the  Pillars,  and  remains  behind  him. 

Hiero: 

Frater  (Sorer).,  .will  you  pledge  yourself  to  maintain  the  same  secrecy  regarding  the  Mysteries  of  this 
Grade  as  you  are  pledged  to  maintain  regarding  those  of  the  Neophyte  Grade  - never  to  reveal  them  to  the 
World,  and  not  even  to  confer  them  upon  a Neophyte  without  a dispensation  from  the  Greatly  Honored 
Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order? 

Neo: 

1 will. 

Hiero: 

Then  you  will  kneel  on  both  your  knees,  lay  your  right  hand  on  the  ground,  and  say:  - 1 swear  by  the  Earth 
whereon  I kneel.  (Done)  Let  the  symbol  of  blindness  be  removed. 

Heg: 

Unbinds  Neophyte 's  eyes. 

Sentinel: 

Turns  up  lights. 

Heg: 

Goes  back  to  his  proper  place. 

Neophyte: 

Remains  kneeling  between  the  Pillars  with  his  hand  on  the  ground. 

Kerux: 

Takes  the  Salt  from  before  the  Tablet  of  the  North,  and  passing  round  the  Altar  with  Sol  stands  in 
front  of  Neophyte  facing  him  and  holds  the  Salt  in  front  of  him. 

Hiero: 

Take  Salt  with  your  left  hand  and  cast  it  to  the  North;  say  Let  the  Powers  of  Earth  witness  my  pledge. 
(Done.) 

Kerux: 

Replaces  Salt,  and  returns  to  his  place. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Neophyte  rise  and  let  him  be  purified  with  Water  and  consecrated  with  Fire,  in  confirmation  of  his 
pledge,  and  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

Dad: 

Moves  forward  round  South  Pillar,  stands  before  Neophyte  and  makes  three  forward  swings  of  censer, 
saying: 

Dad: 

in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  I consecrate  thee  with  Fire. 

Dad: 

Returns  by  way  he  came. 

Stol: 

Moves  round  North  Pillar,  stands  before  Neophyte,  makes  cross  on  forehead,  sprinkles  thrice,  saying: 


91 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Stol: 

In  the  Name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  I purify  thee  with  Water. 

Stol: 

Returns  to  place  as  he  came. 

Hiero: 

The  Zelator  Grade  is  a preparation  for  other  Grades,  a threshold  before  our  discipline,  and  it  shows  by  its 
imagery,  the  Light  of  the  Hidden  Knowledge  dawning  in  the  Darkness  of  Creation;  and  you  are  now  to 
begin  to  analyze  and  comprehend  the  Nature  of  that  Light.  To  this  end,  you  stand  between  the  Pillars,  in 
the  Gateway  where  the  secrets  of  the  Neophyte  Grade  were  communicated  to  you.  Prepare  to  enter  the 
Immeasurable  region.  And  Tetragramaton  Elohim  planted  a Garden  Eastward  in  Eden,  and  out  of  the 
ground  made  Tetragramaton  Elohim  to  grow  every  tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the  sight  and  good  for  food;  the 
Tree  of  Life  also,  in  the  midst  of  the  Garden,  and  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of  Good  and  of  Evil.  This  is  the 
Tree  that  has  two  Paths,  and  it  is  the  Tenth  Sephira  Malkuth,  and  it  has  about  it  seven  Columns,  and  the 
Four  Splendors  whirl  around  it  as  in  the  Vision  of  the  Mercabah  of  Ezekiel;  and  from  Gedulah  it  derives 
an  influx  of  Mercy,  and  from  Geburah  an  influx  of  Severity  and  the  Tree  of  the  Knowledge  of  Good  and 
of  Evil  shall  it  be  until  it  is  united  with  the  Supernals  in  Daath.  But  the  good  which  is  under  it  is  called  the 
Archangel  Metatron,  and  the  Evil  is  called  the  Archangel  Samael,  and  between  them  lies  the  straight  and 
narrow  way  where  the  Archangel  Sandalphon  keeps  watch.  The  Souls  and  the  Angels  are  above  its 
branches,  and  the  Qlippoth  or  Demons  dwell  under  its  roots.  Let  the  Neophyte  enter  the  Pathway  of  Evil. 
Kerux: 

Takes  his  place  in  front  of  Neophyte,  leads  him  in  a N.E.  direction  towards  the  Hiereus,  halts  and  steps 
out  of  the  direct  line  between  Hiereus  and  Neophyte. 

Hiereus: 

Whence  comest  thou? 

Kerux: 

I come  from  between  the  two  Pillars  and  I seek  the  Light  of  the  Hidden  Knowledge  in  the  Name  of 
Adonai. 

Hiereus: 

And  the  Great  Angel  Samael  answered,  and  said:  I am  the  Prince  of  Darkness  and  of  night.  The  foolish 
and  rebellious  gaze  upon  the  face  of  the  created  World,  and  find  therein  nothing  but  terror  and  obscurity. 
It  is  to  them  the  Terror  of  Darkness  and  they  are  as  drunken  men  stumbling  in  the  Darkness.  Return,  for 
thou  canst  not  pass  by. 

Kerux: 

Leads  Neophyte  back  as  he  came,  to  between  the  Pillars. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Neophyte  enter  the  Pathway  of  Good. 

Kerux: 

Leads  Neophyte  S.E.,  and  halts  opposite  Hegemon,  stepping  aside  from  before  Neophyte. 

Heg: 

Whence  comest  thou? 

Kerux: 

I come  from  between  the  Pillars,  and  I seek  the  Light  of  the  Hidden  Knowledge  in  the  Name  of  Adonai. 
Heg: 

The  Great  Angel  Metatron  answered,  and  said:  I am  the  Angel  of  the  Presence  divine.  The  Wise  gaze 
upon  the  created  world  and  behold  there  the  dazzling  image  of  the  Creator.  Not  yet  can  thine  eyes  bear 
that  dazzling  Image.  Return,  for  thou  canst  not  pass  by. 

Kerux: 

Turns  and  leads  Neophyte  back  between  the  Pillars. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Neophyte  enter  the  straight  and  narrow  Pathway  which  turns  neither  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the 
left  hand. 


92 


VOLUME  SIX 


Kerux: 

Leads  Neophyte  directly  up  center  of  Hall  until  he  is  near  the  Altar,  halts,  steps  aside  from  before 
Neophyte,  leaving  him  to  face  Altar  unobstructed. 

Hiereus: 

Heg: 

Cross  Scepter  and  Sword  before  altar. 

Hiereus: 

Heg: 

Whence  comest  thou? 

Kerux: 

I come  from  between  the  Pillars  and  I seek  the  Light  of  the  Hidden  Knowledge  in  the  Name  of  Adonai. 

Hiero: 

Advances  to  East  of  Altar  with  Scepter,  which  he  thrusts  between  Sword  of  Hiereus  and  Scepter  of 
Hegemon  and  raising  it  to  an  angle  of  45  degrees. 

Hiero: 

But  the  Great  Angel  Sandalphon  said:  1 am  the  reconciler  for  Earth,  and  the  Celestial  Soul  therein.  Form 
is  invisible  alike  in  Darkness  and  in  blinding  Light.  I am  the  left  hand  Kerub  of  the  Ark  and  the  Feminine 
Power,  as  Metatron  is  the  right  hand  Kerub  and  the  Masculine  Power,  and  I prepare  the  way  to  the 
Celestial  Light. 


THE  FLAMING  SWORD  WITH  KERUBS 


93 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

Hiereus: 

Step  back  to  South  and  North  of  Altar  respectively. 

Hiero: 

Takes  Neophyte  by  right  hand  with  his  left,  and  pointing  to  the  Altar  and  diagram  says: 

Hiero: 

And  Tetragramaton  placed  Kerubim  at  the  East  of  the  Garden  of  Eden  and  a Flaming  Sword  which  turned 
every  way  to  keep  the  Path  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  for  He  has  created  Nature  that  Man  being  cast  out  of  Eden 
may  not  fall  into  the  Void.  He  has  bound  Man  with  the  Stars  as  with  a chain.  He  allures  him  with 
Scattered  Fragments  of  the  Divine  Body  in  bird  and  beast  and  flower,  and  He  laments  over  him  in  the 
Wind  and  in  the  Sea  and  in  the  birds.  When  the  times  are  ended,  He  will  call  the  Kerubim  from  the  East 
of  the  Garden,  and  all  shall  be  consumed  and  become  Infinite  and  Holy.  Receive  now  the  secrets  of  this 
Grade.  The  step  is  thus  given  6 by  6 showing  you  have  passed  the  threshold.  The  Sign  is  given  by  raising 
the  right  hand  to  an  angle  of  45  degrees.  It  is  the  position  in  which  the  Hierophant  interposed  for  you 
between  the  Hiereus  and  the  Hegemon.  The  Token  is  given  by  grasping  fingers,  the  thumb  touching 
thumb  to  form  a triangle.  It  refers  to  the  Ten  Sephiroth.  The  Word  is  ADONAI  HA-ARETZ,  and  means 
Adonai  the  Lord  of  the  Earth,  to  which  Element  this  Grade  is  allotted.  The  Mystic  Number  is  55,  and 
from  it  is  formed  the  Password  Nun  He.  It  means  Ornament,  and  when  given  is  lettered  separately.  The 
Badge  of  this  Grade,  is  the  sash  of  the  Neophyte  with  the  narrow  white  border,  a red  cross  within  the 
Triangle,  and  the  number  1 within  a circle  and  10  within  a square,  one  on  each  side  of  the  triangle. 

Hiero: 

Invests  Neophyte  with  the  sash,  and  points  out  the  Three  Portals,  saying: 

Hiero: 

The  Three  Portals  facing  you  in  the  East,  are  the  Gates  of  the  Paths  leading  to  the  three  further  Grades, 
which  with  the  Zelator  and  the  Neophyte  forms  the  first  and  lowest  Order  of  our  Fraternity.  Furthermore, 
they  represent  the  Paths  which  connect  the  Tenth  Sephirah  Malkuth  with  the  other  Sephiroth.  The  letters 
Tau,  Qoph  and  Shin  make  the  word  Quesheth  a Bow,  the  reflection  of  the  Rainbow  of  Promise  stretched 
over  our  Earth,  and  which  is  about  the  Throne  of  God. 

(Hegemon  points  out  the  Flaming  Sword,  saying:) 

Heg: 

This  drawing  of  the  Flaming  Sword  of  the  Kerubim,  is  a representation  of  the  Guardians  of  the  Gates  of 
Eden,  just  as  the  Hiereus  and  Hegemon  symbolize  the  Two  Paths  of  the  Tree  of  the  Knowledge  of  Good 
and  of  Evil. 

Hiereus: 

In  this  Grade,  the  red  Cross  is  placed  within  the  White  Triangle  upon  the  Altar,  and  it  is  thus  the  symbol 
of  the  Banner  of  the  West.  The  Triangle  refers  to  the  Three  Paths  and  the  Cross  to  the  Hidden  Knowledge. 
The  Cross  and  the  Triangle  together  represent  Life  and  Light. 

Hiero: 

Points  out  the  Tablet  of  the  North,  saying: 

Hiero: 

This  Grade  is  especially  referred  to  the  element  of  Earth,  and  therefore,  one  of  its 


94 


VOLUME  SIX 


principal  emblems  is  the  Great  Watch  Tower  or  Terrestrial  Tablet  of  the  North.  It  is  the  Third  or  Great 
Northern  Quadrangle  or  Earth  Tablet,  and  it  is  one  of  the  four  Great  Tablets  of  the  elements  said  to  have 
been  given  to  Enoch  by  the  Great  Angel  Ave.  It  is  divided  within  itself  into  four  lesser  angles.  The  Mystic 
letters  upon  it  form  various  Divine  and  Angelic  Names,  in  what  our  tradition  calls  the  Angelic  secret 
language.  From  it  are  drawn  the  Three  Holy  Secret  Names  of  God  EMOR  DIAL  HECTEGA  which  are 
borne  upon  the  Banners  of  the  North,  and  there  are  also  numberless  names  of  Angels,  Archangels,  and 
Spirits  ruling  the  Element  of  Earth. 

Kerux: 

Comes  forward  retrieves  Fylfot  Cross  from  Altar  and  hands  it  to  Hierophant. 

Hiero: 

The  Hermetic  Cross,  which  is  also  called  Fylfot,  Hammer  of  Thor,  and  Swastika,  is  formed  of  17  Squares 
out  of  a square  of  25  lesser  squares.  These  17  represent  the  Sun,  the  Four  Elements,  and  the  Twelve  Signs 
of  the  zodiac.  In  this  Grade,  the  lights  on  the  Pillars  are  unshaded,  showing  that  you  have  quitted  the 
Darkness  of  the  outer  world.  You  will  leave  the  Temple  for  a short  time. 

Kerux: 

Escorts  Neophyte  out  of  Temple,  instructs  Neophyte  in  knocks  and  returns  to  Temple  entrance. 


Part  II 


95 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiero: 

Frater  Kerux,  when  the  Neophyte  gives  the  proper  alarm,  you  will  admit  him.  Fraters  Stolistes  and 
Dadouchos,  assist  the  Kerux  in  the  reception. 

Stol: 

Dad: 

Take  up  positions  so  as  to  face  Neophyte  as  he  enters  Hall. 

Kerux: 

Opens  door  and  admits  Neophyte,  but  does  not  stand  in  front  of  him. 

Hiero: 

Frater,  as  in  the  Grade  of  Neophyte,  you  came  out  of  the  World  to  the  Gateway  of  Hidden  Knowledge,  so 
in  this  Grade  you  pass  through  the  Gateway  and  come  into  the  Holy  Place.  You  are  now  in  the  court  of 
the  Tabernacle,  where  stood  the  Altar  of  Burnt  Offering,  whereon  was  offered  the  sacrifices  of  animals, 
which  symbolized  the  Qlippoth  or  Evil  Demons  who  inhabit  the  plane  contiguous  to  and  below  the 
Material  Universe. 

Dad: 

Makes  Cross  in  air  with  Censer,  and  censes  Neophyte  in  silence  with  three  forward  swings. 

Hiero: 

Between  the  Altar  and  the  entrance  into  the  Holy  Place,  stood  the  Laver  of  Brass  wherein  the  priests 
washed  before  entering  the  Tabernacle.  It  was  the  symbol  of  the  Waters  of  Creation. 

Stol: 

Makes  cross  with  water  on  Neophyte 's  forehead  and  sprinkles  thrice  in  silence. 

Hiero: 

Having  made  offering  at  the  altar  of  Burnt  Sacrifice,  and  having  been  cleansed  at  the  Laver  of  Brass,  the 
Priest  then  entered  the  Holy  Place. 

Kerux: 

Takes  Neophyte  behind  Pillars  to  North  and  removes  the  chair. 

Stol: 

Dad: 

Return  to  their  places. 

Hiereus: 

Takes  his  stand  between  the  Pillars  facing  Neophyte.  He  guards  the  Path  with  his  Sword  and  says: 
Hiereus: 

Thou  canst  not  pass  the  Gateway  which  is  between  the  Pillars,  unless  thou  canst  give  the  Signs  and  Words 
of  a Neophyte. 

(Done) 

Kerux: 

Instructs  Neophyte  to  advance  to  a position  between  the  Pillars. 

Hiereus: 

Returns  to  his  place. 

Heg: 

Comes  forward,  stands  East  of  Pillars,  facing  Neophyte,  and  bars  the  way  into  the  Temple  with 
Scepter,  saying: 

Heg: 

Thou  canst  not  enter  the  Holy  Place,  unless  thou  canst  give  the  Sign  and  Grip  of  a Zelator. 

(Done) 

Kerux: 

Resumes  his  seat  after  handing  Neophyte  over  to  charge  of  Hegemon.  Hegemon  leads  Neophyte  to 
North,  and  says: 

Heg: 

To  the  Northern  side  of  the  Holy  Place,  stood  the  Table  of  Shewbread.  The  drawing  before  you  represents 


96 


VOLUME  SIX 


its  occult  meaning.  On  it  twelve  leaves  were  laid  as  emblems  of  the  Bread  of  life,  and  it  is  an  image  of  the 
Mystery  of  the  Rose  of  Creation.  The  12  circles  are  the  12  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  while  the  Lamp  in  the 
center  is  symbolic  of  the  Sun,  which  is  the  source  of  heat  and  life.  The  four  Triangles  whose  twelve 
angles  each  touch  one  of  the  12  circles  are  those  of  Fire,  Earth,  Air,  and  Water,  and  allude  to  the  four 
Triplicities  of  the  Zodiacal  Signs.  The  Triangle  inscribed  within  each  of  the  12  circles,  alludes  to  the  3 
Decanates,  or  phases  of  ten  degrees  of  each  sign.  On  one  side  of  each  Triangle  is  the  Permutation  of  the 
Divine  Name  YOD  HEH  VAU  HEH,  which  is  referred  to  that  particular  sign,  while  in  the  opposite  side 
of  it  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  12  Tribes  which  is  also  attributed  to  it.  Now  the  22  sounds  and  letters  of  the 
Hebrew  Alphabet  are  the  foundation  of  all  things.  Three  Mothers,  Seven  Double  and  Twelve  Singles.  The 
Twelve  Single  letters  are  allotted  to  the  12  directions  in  space,  and  those  diverge  to  Infinity,  and  are  in  the 
arms  of  the  Eternal.  These  Twelve  Letters  He  designed  and  combined,  and  fortified  with  them  the  Twelve 
Celestial  Constellations  of  the  Zodiac.  They  are  over  the  Universe  as  a King  upon  his  throne,  and  they  are 
in  the  revolution  of  the  year  as  a King  traversing  his  dominions,  and  they  are  in  the  heart  of  man  as  a King 
in  warfare.  And  the  Twelve  Leaves  are  the  images  of  those  ideas,  and  are  the  outer  petals  of  the  Rose; 
while  within  are  the  Four  Archangels  ruling  over  the  Four  Quarters,  and  the  Kerubic  emblems  of  the 
Lion,  Man,  Bull  and  Eagle.  Around  the  great  central  Lamp  which  is  an  image  of  the  Sun,  is  the  Great 
Mother  of  Heaven,  symbolized  by  the  letter  Heh,  the  first  of  the  Single  letters,  and  by  its  number  5,  the 
Pentagram,  Malkah  the  Bride,  ruling  in  her  Kingdom  Malkuth,  crowned  with  a crown  of  Twelve  Stars. 
These  Twelve  Circles  further  represent  the  12  Foundations  of  the  Holy  City  of  the  Apocalypse  while  in 
Christian  Symbolism  the  Sun  and  the  Twelve  Signs  are  referred  to  Christ  and  His  Twelve  Apostles. 


TABLE  OF  SHEWBREAD 


Heg: 

Leads  Neophyte  to  Hiereus  and  then  returns  to  his  place  and  is  seated. 


97 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiereus: 

Leads  Neophyte  to  the  South,  and  says: 

Hiereus: 

On  the  Southern  side  of  the  Holy  Place  stood  the  Seven  Branched  Candlestick,  wherein  was  burned  pure 
olive  oil.  It  is  an  image  of  the  Mystery  of  the  Elohim,  the  Seven  Creative  Ideas.  The  symbolic  drawing 
before  you  represents  its  occult  meaning.  The  Seven  Circles  which  surround  the  Heptagram,  represent  the 
Seven  Planets  and  the  Seven  Qabalistic  Palaces  of  Assiah,  the  Material  world  - which  answer  to  the  Seven 
Apocalyptic  Churches  which  are  in  Asia  or  Assiah  - as  these  again  allude  to  the  Seven  Lamps  before  the 
Throne  on  another  Plane.  Within  each  circle  is  a triangle  to  represent  the  Three  Fold  Creative  Idea 
operating  in  all  things.  On  the-righthand  side  of  each  is  the  Hebrew  Name  of  the  Angel  who  governs  the 
Planet;  on  the  left  side  is  the  Hebrew  name  of  the  sphere  of  the  Planet  itself;  while  the  Hebrew  letter 
beneath  the  base  is  one  of  the  duplicated  letters  of  the  Hebrew  Alphabet  which  refer  to  the  Seven  Planets. 
The  Seven  Double  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet  have  each  two  sounds  associated  with  them,  one  hard, 
and  one  soft.  They  are  called  Double,  because  each  letter  represents  a contrary  or  permutation,  thus:  Life 
and  Death;  Peace  and  War;  Wisdom  and  Folly;  Riches  and  Poverty;  Grace  and  Indignity;  Fertility  and 
Solitude;  Power  and  Servitude.  These  Seven  letters  point  out  7 localities:  Zenith,  Nadir,  East,  West, 

North,  South,  and  the  Place  of  Holiness  in  the  midst  sustaining  all  things.  The  Archetypal  Creator 
designed,  produced,  combined  and  formed  with  them  the  Planets  of  the  Universe,  the  Days  of  the  Week, 
and  in  Man,  the  Gate  of  the  Soul.  He  has  loved  and  blessed  the  number  7 more  than  all  things  under  His 
Throne,  The  powers  of  these  7 letters  are  also  shown  forth  in  the  7 Palaces  of  Assiah  and  the  Seven  Stars 
of  that  Vision  are  the  7 Archangels  who  rule  them. 


-ScmtVi 


NoRJH 


Hiereus: 

Leads  Neophyte  to  W.  of  Altar,  and  returns  to  his  place,  and  is  seated. 

Hiero: 

Moves  to  East  of  Altar,  takes  censer  from  Altar,  and  holding  it  with  chain  short,  makes  cross  and  three 
forward  swings,  replaces  it,  and  says: 


98 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiero: 

Before  the  veil  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  stood  the  Altar  of  incense,  of  which  this  altar  is  an  image.  It  was  of 
the  form  of  a double  cube,  thus  representing  material  form  as  a reflection  and  duplication  of  that  which  is 
Spiritual.  The  sides  of  the  Altar,  together  with  the  top  and  bottom,  consist  of  ten  squares,  thus 
symbolizing  the  Ten  Sephiroth  of  which  the  basal  one  is  Malkuth,  the  realization  of  the  rest  upon  the 
material  plane,  behind  which  the  others  are  'concealed.  For  were  this  double  cube  raised  in  the  air 
immediately  above  your  head,  you  would  but  see  the  single  square  forming  the  lowest  side,  the  others 
from  their  position  being  concealed  from  you.  Just  so,  behind  the  material  Universe,  lies  the  concealed 
form  of  the  Majesty  of  God.  The  Altar  of  Incense  was  overlaid  with  Gold  to  represent  the  highest  degree 
of  purity,  but  the  Altar  before  you  is  black  to  represent  the  terrestrial  Earth.  Learn  then,  to  separate  the 
pure  from  the  impure,  and  refine  the  Gold  of  the  Spirit  from  the  Black  Dragon,  the  corruptible  body. 

Upon  the  Cubical  Altar,  were  Fire,  Water,  and.  Incense  Three  Mother  Letters  of  the  Hebrew  Alphabet; 
Aleph,  Mem,  and  Shin.  Mem  is  silent,  Shin;  is  Sibilant,  and  Aleph  is  the  tongue  of  a balance  between 
these  contraries  in  equilibrium,  reconciling  and  mediating  between  them.  In  this  is  a great  Mystery,  very 
admirable  and  recondite.  The  Fire  produced  the  Heavens,  the  Water,  the  Earth,  and  the  Air  is  the 
reconciler  between  them.  In  the  year,  they  bring  forth  the  hot,  the  cold,  and  the  temperate  seasons,  and  in 
man,  they  are  imaged  in  the  head,  the  chest,  and  the  trunk.  I now  confer  upon  you  the  Mystic  Title  of 
Periclinus-de  Faustis,  which  signifies  that  on  this  Earth  you  are  in  a wilderness,  far  from  the  Garden  of  the 
Happy.  And  give  you  the  symbol  of  ARETZ  which  is  the  Hebrew  name  for  Earth,  to  which  the  Grade  of 
Zelator  is 


99 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


referred.  The  word  Zelator  is  derived  from  the  ancient  Egyptian  Zaruator,  signifying  Searcher  of  Athor, 
Goddess  of  Nature;  but  others  assign  to  it  the  meaning  of  the  zealous  student  whose  first  duty  was  to  blow 
the  Athanor  or  fire  which  heated  the  Crucible  of  the  Alchemist. 

Hiero: 

Resumes  seat  on  Dais. 

Kerux: 

Leads  new  Zelator  to  seat  in  North  West. 

Hiero: 

Frater  Kerux,  you  have  my  command  to  declare  that  our  Frater  has  been  duly  admitted  to  the  Grade  of 
Zelator. 

Kerux: 

Comes  to  N.  W of  Hierophant,  faces  West,  raises  Wand  and  says: 

Kerux: 

In  the  name  of  ADONAI MEFEKH,  and  by  command  of  the  Very  Honored  Hierophant,  hear  ye  all  that  I 
proclaim  that  Frater  (Name)  has  been  duly  admitted  to  the  Grade  of  Zelator,  and  that  he  has  obtained  the 
Mystic  Title  of  Periclinus  (Pericline)  de  Faustis  and  the  symbol  of  Aretz. 

Kerux: 

Returns  to  his  place  by  E.  saluting,  and  by  S.  and  W. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Zelator  Grade,  the  symbolism  of  the  Tenth  Sephirah  Malkuth  is  especially  shown,  as  well  as  the 
Tenth  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah.  Among  other  Mystic  Titles,  Malkuth  is  called  SHAAR,  the  Gate, 
which  by  metathesis  becomes  ASHUR,  meaning  the  number  Ten.  Also,  in  Chaldee  it  is  called  THRAA, 
the  Gate,  which  has  the  same  number  as  the  Great  Name  ADONAI,  written  in  full:  Aleph,  Daleth,  Nun, 
Yod,  which  both  equal  67 1 in  total  numeration.  It  is  also  called  the  Gate  of  Death,  The  Gate  of  Tears,  and 
the  Gate  of  Justice,  the  Gate  of  Prayer,  and  The  Gate  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Mighty  Ones.  It  is  also  called 
The  Gate  of  the  Garden  of  Eden  and  the  Inferior  Mother,  and  in  Christian  symbolism,  it  is  connected  with 
the  Three  Holy  Women  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  The  Tenth  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  which  answereth 
to  Malkuth  is  called  The  Resplendent  Intelligence,  because  it  exalts  above  every  head  and  sitteth  upon  the 
Throne  of  Binah.  It  illuminateth  the  Splendor  of  all  the  Fights,  the  Zohar  ME-OU  ROTH  and  causeth  the 
current  of  the  Divine  Influx  to  descend  from  the  Prince  of  Countenances,  the  Great  Archangel  Metatron. 
Frater  (Name)  before  you  can  be  eligible  for  advancement  to  the  next  Grade  of  Theoricus  you  will  be 
required  to  pass  an  examination  in  certain  subjects.  1)  The  names  and  alchemical  symbols  of  the  three 
principles  of  nature.  2)  The  metals  attributed  in  alchemy  to  the  seven  planets.  3)  The  names  of  the 
alchemical  particular  principles,  the  Sun  and  Moon  of  the  Philosophers,  the  Green  Fion,  the  King  and 
Queen.  4)  The  names  and  astrological  value  of  the  Twelve  Houses  of  Heaven.  5)  The  names,  astrological 
symbols  and  values  of  the  aspects  of  the  planets.  6)  The  meaning  of  the  Querent  and  Quesited.  7)  The 
four  great  classes  of  astrology.  8)  The  arrangement  of  the  ten  Sephiroth,  Hebrew  and  English,  in  the  Tree 
of  Fife.  This  is  especially  important.  9)  The  three  pillars  of  the  same.  10)  The  names  of  the  four  orders  of 
Elemental  Spirits.  1)  The  names  and  descriptions  of  the  Kerubim.  12)  The  meaning  of  the  Faver  and 
Great  Altar  of  Burnt  Offerings  of  the  Sacrifice  and  of  the  Qlippoth  or  Shells.  13)  The  names  of  the  ten 
Heavens  of  Assiah,  in  Hebrew  and  English.  14)  The  names  of  the  four  Qabalistic  Worlds,  Hebrew  and 
English.  15)  The  names  of  the  twenty  two  Tarot  Trumps  and  Four  Suits.  A manuscript  on  these  will  be 
supplied  to  you.  When  you  are  well  satisfied  that  you  are  well  informed  on  these,  notify  the  Officer  in 
charge. 

Hiero: 

Fraters  and  Sorors,  assist  me  to  close  this  Temple  in  the  Grade  of  Zelator. 

All  rise. 

Hiero: 

Frater  Kerux,  see  that  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Kerux: 

On  inner  side  of  the  door,  knocks. 


100 


VOLUME  SIX 


Sentinel: 

(Knocks.) 

Kerux: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant,  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Hiero: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Earth. 

All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

ADONAI  HA-ARETZ,  ADONAI MELEKH,  Blessed  be  Thy  Name  unto  the  countless  ages.  Amen. 

All  give  sign  and  face  East. 

Hiero: 

Leaves  his  Throne  and  passes  to  the  North,  standing  before  the  Tablet  of  the  North. 

Hiereus: 

Moves  to  right  of  Hierophant. 

Heg: 

Moves  to  left  of  Hierophant. 

Kerux: 

Moves  behind  Hierophant. 

Stol: 

Falls  in  behind  Hiereus. 

Dad: 

Falls  in  behind  Hegemon. 

Hiero: 

Let  us  rehearse  the  prayer  of  the  Earth  Spirits.  O Invisible  King,  Who,  taking  the  Earth  for  Foundation, 
didst  hollow  its  depths  to  fill  them  with  Thy  Almighty  Power.  Thou  Whose  Name  shaketh  the  Arches  of 
the  World,  Thou  who  causest  the  Seven  Metals  to  flow  in  the  veins  of  the  rocks.  King  of  the  Seven 
Lights,  Rewarder  of  the  subterranean  Workers,  lead  us  into  the  desirable  Air  and  into  the  Realm  of 
Splendor.  We  watch  and  we  labor  unceasingly,  we  seek  and  we  hope,  by  the  twelve  stones  of  the  Holy 
City,  by  the  buried  Talismans,  by  the  Axis  of  the  Loadstone  which  passes  through  the  center  of  the  Earth. 
O Lord,  O Lord,  O Lord!  Have  pity  upon  those  who  suffer.  Expand  our  hearts,  unbridle  and  upraise  our 
minds,  enlarge  our  natures.  O Stability  and  Motion!  O Darkness  veiled  in  Brilliance!  O Day  clothed  in 
Night!  O Master  who  never  dost  withhold  the  wages  of  Thy  Workmen!  O Silver  Whiteness  - O Golden 
Splendor!  O Crown  of  Living  and  Harmonious  Diamond!  Thou  who  wearest  the  Heavens  on  Thy  Finger 
like  a ring  of  Sapphire!  Thou  Who  hidest  beneath  the  Earth  in  the  Kingdom  of  Gems,  the  marvelous  Seed 
of  the  Stars ! Lire,  reign  and  be  Thou  the  Eternal  Dispenser  of  the  Treasures  whereof  Thou  hast  made  us 
the  Guardians.  Depart  ye  in  peace  unto  your  abodes  and  habitations.  May  the  blessing  of  Adonai 


101 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ha-Aretz  be  upon  you. 

Hiero: 

Makes  Banishing  Pentagram  of  Earth. 

Hiero: 

Be  there  peace  between  us  and  you,  and  be  ye  ready  to  come  when  ye  are  called. 

All  return  to  their  places  and  face  East. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  ADONAI  MELEKH,  I declare  this  Temple  closed  in  the  Grade  of  Zelator. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks  4,  3,  3) 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks  4,  3,  3) 

Heg: 

(Knocks  4,  3,  3)  Candidate  is  led  out  by  Hegemon. 


102 


VOLUME  SIX 


2 = 9 

Theoricus  Grade 
Part  I 

TEMPLE  OFFICERS 

Hierophant:  Red  Robe,  R&W  Nemyss,  Gold  Shoes,  White  Collar,  Lamen,  Scepter. 
Hiereus:  Black  Robe,  B&W  Nemyss,  Red  Shoes,  Red  Collar,  Lamen,  Sword. 

Hegemon:  White  Robe,  White  Nemyss,  Black  Collar,  Red  Shoes,  Lamen,  Scepter. 

Kerux:  Black  Robe,  B&W  Nemyss,  Black  Collar,  Red  Shoes,  Lamen,  White  Lamp,  Wand. 
Sentinel:  Black  Robe,  B&W  Nemyss,  Black  Collar,  Red  Shoes,  Lamen,  Sword. 

Candidate:  Black  Robe,  Red  Shoes,  Sash,  Red  Rope,  Hoodwink. 


Part  I 


OPENING 

(Temple  arranged  as  in  diagram  for  the  32nd  Path.  Members  assembled  and  clothed.  Lamp  on 
Altar  lighted.  Members  not  taking  office  rise  at  the  words.  Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Air  and  face 
East,  remaining  so  to  the  end  of  the  invocation.  They  do  the  same  at  the  closing,  but  otherwise  do  not 
move  from  their  places.) 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  assist  me  to  open  the  Temple 
in  the  grade  of  Theoricus.  Frater  Kerux,  see  that  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 


103 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Kerux: 

(Knock) 

Sentinel: 

(Knock) 

Kerux: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant  the  Hall  is  properly  guarded. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  see  that  none  below  the  Grade  of  Theoricus  is  present. 

Hiereus: 

Fraters  and  Sorors  give  the  signs  of  Theoricus 

All  Salute. 

Hiereus: 

(Saluting)Ve ry  Honored  Hierophant  all  present  have  attained  the  Grade  of  Theoricus. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  to  what  particular  element  is  this  Grade  attributed? 

Heg: 

To  the  Element  of  Air. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  to  what  Planet  does  this  Grade  especially  refer? 

Hiereus: 

To  the  Moon. 

Hiero: 

What  Path  is  attributed  to  this  Grade,  Honored  Hegemon? 

Heg: 

The  32nd  Path  ofTau. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  to  what  does  it  allude? 

Hiereus: 

To  the  Universe  as  composed  of  the  Four  Elements,  to  the  Kerubim,  to  the  Qlippoth  the  Astral  Plane  and 
the  reflection  of  the  sphere  of  Saturn. 

All  rise  and  face  East 
Hiero: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Air. 

Hiero: 

Making  invoking  Pentagram  and  Circle  with  Scepter  towards  East. 

Hiero: 

SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  Almighty  and  Everlasting  be  Thy  Name,  ever  magnified  in  the  Life  of  All.  Amen 
All  salute. 

Hierophant  remains  facing  East. 

Hiereus: 

Moves  to  Altar  and  halts. 

Heg: 

Kerux: 

Move  to  East  and  stand  on  the  right  and  left  rear  of  the  Hierophant  respectively  and  outside  the  Pillars. 
All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

Makes  Invoking  Pentagram  with  his  Scepter  in  the  Air  in  front  of  the  Tablet  of  Air. 

Hiero: 

And  Elohim  said  Let  us  make  Adam  in  our  Image,  after  our  likeness,  and  let  them  have  dominion  over  the 
fowl  of  the  Air.  In  the  Name  of  YOD  HEH  VAU  HEH,  and  in  the  Names  of  S HADDAI  EL  CHAI, 

Spirits  of  Air  adore  your  Creator. 


104 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiero: 

Taking  Pentacle  from  before  the  Tablet,  and  making  therewith  the  sign  Aquarius  in  the  air  before  it. 
Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  Raphael  the  Great  Archangel  of  Air  and  in  the  Sign  of  the  head  of  the  Man,  Spirits  of  Air 
adore  your  Creator. 

Hiero: 

Make  the  Sign  of  the  Cross  with  the  Pentacle. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Names  and  letters  of  the  Great  Eastern  Quadrangle  revealed  unto  Enoch  by  the  Angel  Ave,  Spirits 
of  Air,  adore  your  Creator. 

Hiero: 

Holding  Pentacle  on  high. 

Hiero: 

In  the  three  Great  Secret  names  of  God  borne  on  the  Banners  of  the  East,  ORO  IB  AH  AOZPI  Spirits  of 
Air,  adore  your  Creator. 

Hiero: 

Replaces  pentacle. 

All  return  to  places. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  I declare  the  Temple  opened  in  the  Grade  of  Theoricus. 

Hiero: 

(Knock  3,  3,  3) 

Hiereus: 

(Knock  3,  3,  3) 

Heg: 

(Knock  3,  3,  3.) 

(Temple  is  darkened) 

Hiero: 

Fraters  and  Sorors,  our  Frater  (Sorer)  XYZ  having  made  such  progress  in  the  paths  of  Occult  Science  as 
has  enabled  him  (her)  to  pass  the  examination  in  the  requisite  knowledge,  is  now  eligible  for  advancement 
to  the  Grade  of  Theoricus,  and  I have  duly  received  a dispensation  from  the  Great  Honored  Chiefs  of  the 
Second  Order  to  advance  him  in  due  form.  Honored  Hegemon,  superintend  the  preparation  of  the  Zelator 
and  give  the  customary  alarm. 

Kerux: 

Places  fan  by  Hierophant,  lamp  by  Hegemon,  Cup  by  Hiereus,  salt  by  Kerux,  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Officers  seats,  facing  the  same. 

Heg: 

Rises,  salutes  Hierophant,  quits  Temple,  and  sees  that  Zelator  is  prepared  wearing  sash  of  Zelator, 
hoodwinked  and  with  solid  cubical  Greek  Cross  as  shown,  formed  of  22  squares  with  letters  of  Hebrew 
alphabet  written  thereon  in  right  hand. 

Heg: 

Takes  Zelator  by  left  hand  and  gives  an  alarm  of  9 Knocks  saying: 

Heg: 

Quit  thou  the  material  and  seek  the  spiritual. 

Kerux: 

Opens  door  and  admits  them. 


105 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiero: 

Conduct  the  Zelator  to  the  East. 

Heg: 

Places  Zelator  before  the  Pillars  and  places  himself  at  Zelators  right  hand. 

Kerux: 

Moves  to  Zelators  left  hand. 

Kerux: 

Takes  cubical  cross  from  Zelator. 

Hiero: 

(To  Zelator)  Give  me  the  Step,  Sign,  and  Grip  or  Token,  Grand  Word,  Mystic  number  and  Password 
formed  therefrom  of  the  Grade  of  Zelator. 

Zel: 

Step  left  foot  6 inches  right  foot  6 inches. 

Sign  arm  upward  45  degrees. 

General  Grip  of  first  Order. 

The  Grand  Word  ADONAI  HA-ARETZ.  The  number  of  the  Password  is  55.  The  Hebrew  letters 
are  Nun  Heh. 

Hiero: 

Give  me  also  the  mystic  title  and  symbol  which  you  received  in  that  Grade. 

Zel: 

Pereclinus  de  Faustis,  Aretz. 

Hiero: 

Frater  (Sorer)  do  you  solemnly  pledge  yourself  to  maintain  the  same  strict  secrecy  regarding  the  mysteries 
of  the  32nd  Path  and  of  the  Grade  of  Theoricus  which  you  have  already  sworn  to  maintain  respecting  those 
of  the  preceding  Grades? 

Zel: 

1 do. 

Kerux: 

Hands  cubical  cross  to  Candidate. 

Hiero: 

Then  you  will  stretch  your  right  hand  holding  the  cubical  cross  towards  Heaven  and  say  I swear  by  the 
Firmament  of  Heaven. 

Zel: 

1 swear  by  the  firmament  of  heaven. 

Hiero: 

Fet  the  hoodwink  be  removed. 

Kerux: 

Removes  hoodwink. 

Heg: 

Returns  to  his  place  in  South  leaving  Kerux  in  charge  of  Zelator. 

Hiero: 

Stretch  forth  your  right  hand  holding  the  cubical  cross  toward  the  East  in  the  position  of  the  Zelator  sign, 
saying:  Fet  the  Powers  of  Air  witness  my  pledge. 

Zel: 

Fet  the  powers  of  Air  witness  my  pledge. 


RITUAL  OF  32nd  PATH 

Hiero: 

( Knocks ) Facing  you  are  the  Portals  of  the  31st,  32nd  and  29th  Paths,  leading  from  the  Grade  of  Zelator 
to  the  three  other  Grades  which  are  beyond.  The  only  Path  open  to  you,  however,  is  the  32nd  which  leads 
to  the  Grade  of  Theoricus,  and  which  you  must  traverse  before  arriving  at  that  Degree.  Take  in  your  right 


106 


VOLUME  SIX 


hand  the  Cubical  Cross,  and  in  your  left  hand  the  Banner  of  Light  (Gives  candidate  The  Banner  of  East ) 
and  follow  your  guide,  Anubis  the  Guardian,  who  leads  you  from  the  material  to  the  Spiritual. 

Kerux: 

Anubis  the  Guardian  said  unto  the  Aspirant,  Let  us  enter  the  Presence  of  the  Lords  of  Truth.  Arise  and 
follow  me. 

Kerux: 

Leads  Zelator  between  the  columns,  turns  to  the  right  and  circumambulates  the  hall  once. 

Hiereus: 

(As  they  go  round  first  time.)  The  Sphinx  of  Egypt  spake  and  said,  I am  the  synthesis  of  the  Elemental 
Forces,  I am  also  the  symbol  of  Man,  I am  Life  and  I am  Death,  I am  the  Child  of  the  Night  of  Time. 

As  Kerux  and  Zelator  approach  East,  the  Hierophant  steps  from  between  the  Pillars  and  bars 
the  passage. 

Hiero: 

Takes  Banner  of  the  West  in  left  hand,  holds  fan  in  right  hand. 

Hiero: 

The  Priest  with  the  mask  of  Osiris  spake  and  said  Thou  canst  not  pass  the  Gate  of  the  Eastern  heaven, 
unless  thou  canst  tell  me  my  Name. 

Kerux: 

(For  Candidate ).  Thou  art  NU  the  Goddess  of  the  Firmament  of  Air,  Thou  art  HORMAKHU  Lord  of  the 
Eastern  Sun. 

Hiero: 

In  what  signs  and  symbols  do  ye  come? 

Kerux: 

In  the  letter  Aleph,  in  the  Banner  of  Light,  and  the  symbol  of  Equated  Forces. 

Hiero: 

Falls  back  and  signing  the  Aquarius  Kerub  before  Zelator  with  fan. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Sign  of  the  Man,  Child  of  Air,  thou  art  purified,  pass  thou  on. 

Hiero: 

Gives  Banner  of  West  to  Kerux. 

Kerux: 

Hands  it  to  Hegemon  as  he  passes  him. 

Kerux  and  Zelator  circumambulate  the  Temple  a second  time,  following  the  course  of  the  Sun. 
Heg: 

As  they  go  round  second  time  Bars  the  way  in  south  with  red  lamp  in  right  hand  and  Banner  of  West  in 
left  hand. 

Hiereus: 

(As  they  go  round  second  time.)l  am  Osiris  the  Soul  in  Twin  aspect,  united  to  the  higher  by  purification; 
perfected  in  suffering;  glorified  through  trial,  I have  come  where  the  Great  Gods  are  through  the  Power  of 
the  Mighty  Name. 


107 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

The  Priest  with  the  Mask  of  the  Lion  spake  and  said  Thou  canst  not  pass  the  Gate  of  the  Southern  Heaven 
unless  thou  canst  tell  me  my  Name. 

Kerux: 

(For  Candidate ).  MAU,  the  Lion  very  powerful,  Lord  of  Fire  is  thy  name;  thou  art  RA,  the  Sun  in  his 
strength. 

Heg: 

In  what  signs  and  symbols  do  ye  come? 

Kerux: 

In  the  Letter  Shin,  in  the  Banner  of  the  East,  and  the  symbol  of  the  Cubical  Cross. 

Heg: 

Falls  back  and  signing  the  Leo  Kerub  before  Zelator  with  Lamp. 

Heg: 

In  the  sign  of  the  Lion,  Child  of  Fire,  thou  art  purified,  pass  thou  on. 

Heg: 

Takes  the  place  of  Kerux. 

Kerux: 

Returns  to  his  seat  in  North. 

Heg: 

Leads  Zelator  round  the  Temple  a third  time  giving  the  Banner  of  the  West  to  Hiereus,  as  he  passes. 
Hiereus: 

As  they  go  round  third  time  Bars  the  way  in  West  with  cup  of  Water  in  right  hand  and  Banner  of  West 
in  left  hand. 

Hiereus: 

1 have  passed  through  the  Gates  of  the  Firmament,  give  me  your  hands  for  I am  made  as  ye.  Hail  unto  ye, 
ye  Lords  of  Truth,  for  ye  are  the  formers  of  the  Soul.  The  Priest  with  the  Mask  of  the  Eagle  spake  and 
said  Thou  canst  not  pass  the  Gate  of  the  Western  heaven,  unless  thou  canst  tell  me  my  Name. 

Heg: 

(For  Candidate ) HEKA,  Mistress  of  HESAR,  Ruler  of  Water  is  thy  name;  thou  art  TOUM,  the  setting 
Sun. 

Hiereus: 

In  what  signs  and  symbols  do  ye  come? 

Heg: 

In  the  letter  Mayim,  in  the  Banner  of  Light,  and  the  symbol  of  the  Twenty  two  letters. 

Hiereus: 

Falls  back  and  signing  the  Eagle  Kerub  before  Zelator  with  cup  of  Water. 

Hiereus: 

In  the  sign  of  the  Eagle,  Child  of  Water,  thou  art  purified,  pass  thou  on. 

Hiereus: 

Gives  Banner  of  West  to  Hegemon  who  leaves  it  with  the  Kerux  as  he  passes  him.  Hegemon  leads 
Candidate  round  the  Temple  for  fourth  time. 

Kerux: 

As  they  go  round  fourth  time  Bars  the  way  in  the  North  with  plate  of  salt  in  right  hand  and  Banner  of 
West  in  left  hand. 


108 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiereus: 

(As  they  go  round  fourth  time.)  O Lord  of  the  Universe,  Thou  art  above  all  things;  and  before  Thee  the 
Shadows  of  Night  roll  back  and  the  Darkness  hasteneth  away. 

Kerux: 

The  Priest  with  the  mask  of  the  Ox  spake  and  said:  Thou  canst  not  pass  the  Gate  of  the  Northern  Heaven, 
unless  thou  canst  tell  me  my  Name. 

Heg: 

(For  Candidate ) SATEM  in  the  abode  of  SHU,  the  Bull  of  Earth  is  thy  name;  thou  art  KHEPHRA,  the 
Sun  at  Night. 

Kerux: 

In  what  signs  and  symbols  do  ye  come? 

Heg: 

In  the  Letters  Aleph,  Mem  and  Shin;  and  in  the  symbols  of  the  Banner  and  Cross. 

Kerux: 

Falls  back  and  signing  the  Taurus  Kerub  before  Zelator  with  plate  of  salt. 

Kerux: 

In  the  Sign  of  the  head  of  the  Ox,  Child  of  the  elements,  thou  art  purified,  pass  thou  on. 

Heg: 

Kerux: 

Conduct  Candidate  to  the  foot  of  the  Pillars. 

Hiero: 

Takes  Banners  and  places  them  on  their  bases. 

Heg: 

Kerux: 

Turn  up  the  lights  so  as  to  make  the  Temple  as  light  as  usual,  and  return  to  their  respective  places. 

Fan,  Lamp,  Cup,  and  Salt  are  replaced  by  them  on  the  Altar. 

Hiero: 

(Taking  Cubical  Cross  from  Candidate ) The  Cubical  Cross  is  a fitting  emblem  of  the  equilibriated  and 
balanced  forces  of  the  Elements.  It  is  composed  of  22  squares  externally  thus  referring  to  the  22  Hebrew 
letters  which  are  placed  thereon.  Twenty-two  are  the  letters  of  the  Eternal  Voice;  in  the  Vault  of  Heaven, 
in  the  depth  of  the  Earth,  in  the  Abyss  of  Water,  in  the  all-presence  of  Fire;  Heaven  cannot  speak  their 
fullness,  Earth  cannot  utter  it.  Yet  hath  the  Creator  bound  them  in  all  things.  He  hath  mingled  them 
through  Water.  He  hath  whirled  them  aloft  in  Fire;  He  hath  sealed  them  in  the  air  of  Heaven;  He  hath 
distributed  them  through  the  Planets;  He  hath  assigned  unto  them  the  12  Constellations  of  the  zodiac. 
(Places  Cubical  Cross  aside.)  The  Thirty-second  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  which  answereth  unto  the 
Letter  Tau  is  called  the  Administrative  Intelligence  and  it  is  so  called  because  it  directeth  and  associateth 
in  all  their  operations  the  Seven  Planets,  even  all  of  them  in  their  own  due  courses.  To  it  therefore,  is 
attributed  the  due  knowledge  of  the  Seven  abodes  of  Assiah,  the  Material  World,  which  are  symbolized  in 
the  Apocalypse  by  the  Seven  Churches.  It  refers  to  the  Universe  as  composed  of  the  Four  elements;  to  the 
Kerubim;  to  the  Qlippoth,  and  to  the  Astral  Plane.  It  is  the  Reflection  of  the  Sphere  of  Saturn.  It 
represents  the  connecting  and  binding  link  between  the  Material  and  Formative  worlds,  Assiah  and 
Yetzirah,  and  necessarily  passes  through  the  Astral  Plane,  the  abode  of  the  elementals,  the  Qlippoth,  and 
the  Shells  of  the  Dead.  It  is  the  rending  of  the  Veil  of  the  Tabernacle  whereon  the  Kerubim  and  the  Palm 
Trees  were  depicted;  it  is  the  passing  of  the  Gate  of  Eden.  (Leads  Zelator  to  the  West  of  the  Altar.)  These 
ideas  are  symbolically  resumed  in  the  representation  of  the  twenty-first  Key  of  the  Tarot  before  you. 
Within  the  oval  formed  of  the  72  circles  is  a female  figure,  nude  save  for  a scarf  which  floats  around  her. 
She  is  crowned  with  the  lunar  crescent  of  Isis,  and  holds  in  each  hand  a wand,  her  legs  form  a cross.  She 
is  the  Bride  of  the  Apocalypse,  the  Qabalistic  Queen  of  the  Canticles,  the  Egyptian  Isis  of  Nature  now 
shown  partly  unveiled,  the  Great  Feminine  Kerubic  Angel  Sandalphon  on  the  left  hand  of  the  Mercy  Seat 
of  the  Ark.  The  two  wands  are  the  directing  forces  of  the  Positive  and  Negative  currents.  The  Seven 


109 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


pointed  Star  or  Heptagram  alludes  to  the  Seven  Palaces  of  Assiah,  the  crossed  legs  to  the  Symbol  of  the 
Four  Letters  of  the  Name.  The  surmounting  Crescent  receives  the  Influences  alike  of  Geburah  and  of 
Gedulah.  She  is  the  synthesis  of  the  32nd  Path  uniting  Malkuth  with  Yesod.  The  oval  of  72  small  circles  is 
the  Schem-hamphorasch,  or  the  72  fold  Name  of  the  Deity.  The  12  larger  circles  form  the  Zodiac.  At  the 
angles  are  the  four  Kerubim,  which  are  the  vivified  Powers  of  the  Letters  of  the  Name  Tetragramaton 
operating  in  the  elements,  through  which  you  have  just  symbolically  passed  in  the  preceding  ceremony. 
The  Fan,  Lamp,  Cup  and  Salt  represent  the  four  elements  themselves,  whose  inhabitants  are  the  Sylphs, 
Salamanders,  Undines  and  Gnomes.  Be  thou  therefore  prompt  and  active  as  the  sylphs,  but  avoid  frivolity 
and  caprice;  be  energetic  and  strong  like  the  salamanders  but  avoid  irritability  and  ferocity;  be  flexible 
and  attentive  to  images  like  the  undines,  but  avoid  idleness  and  changeability;  be  laborious  and  patient 
like  the  gnomes  but  avoid  grossness  and  avarice.  So  shalt  thou  gradually  develop  the  powers  of  thy  soul, 
and  fit  thyself  to  command  the  Spirits  of  the  elements.  The  Altar  as  in  the  preceding  degrees  represents 
the  Material  universe,  and  on  its  right  is  the  Garden  of  Eden,  symbolized  by  the  Station  of  the  Hegemon, 
and  on  its  left  is  Gehenna  the  abode  of  the  Shells  symbolized  by  the  Tablet  of  the  Kerux.  These  Officers 
will  now  explain  these  drawings. 

Hiero: 

Returns  to  his  place. 

Heg: 

Leads  Candidate  to  his  Tablet  in  The  South. 

Heg: 

The  drawing  before  you  shows  in  part  the  Occult  symbolism  of  the  Garden  of  Eden  and  the  Holy  City  of 
the  Apocalypse.  The  Outer  circle  is  the  enclosing  Paradisiacal  Wall  guarded  by  the  Kerubim  and  the 
Flame,  and  the  Seven  Squares  are  the  Seven  Mansions  thereof,  or  the  Seven  Spheres,  wherein 
Tetragramaton  Elohim  planted  every  Tree  which  is  pleasant  and  good  for  food  symbolized  by  the  Palm 
Trees  wrought  upon  the  Veil  of  the  Tabernacle  and  the  Door  of  the  Holy  of  Holies  in  the  Temple.  But  in 
the  midst  is  the  Tree  of  Life,  the  Throne  of  God,  and  the  Lamb.  Twelve  are  the  foundations  and  twelve 
are  the  Gates,  shown  by  the  twelve  entrances  in  the  drawing.  The  four  streams  rising  from  one 


110 


VOLUME  SIX 


central  fountain  are  the  rivers  of  Eden,  referring  to  the  four  elements  proceeding  from  the  Omnipresent 
Spirit. 

Kerux: 

Leads  Candidate  to  his  Tablet  in  the  North. 

Kerux: 

The  drawing  before  you  represents  the  Seven  Infernal  Mansions  and  the  four  Seas.  The  first  circle 
represents  the  Waters  of  Tears;  the  second  circle  represents  the  Waters  of  Creation;  the  third  circle 
represents  the  Waters  of  Ocean;  and  the  fourth  circle  represents  the  False  Sea.  In  the  inner  circles  are  on 
the  right  hand  the  seven  Earths,  which  are:  1)  Aretz  2)  Adamah  3)  Gia  4)  Neschiah  5)  Tziah  6)  Arega  and 
7)  Thebel  or  Cheled.  On  the  left  hand  are  the  seven  Infernal  Habitations  which  are:  1)  Sheol  2)  Abaddon 
3)  Titahion  4)  Bar  Schauheth  5)  Tzelmoth  6)  Shaari  Moth  and  7)  Gehinnon. 

Hiero: 

I have  much  pleasure  in  conferring  upon  you  the  title  of  Lord  (Lady)  of  the  32nd  Path.  You  will  now  quit 
the  Temple  for  a short  time,  and  on  your  return  the  ceremony  of  your  reception  in  the  Grade  of  Theoricus 
will  be  proceeded  with. 


Ceremony  Of  Theoricus 
Part  II 

TEMPLE  OFFICERS 

Hierophant:  Red  Robe,  R&W  Nemyss,  Gold  Shoes,  White  Collar,  Lamen,  Scepter. 
Hiereus:  Black  Robe,  B&W  Nemyss,  Red  Shoes,  Red  Collar,  Lamen,  Sword. 

Hegemon:  White  Robe,  White  Nemyss,  White  Nemyss,  Black  Collar,  Red  Shoes,  Lamen, 

Scepter. 

Kerux:  Black  Robe,  B&W  Nemyss,  Black  Collar,  Red  Shoes,  Lamen,  White  Lamp,  Wand. 
Sentinel:  Black  Robe,  B&W  Nemyss,  Black  Collar,  Red  Shoes,  Lamen,  Sword. 

Candidate:  Black  Robe,  Red  Shoes,  Sash. 


“130 


J>  tW-V€A 


22 8 


A 

I hierophant 


T 


PC 

mi 


sit. 


\ 


wwt 


1 1 Of* 

tu*** 


IHIEREUS 


111 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiero: 

Frater  Kerux,  you  have  my  command  to  instruct  the  Zelator  in  the  proper  alarm,  and  to  present  him  with 
the  necessary  admission  badge.  Honored  Hegemon,  guard  the  Portal  and  admit  them  on  giving  the  proper 
alarm. 

Kerux: 

Presents  Candidate  with  necessary  admission  badge,  Caduceus  of  Hermes  and  instructs  him  to  give  an 
alarm  of  9 Knocks. 

Heg: 

Opens  door  and  admits  them. 

Hiero: 

(To  Zelator)  Frater  (Sorer)  XYZ  as  in  the  Zelator  Grade  there  were  given  the  symbolical  representations 
of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of  Good  and  Evil,  of  the  Garden  of  Eden  and  of  the  Holy  Place;  so  in  the  Grade 
of  Theoricus  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum  with  the  Ark  and  Kerubim  is  shown,  as  well  as  the  Garden  of  Eden 
with  which  it  coincides,  while  in  the  32nd  Path  leading  hereunto,  through  which  you  have  just  now 
symbolically  passed,  the  Kerubic  Guardians  are  represented  and  the  Palm  Trees  or  Trees  of  Progression  in 
the  Garden  of  Eden.  Honored  Hegemon,  conduct  the  Zelator  to  the  West,  and  place  him  thus  before  the 
Portal  of  the  32nd  Path  by  which  he  has  symbolically  entered. 

(Done.) 

Zelator: 

Faces  to  East. 

Kerux: 

Returns  to  his  place. 

Hiereus: 

By  what  symbol  dost  thou  enter  herein? 

Heg: 

By  the  peculiar  emblem  of  the  Kerux,  which  is  the  Caduceus  of  Hermes. 

Hiereus: 

The  Tree  of  Life  and  the  Three  Mother  Letters  are  the  keys  wherewith  to  unlock  the  meaning  of  the 
Caduceus  of  Hermes.  The  upper  part  of  the  Wand  rests  on  KETHER  and  the  Wings  stretch  out  unto 
CHOKMAH  and  BINAH,  the  three  Supernal  Sephiroth.  The  lower  seven  are  embraced  by  the  Serpents, 
whose  heads  fall  upon  CHESED  and  GEBURAH.  They  are  the  twin  Serpents  of  Egypt,  and  the  currents 
of  astral  light.  Furthermore,  the  wings  and  the  top  of  the  wand  form  the  letter  Shin,  the  symbol  of  fire. 

The  heads  and  upper  halves  of  the  serpents  form  Aleph,  the  symbol  of  Air,  while  their  tails  enclose  Mem 
the  symbol  of  Water.  The  Fire  above,  the  Waters  of  Creation  below,  and  the  Air  symbol  vibrating 
between  them. 

Hiero: 

Leaves  his  throne  and  comes  to  the  West  of  Altar.  Hegemon  conducts  Candidate  to  him  and  then 
returns  to  his  place  in  the  south. 

Hiero: 

The  symbols  before  you  represent  alike  the  Garden  of  Eden  and  the  Holy  of  Holies.  Before  you  stands  the 
Tree  of  Life  formed  of  the  Sephiroth  and  their  connecting  Paths.  Into  its  complete  symbolism  it  is 
impossible  here  to  enter,  for  it  is  the  key  of  all  things,  when  rightly  understood.  Upon  each  Sephira  are 
written  in  Hebrew  letters  its  Name,  the  Divine  names  ruling  it,  and  those  of  the  Angels  and  Archangels 
attributed  to  it.  The  connecting 


112 


VOLUME  SIX 


Paths  are  twenty  two  in  number,  and  are  distinguished  by  the  twenty  two  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet, 
making  with  the  Ten  Sephiroth  themselves,  the  thirty  two  Paths  of  Wisdom  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah.  The 
course  of  the  Hebrew  letters  as  placed  on  the  Paths  forms,  as  you  see,  the  symbol  of  the  Serpent  of 
Wisdom;  while  the  natural  succession  of  the  Sephiroth  forms  the  flaming  Sword,  and  the  course  of  the 
Lightning  Flash,  as  shown  in  the  drawing.  The  cross  within  the  triangle,  apex  downwards  placed  upon  the 
Altar  at  the  base  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  refers  to  the  Four  Rivers  of  Paradise,  while  the  angles  of  the  Triangle 
refer  to  the  Three  Sephiroth  NETZACH,  HOD  and  YESOD.  The  two  Pillars  right  and  left  of  the  Tree  are 
the  symbols  of  Active  and  Passive,  Male  and  Female,  Adam  and  Eve.  They  also  allude  to  the  Pillars  of 
Fire  and  Cloud  which  guided  the  Israelites  in  the  Wilderness,  and  the  Hot  and  Moist  natures  are  further 
marked  by  the  Red  Lamp  and  the  Cup  of  Water.  The  Pillars  further  represent  the  two  Kerubim  of  the  Ark; 
the  right  Metatron,  Male;  the  left  Sandalphon  Female.  Above  them  ever  bum  the  lamps  of  their  Spiritual 
Essence,  the  Higher  Life  of  which  they  are  partakers  in  the  Eternal  Uncreated  One.  (Giving  Sign  of 
Theoricus)  Glory  be  unto  Thee,  Lord  of  the  Land  of  Life,  for  thy  Splendor  filleth  the  Universe.  The 
Grade  of  Theoricus  is  referred  to  Yesod,  as  the  Grade  of  Zelator  is  to  Malkuth.  The  Path  between  them  is 
assigned  to  the  Letter  Tau,  whose  Portal  you  now  see  in  the  West  and  through  which  you  have  just 
symbolically  passed.  To  this  Grade  as  to  those  preceding  it  certain  Secret  Signs,  and  Tokens  are 
attributed.  They  consist  of  a sign,  grip  or  token.  Grand  Word,  Mystic  Number  and  Pass  Word  formed 
therefrom;  The  sign  is  thus  given  - Raise  the  arms  level  with  the  shoulders,  bend  the  elbows,  arms 
upwards  and  hands  bent  outwards,  as  if  supporting  a weight.  It  represents  you  in  the  Path  of  Yesod, 
supporting  the  Pillars  of  Mercy  and  Severity;  it  is  the  sign  of  the  classical  Atlas,  supporting  the  Universe 
upon  his  shoulders,  whom  Hercules  had  to  emulate.  It  is  the  Isis  of  Nature  supporting  the  Heavens.  The 
grip  is  the  general  grip  of  the  First  Order.  The  Grand  Word  is  a name  of  seven  letters  which  means  the 
Vast  and  Mighty  One  - SHADDAI  EL  CHAI.  The  mystic  number  is  45  and  from  it  is  formed  the  Pass 
Word  which  is  Mem,  Heh,  Mah.  It  should  be  lettered  separately  when  given.  Unto  this  Grade  and  unto  the 
Sephira  Yesod  the  ninth  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  is  referred.  It  is  called  the  Pure  or  clear  Intelligence, 
and  it  is  so  called  because  it  purifieth  and  maketh  clear  the  Sephiroth,  proveth  and  amendeth  the  forming 
of  their  representation  and  disposeth  their  unities  or  Harmonies  wherein  they  combine  without  mutilation 
or  division.  The  distinguishing  badge  of  the  Grade  which  you  will  now  be  entitled  to  wear,  is  the  sash  of  a 
Zelator  with  the  addition  of  a white  cross  above  the  triangle  and  the  numbers  2 and  9 within  a circle  and  a 
square  respectively  left  and  right  of  its  summit;  and  beneath  the  triangle  the  number  32  between  two 
parallel  narrow  white  lines.  The  meaning  of  the  Tablet  of  Earth  was  explained  to  you  in  the  preceding 
Grade. 

Hiero: 

Proceeds  to  East.  Hegemon  comes  forward  and  guides  Candidate  to  the  East. 

Hiero: 

The  three  Portals  facing  you  are  the  Gates  of  the  Paths  leading  from  the  Grade.  That  on  the  right  connects 
it  with  the  Grade  of  Philosophus,  that  on  the  left  with  the  Grade  of 


113 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Practicus,  while  the  central  one  leads  to  the  higher.  This  Grade  is  especially  referred  to  the  element  of  Air, 
and  therefore  the  great  Watch  Tower  or  Terrestrial  Tablet  of  the  East  forms  one  of  its  principal  emblems. 
It  is  known  as  the  first  or  Great  Eastern  Quadrangle  or  Tablet  of  Air,  and  it  is  one  of  the  four  great  Tablets 
delivered  unto  Enoch  by  the  Great  Angel  Ave.  From  it  are  drawn  the  three  Holy  Secret  Names  of  God 
ORO  IBAH  AOZPI  which  are  borne  upon  the  Banners  of  the  East;  and  the  numberless  Divine  and 
Angelic  names  which  appertain  unto  the  Element  of  Air.  To  the  Moon  also  is  this  Grade  related.  Its 
Kamea  or  Mystical  square  is  formed  of  8 1 squares  containing  the  numbers  from  1 to  8 1 arranged  so  as  to 
show  the  same  sum  each  way.  Its  ruling  numbers  are  9,  81,  369  and  3321.  This  Tablet  (indicating  it) 
shows  the  mystical  Seals  and  Names  drawn  from  the  Kamea  of  the  Moon.  The  Seals  are  formed  from 
lines  drawn  to  and  from  certain  numbers  in  the  square.  The  name  answering  to  9 is  Hod  meaning  Glory; 
that  answering  to  81  is  Elim  the  plural  of  the  Divine  Name  El,  that  answering  to  369  is  Chasmodai,  the 
Spirit  of  the  Moon.  The  other  names  are  those  of  the  Intelligences  and  Spirits  of  the  Moon.  On  this  Tablet 
are  shown  the  meanings  of  the  Lunar  symbol  when  inscribed  upon  the  Tree  of  Life.  Thus  its  crescent  in 
increase  represents  the  side  of  Mercy;  and  its  crescent  in  decrease  the  side  of  Severity;  while  at  full  it 
reflects  the  Sun  of  Tiphareth. 

Hiero: 

Resumes  his  seat. 

Heg: 

Conducts  Candidate  to  Hiereus  in  The  West. 

Hiereus: 

The  Tablet  before  you  shows  the  duplicated  form  of  the  alchemic  Sephiroth.  In  the  first  the  Metallic  root 
is  in  Kether,  Lead  in  Chokmah,  Tin  in  Binah,  Silver  in  Chesed,  Gold  in  Geburah,  Iron  in  Tiphareth, 
Netzach  and  Hod  are  the  places  of  Hermaphroditical  Brass,  Yesod  is  Mercury  and  Malkuth  is  the 
Medicine  of  Metals.  In  the  second  form  the  Mercury,  Sulphur  and  Salt  are  referred  to  the  three  Supernal 
Sephiroth,  and  the  Metals  to  the  seven  lower  but  in  a rather  different  order.  For  in  all  things  as  Supernal 
so  Terrestrial,  is  the  Tree  of  Life  to  be  found,  whether  it  be  in  animal,  in  vegetable  or  in  mineral  natures. 
Heg: 

Leads  Candidate  to  his  own  Tablet  in  South. 

Heg: 

This  Tablet  shows  you  the  Geometrical  lineal  Figures  attributed  to  the  Planets.  They  are  thus  referred: 

The  Number  3 and  the  Triangle  to  Saturn.  The  Number  4 and  the  Square  to  Jupiter.  The  Number  5 and  the 
Pentagram  to  Mars.  The  Number  6 and  the  Hexagram  to  the  Sun.  The  Number  7 and  the  Heptagram  to 
Venus.  The  Number  8 and  the  Octagram  to  Mercury.  The  Number  9 and  the  Enneagram  to  the  Moon.  Of 
these  the  heptagram  and  the  octagram  can  be  traced  in  two  modes  and  the  enneagram  in  three;  the  first  in 
each  case  being  most  consonant  to  the  nature  of  the  Planet. 

Heg: 

Resumes  his  seat. 

Kerux: 

Comes  forward  and  conducts  the  Candidate  to  his  Tablet  in  the  North. 

Kerux: 

Before  you  are  represented  the  sixteen  Figures  of  Geomancy,  which  are  formed  from  all  the  combinations 
of  single  and  double  points  in  4 lines  which  can  possibly  occur.  Two  are 


114 


VOLUME  SIX 


attributed  to  each  of  the  seven  Planets,  and  the  remaining  two  to  Caput  and  Cauda  Draconis.  Some  of 
them  are  also  attributed  to  Fire,  others  to  Air,  others  to  Earth  and  Water.  They  are  also  classed  under  the 
signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

Kerux: 

Conducts  Candidate  to  foot  of  Hierophant's  throne  in  The  East. 

Hiero: 

I now  congratulate  you  upon  having  attained  to  the  Grade  of  Theoricus,  and  in  recognition  thereof  I 
confer  upon  you  the  Mystic  title  of  Poraios  de  Rejectis  which  means  Brought  from  among  the  Rejected 
Ones  and  I give  you  the  symbol  of  Ruach  which  is  the  Hebrew  name  for  Air.  Frater  Kerux  (Knocks)  you 
have  my  command  to  declare  that  the  Zelator  has  been  duly  advanced  to  the  Grade  of  Theoricus. 

Kerux: 

In  the  Name  of  SHADDA1  EL  CHAI,  and  by  command  of  the  Very  Honored  Hierophant,  hear  ye  all  that 
1 proclaim  that  our  Frater(Soror)  XYZ  having  made  sufficient  progress  in  the  study  of  Occult  sciences, 
has  been  duly  advanced  to  the  Grade  of  Theoricus,  Lord  (Lady)  of  the  32nd  Path  and  that  he  (she)  has 
received  the  Mystic  title  of  Poraios  de  Rejectis  (Poraia)  and  the  symbol  of  Ruach.  Take  your  seat  in  the 
West. 

Hiero: 

Frater  (Sorer)  XYZ  before  you  are  eligible  for  advancement  to  the  next  higher  Grade  you  must  be  perfect 
in  certain  subjects,  presented  In  a standard  Knowledge  Lecture.  When  you  are  perfect  you  must  signify 
the  same  by  letter  to  the  Scribe  as  in  the  preceding  Grades. 

CLOSING 

Hiero: 

( Knocks ) Fraters  and  Sorors  assist  me  to  close  the  Temple  in  the  Grade  of  Theoricus.  Frater  Kerux,  see 
that  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Kerux: 

( Knocks ) 

Sentinel: 

( Knocks ) 

Kerux: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant,  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Hiero: 

( Knocks ) Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Air. 

(All  face  East.) 


ADORATION 

Hiero: 

SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  Almighty  and  Everliving,  Blessed  be  Thy  Name  unto  the  Countless  Ages.  Amen. 
All  salute. 

Hiero: 

Making  invoking  Pentagram  and  Circle  with  Scepter  towards  East. 

Hiero: 

SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  Almighty  and  Everlasting  be  Thy  Name,  ever  magnified  in  the  Life  of  All.  Amen 
All  salute. 

Hiero: 

Remains  facing  East. 

Hiereus: 

Moves  to  Altar  and  halts. 

Heg: 

Kerux: 

Move  to  East  and  stand  on  the  right  and  left  rear  of  the  Hierophant  respectively  and  outside  the  Pillars. 


115 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

Makes  Invoking  Pentagram  with  his  Scepter  in  the  Air  in  front  of  the  Tablet  of  Air. 

Hiero: 

Let  us  rehearse  the  Prayer  of  the  Sylphs  or  Air  Spirits.  Spirit  of  Light,  Spirit  of  wisdom  whose  breath 
giveth  forth  and  withdraweth  the  form  of  all  living  things.  Thou,  before  whom  the  Life  of  Beings  is  but  a 
shadow  which  changeth,  and  a vapor  which  passeth,  Thou  who  mountest  upon  the  clouds,  and  who 
walketh  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind,  Thou  who  breathest  forth  Thy  Breath,  and  endless  Space  is  peopled. 
Thou  who  drawest  in  Thy  breath  and  all  that  cometh  from  Thee  returneth  unto  Thee;  ceaseless  Movement 
in  Eternal  Stability.  Be  Thou  eternally  blessed.  We  praise  Thee  and  we  bless  Thee  in  the  changing  Empire 
of  created  Light,  of  Shades,  of  reflections,  and  of  Images  and  we  aspire  without  cessation  unto  Thy 
immutable  and  imperishable  brilliance.  Let  the  Ray  of  Thine  Intelligence  and  the  warmth  of  Thy  Love 
penetrate  even  unto  us,  then  that  which  is  volatile  shall  be  fixed,  the  shadow  shall  be  a body,  the  Spirit  of 
Air  shall  be  a soul,  the  dream  shall  be  a thought.  And  no  longer  shall  we  be  swept  away  by  the  Tempest, 
but  we  shall  hold  the  bridles  of  the  Winged  Steeds  of  Dawn,  and  we  shall  direct  the  course  of  the  Evening 
Breeze  to  fly  before  Thee.  O Spirit  of  Spirits,  O Eternal  Soul  of  Souls,  O imperishable  breath  of  Life,  O 
Creative  Sigh,  O mouth  which  breathest  forth  and  withdrawest  the  Life  of  all  Beings  in  the  flux  and 
Reflux  of  thine  Eternal  Word  which  is  the  Divine  Ocean  of  Movement  and  of  Truth.  Amen. 

Hiero: 

Makes  with  his  scepter  the  banishing  Pentagrams,  in  the  air  in  front  of  the  Tablet. 

Hiero: 

Depart  ye  in  peace  unto  your  abodes  and  habitations.  May  the  blessing  of  YOD  HEH  VOU  HEH  rest  with 
you.  Be  there  peace  between  us  and  you,  and  be  ye  ready  to  come  when  you  are  called.  (Knock) 

All  salute  and  return  to  their  places. 

Hiero: 

In  the  name  of  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  I declare  this  Temple  closed  in  the  Grade  of  Theoricus.  (Knocks  3, 
3,3.) 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks  3,  3,  3.) 

Heg: 

Kerux: 

(Knocks  3,  3,  3.) 


116 


VOLUME  SIX 


3 = 8 

Practicus  Grade 
Part  I 


U 

31” 

RKI’K 


EAST 


LAnP 


IHIEHOPHANT  | 


▼ 


T*3e*i» 


5tftT  fJEAPiffcft. 
TbEOWCuS 


V4to»icuS  * £rWkGRCH*w»w*iw'*H 

/f\  □ jr*WuSj 

VV  6AMWER*F  cuPofwArtJi. 

. . . , T TT-C-T-  * 

| WEST 


HlERCUS  'Ulj.  "V/E&X 


HfitCTTOH 


*£W 


OPENING 

(Arrange  the  Temple  for  the  31st  Path.  Members  are  assembled  and  Robed.) 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Fraters  and  Sorors  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  assist  me  to  open  this  Temple 
in  the  Grade  of  Practicus.  Honored  Hegemon,  see  that  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

(Done.) 

Heg: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant,  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  see  that  none  below  the  Grade  of  Practicus  is  present. 

Hiereus: 

Fraters  and  Sorors  give  the  Sign  of  Practicus. 

(Done) 

Hiereus: 

(Saluting.)  Very  Honored  Hierophant  all  present  have  attained  the  Grade. 


117 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  to  what  particular  Element  is  this  Grade  attributed? 

Heg: 

To  the  Element  of  Water. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  to  what  Planet  does  this  Grade  especially  refer? 

Hiereus: 

To  the  Planet  Mercury. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  what  Paths  are  attached  to  this  Grade? 

Heg: 

The  31st  and  30th  Paths  of  Shin  and  Resh. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus  to  what  does  the  31st  Path  refer? 

Hiereus: 

To  the  reflection  of  the  Sphere  of  Fire. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  to  what  does  the  30th  Path  allude? 

Heg: 

To  the  reflection  of  the  Sphere  of  the  Sun. 

Hiero: 

Gives  one  knock. 

All  rise  and  face  East. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Water.  ELOHIM  TZABDOTH,  Elohim  of  Hosts,  Glory  be 
unto  the  RUACH  ELOHIM  who  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  Waters  of  Creation.  Amen 
All  salute. 

Hiero: 

Quits  his  throne  and  proceeds  to  the  West.  Gives  one  knock. 

All  face  West. 

Hiero: 

Standing  before  the  Tablet  of  Water,  he  makes  with  his  Scepter  the  invoking  circle  and  Pentagrams 
before  it  in  the  Air. 

Hiero: 

And  the  Elohim  said,  Let  us  make  Adam  in  our  Image,  after  our  Likeness,  and  let  them  have  dominion 
over  the  Fish  of  the  Sea.  In  the  Name  of  EL,  Strong  and  Powerful,  and  in  the  name  of  Elohim  Tzabaoth, 
Spirits  of  Water  adore  your  Creator. 


118 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiero: 

Taking  Cup  of  Water  from  before  Tablet  and  making  therewith  the  Sign  of  the  Eagle  in  the  Air  before 
it. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  Gabriel,  the  Great  Archangel  of  Water,  and  in  the  Sign  of  the  Eagle,  Spirits  of  Water 
adore  your  Creator.  (Making  the  Cross  with  Cup  of  Water)  In  the  Names  and  Letters  of  the  Great 
Western  Quadrangle  revealed  unto  Enoch  by  the  Angel  Ave,  Spirits  of  Water  adore  your  Creator. 
(Holding  Cup  on  high.)  In  the  three  Great  Secret  Names  of  God,  borne  on  the  Banners  of  the  West, 
EMPEH  ARSOL  GAIOL,  Spirits  of  Water  adore  your  Creator.  In  the  Name  of  Pa  AGIOSEL  Great  King 
of  the  West,  Spirits  of  Water  adore  your  Creator. 

Hiero: 

Replaces  Cup  and  returns  to  place. 

All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  Elohim  Tzabaoth  I declare  this  Temple  opened  in  the  Grade  of  Practicus. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks  1,  3,  1,3) 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks  1,  3,  1,  3) 

Heg: 

(Knocks  1,  3,  1,3) 


THE  RITUAL  OF  THE  31st  PATH 
(Temple  arranged  for  Ritual  of  31st  Path.  The  Temple  is  darkened). 

Hiero: 

Fraters  and  Sorors  our  Frater  (Soror)  XYZ  having  made  such  progress  in  the  Path  of  Occult  Science  as 
has  enabled  him  (her)  to  pass  the  Examinations  in  the  requisite  knowledge  is  now  eligible  for 
advancement  to  the  Grade  of  Practicus,  and  I have  duly  received  a dispensation  from  the  Greatly  Honored 
Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order,  to  advance  him  in  due  form.  Honored  Hegemon,  superintend  the  preparation 
of  the  Theoricus  and  give  the  customary  alarm. 

Heg: 

Rises,  salutes  the  Hierophant,  quits  the  Temple  and  sees  the  Theoricus  is  thus  prepared.  Wearing  sash 
of  Theoricus,  hoodwink  and  with  the  solid  triangular  pyramid  formed  of4  elements  in  right  hand, 
Hegemon  takes  Theoricus  by  left  hand  and  gives  an  alarm  of  8 Knocks. 

Heg: 

His  throne  was  like  a fiery  Flame,  and  the  wheels  as  burning  Fire. 

Hiereus: 

Opens  door  and  admits  them,  returns  to  his  place. 

Heg: 

Conducts  Theoricus  to  the  North  West  facing  the  seat  of  Hiereus.  Hegemon  takes  pyramid. 

Hiereus: 

Give  me  the  Sign,  Grip  or  Token,  Grand  Word,  Mystic  Number  and  Password  of  the  Grade  of  Theoricus. 


119 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Theor: 

Word  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  No.  45,  Password  Mah. 

Hiereus: 

Give  me  also  the  Mystic  title  and  symbol  which  you  received  in  that  Grade. 

Theor: 

Poraios  de  Rejectus.  Ruach. 

Hiereus: 

Frater  XYZ  do  you  solemnly  pledge  yourself  to  maintain  the  same  strict  secrecy  regarding  the  Mysteries 
of  the  31st  and  30th  Paths,  and  of  the  Grade  of  Practicus  which  you  have  sworn  to  maintain  respecting 
those  of  the  preceding  Grades? 

Theor: 

Ido. 

Hiereus: 

Then  you  will  stretch  forth  your  hands  in  the  position  of  the  saluting  sign  of  a Neophyte  and  say  I swear 
by  the  Abyss  of  the  Waters. 

Candidate  Repeats 
Heg: 

Removes  Hoodwink.  Places  in  his  hand  the  Cup  of  Water  from  before  the  Tablet. 

Hiereus: 

Sprinkle  with  your  hand  a few  drops  of  Water  towards  the  Tablet  of  Water  in  the  West  and  say,  Let  the 
Powers  of  Water  witness  my  Pledge. 

Heg: 

Replaces  Cup. 

Hiereus: 

Conduct  the  Theoricus  to  the  East  and  place  him  before  the  Mystic  Pillars. 

Hiero: 

( Knocks ) Before  you  are  the  Portals  of  the  31st,  32nd  and  29th  Paths.  Of  these  as  you  already  know,  the 
central  one  leads  from  the  Zelator  Grade  to  the  Theoricus  Grade.  The  one  on  the  left  hand  now  open  to 
you  is  the  31st  which  leads  from  the  Grade  of  Zelator  to  the  Grade  of  Practicus.  Take  in  your  right  hand 
the  Pyramid  of  Flame  and  follow  your  Guide  AXIOKERSA  the  KAB1R  who  leads  you  through  the  Path 
of  Fire. 

Heg: 

Leads  the  Theoricus  between  the  Pillars  turns  to  right  and  circumambulates  hall  once. 

Hiero: 

As  they  approach,  takes  Red  Lamp  in  his  hand  and  rises.  Hegemon  and  Theoricus  halt  before  him. 
Hiero: 

Axieros  the  First  Kabir  spake  to  Kasmillos  the  Candidate  and  said  I am  the  Apex  of  the  Triangle  of 
Flame.  I am  the  Solar  Fire  pouring  forth  its  beams  upon  the  lower  world.  Life  giving.  Light  producing.  By 
what  symbol  dost  thou  seek  to  pass  by? 

Heg: 

By  the  Symbol  of  the  Pyramid  of  Flame. 


120 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiero: 

Hear  thou  the  Voice  of  Axieros  the  First  Kabir.  The  Mind  of  the  Father  whirled  forth  in  re-echoing  roar, 
comprehending  by  invincible  Will  Ideas  omniform,  which  flying  forth  from  that  one  fountain  issued;  for 
the  Father  alike  was  the  Will  and  the  End;  by  which  yet  are  they  connected  with  the  Father,  according  to 
alternating  Life,  through  varying  vehicles.  But  they  were  divided  asunder,  being  by  Intellectual  Fire 
distributed  unto  other  Intellectuals.  For  the  King  of  all  previously  placed  before  the  polymorphous  world, 
a type  intellectual,  incorruptible,  the  imprint  of  whose  form  is  sent  forth  through  the  World,  by  which  the 
Universe  shone  forth  decked  with  ideas  all  various  of  which  the  foundation  is  one,  One  and  Alone.  From 
this  the  others  rush  forth  distributed  and  separated  through  the  various  bodies  of  the  Universe,  and  are 
borne  in  swarms  through  its  vast  Abysses,  ever  whirling  forth  in  illimitable  radiation.  They  are 
Intellectual  Conceptions  from  the  Paternal  Fountain,  partaking  abundantly  the  brilliance  of  fire  in  the 
culmination  of  unresting  Time.  But  the  primary  self-perfect  fountain  of  the  Father  poured  forth  these 
primogenial  Ideas.  These  being  many  ascend  flashingly  into  the  shining  Worlds,  and  in  them  are 
contained  the  three  Supernals.  Because  it  is  the  Operator,  because  it  is  the  Giver  of  Life-bearing  Lire; 
because  it  filleth  the  Life  producing  bosom  of  Hecate;  and  it  instilleth  into  the  Synoches  the  enlivening 
strength  of  Lire,  embued  with  mighty  power.  The  Creator  of  all  formed  the  World,  and  there  was  a certain 
mass  of  fire  and  all  these  self-operating  He  produced,  so  that  the  Kosmic  body  might  be  completely 
conformed,  so  that  the  Kosmos  might  be  manifest  and  not  appear  membranous.  And  he  fixed  a vast 
multitude  of  inwandering  Stars,  not  by  a strain  laborious  and  hurtful,  but  to  uphold  them  with  a stability 
void  of  movement,  forcing  Lire  forward  into  Lire.  Hereunto  is  the  Speech  of  Axieros. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  round  to  seat  of  Hiereus  in  N.  W. 

Hiereus: 

As  they  approach  takes  Red  Lamp  in  his  hand,  rises. 

Hegemon  and  Theoricus  halt  before  him. 

Hiereus: 

Axiokersos  the  Second  Kabir  spake  to  Kasmillos  the  Candidate  and  said:  I am  the  left  Basal  Angle  of  the 
Triangle  of  Llame.  1 am  fire  volcanic  and  terrestrial,  flashingly  flaming  through  the  Abysses  of  Earth;  Lire 
rending  Lire  penetrating,  tearing  asunder  the  curtain  of  Matter;  Fire  constrained,  Fire  tormenting,  raging 
and  whirling  in  lurid  storm.  By  what  Sign  dost  thou  seek  to  pass  by? 

Heg: 

By  the  Symbol  of  the  Pyramid  of  Flame. 

Hiereus: 

Hear  thou  the  Voice  of  Axiokersos  the  Second  Kabir:  For  not  in  matter  did  the  fire  which  is  the  beyond 
first  enclose  his  power  in  acts,  but  in  Mind;  for  the  Former  of  the  Fiery  World  is  the  Mind  of  Mind,  who 
first  sprang  from  Mind,  clothing  the  one  fire  with  the  other  Fire,  binding  them  together  so  that  he  might 
mingle  the  Fountainous  Craters  while  preserving  unsullied  the  Brilliance  of  his  own  Fire.  And  thence  a 
fiery  whirlwind  drawing 


121 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


down  the  brilliance  of  the  Flashing  Flame  penetrating  the  Abysses  of  the  Universe,  for  thence  from 
downwards  all  extend  their  wondrous  rays,  abundantly  animating  Light,  Fire,  Ether  and  the  Universe. 
From  Him  leap  forth  all  relentless  thunders,  and  the  whirlwind  wrapped,  storm  enrolled  bosom  of  the  All 
Splendid  strength  of  Hecate,  Father  begotten  and  He  who  encircleth  the  Brilliance  of  Fire,  and  the  strong 
Spirit  of  the  Poles,  all  Fiery  beyond.  Hereunto  is  the  Speech  of  Axiokersos. 

Hiereus: 

Leads  Theoricus  round  to  Hegemon 's  seat  in  South  West. 

Heg: 

Takes  Red  Lamp  and  thus  addresses  Theoricus. 

Heg: 

Axiokersa  the  Third  Kabir  spake  to  Kasmillos  the  Candidate  and  said  I am  the  Right  Basal  Angle  of  the 
Triangle  of  Flame;  I am  the  Fire  Astral  and  Fluid,  winding  and  coruscating  through  the  firmament.  I am 
the  Life  of  Beings,  the  vital  heat  of  Existence.  By  what  Sign  dost  thou  seek  to  pass  by? 

Hiereus: 

Prompts  Theoricus  and  then  returns  to  his. 

Hiereus: 

(For  Theoricus)  By  the  Symbol  of  the  Pyramid  of  Flame. 

Heg: 

Hear  thou  the  Voice  of  Axiokersa  the  Third  Kabir.  The  Father  hath  hastily  withdrawn  Himself,  but  hath 
not  shut  up  his  own  Fire  in  His  intellectual  Power.  All  things  are  sprung  from  that  one  Fire.  For  all  things 
did  the  Father  of  all  things  perfect,  and  delivered  them  over  unto  the  Second  Mind,  whom  all  races  of  men 
call  First.  The  Mind  of  the  Father  riding  on  the  subtle  girders  which  glitter  with  the  tracings  of  inflexible 
and  relentless  Fire.  The  Soul  being  a brilliant  Fire,  by  the  Power  of  the  Father  remaineth  Immortal,  and  is 
mistress  of  Life,  and  filleth  up  the  many  recesses  of  the  Bosom  of  the  World.  The  channels  being 
intermixed  therein  she  performeth  the  works  of  incorruptible  Fire.  Hereunto  is  the  Speech  of  Axiokersa. 
Heg: 

Places  Theoricus  in  a seat  in  the  West  between  himself  and  Hiereus  and  facing  Hierophant,  takes 
Pyramid  from  him. 

Hiero: 

Stoop  not  down  into  the  darkly  splendid  world,  wherein  continually  lies  a faithless  Depth,  and  Hades 
wrapped  in  clouds,  delighting  in  unintelligible  Images,  precipitous,  winding,  a black  ever  rolling  abyss 
ever  espousing  a body  unluminous,  formless  and  void.  Nature  persuadeth  us  that  there  are  pure  Demons, 
and  that  even  the  evil  germs  of  Matter  may  alike  become  useful  and  good.  But  these  are  mysteries  which 
are  evoked  in  the  profound  Abyss  of  the  Mind.  Such  a Fire  existeth  extending  through  the  rushings  of  Air 
or  even  a Fire  Formless  whence  comes  the  Image  of  a Voice  or  even  a flashing  Light  abounding, 
revolving,  whirling  forth,  crying  aloud.  Also  there  is  the  vision  of  the  Fire  flashing  Courser  of  Light,  or 
also  a Child  borne  aloft  on  the  shoulders  of  the  Celestial  Steed,  fiery  or  clothed  with  gold,  or  naked  or 
shooting  with  the  bow  shafts  of  light,  and  standing  on  the  shoulders  of  the  horse.  But  if  thy  meditation 
prolongeth  itself  thou  shalt 


122 


VOLUME  SIX 


unite  all  these  Symbols  in  the  form  of  the  Lion.  Then  when  no  longer  are  visible  unto  thee  the  Vault  of  the 
Heavens,  the  mass  of  the  Earth,  when  to  thee  the  stars  have  lost  their  Light  and  the  Lamp  of  the  Moon  is 
veiled  when  the  Earth  abideth  not,  and  around  thee  is  the  Lightening  Llame,  then  call  not  before  thyself 
the  Visible  Image  of  the  Soul  of  Nature.  Lor  thou  must  not  behold  it  ere  thy  body  is  purged  by  the  sacred 
Rites.  Since  ever  dragging  down  the  Soul  and  leading  it  from  Sacred  things,  from  the  confines  of  matter, 
arise  the  terrible  dog-faced  Demons,  never  showing  a true  image  unto  mortal  gaze.  So,  therefore,  first  the 
Priest  who  governeth  the  works  of  Lire  must  sprinkle  with  the  Lustral  Water  of  the  Loud  resounding  Sea. 
Labor  thou  around  the  Strophaios  of  Hecate,  when  thou  shalt  see  a terrestrial  demon  approaching  cry 
aloud,  and  sacrifice  the  Stone  MNIZOURIN.  Change  not  the  barbarous  names  of  Evocation  for  they  are 
Names  Divine  having  in  the  Sacred  Rites  a Power  ineffable.  And  when  after  all  the  Phantoms  are 
banished  thou  shalt  see  that  Holy  and  Lormless  Lire,  that  Lire  which  darts  and  flashes  through  the  hidden 
depths  of  the  Universe  Hear  thou  the  Voice  of  Lire.  Hereunto  is  the  speech  of  the  Kabiri. 

Heg: 

Turns  up  Lights  and  then  conducts  Candidate  to  foot  of  Hierophant's  throne,  and  hands  Tlieoricus  the 
solid  Triangular  Pyramid. 

Hiero: 

The  solid  Triangular  Pyramid  is  an  appropriate  hieroglyph  of  Lire.  It  is  formed  of  4 triangles,  3 visible 
and  one  concealed,  which  yet  use  the  synthesis  of  the  rest.  The  3 visible  triangles  represent  Lire  Solar, 
Volcanic  and  Astral,  while  the  4th  represents  the  Latent  Heat.  The  three  words  AUD,  AUB,  AUR  refer  to 
the  three  conditions  of  Heat,  Aud,  active;  Aub,  passive;  Aur,  equilibrated;  whilst  Asch  is  the  Name  of 
Lire.  The  31st  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  which  answereth  unto  the  Letter  Shin,  is  called  the  Perpetual 
Intelligence,  and  it  is  so  called  because  it  regulateth  the  Motions  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  in  their  proper 
order,  each  in  an  Orbit  convenient  for  it.  It  is  therefore  the  reflection  of  the  Sphere  of  Lire,  and  the  Path 
connecting  the  material  Universe  as  depicted  in  Malkuth,  with  the  Pillar  of  Severity  on  the  side  of 
Geburah,  through  the  Sephira  Hod. 

Hierophant,  Hegemon  and  Tlieoricus  come  to  West  of  Altar. 

Hiero: 

Before  you  upon  the  Altar  is  the  20th  Key  of  the  Tarot,  which  symbolically  resumes  the  ideas.  To  the 
uninitiated  eye  it  apparently  represents  the  Last  Judgement,  with  an  angel  blowing  a trumpet  and  the  Dead 
rising  from  the  tombs.  But  its  meaning  is  far  more  occult  and  recondite  than  this,  for  it  is  a glyph  of  the 
Powers  of  Lire.  The  Angel  encircled  by  a Rainbow  whence  leap  coruscation’s  of  Lire,  and  crowned  with 
the  Sun,  represents  Michael,  the  great  Archangel,  the  Ruler  of  Solar  Lire.  The  Serpents  which  leap  in  the 
rainbow  are  symbols  of  the  Liery  Seraphim.  The  trumpet  represents  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  descending 
from  Binah,  while  the  Banner  with  the  Cross  refers  to  the  four  rivers  of  Paradise  and  the  letters  of  the 
Holy  Name.  He  also  is  Axieros,  the  first  of  the  Samothracian  Kabiri,  as  well  as  Zeus  and  Osiris.  The  left 
hand  figure  below,  rising  from  the  Earth  is  Samael,  the  Ruler  of  Volcanic  Lire.  He  is  also  Axiokersos,  the 
2nd  Kabir,  Pluto  and  Typhon.  The  right  hand  figure  below  is  Anadl,  the  Ruler  of  the  Astral  Light.  She  is 
also  Axiokersa,  the  third  Kabir,  Ceres  and  Proserpina,  Isis  and  Nephthys.  She  is  therefore  represented  in  a 
duplicate  form  and  rising  from  the  Water.  Around  both  these  figures  dart  flashes  of  lightning.  These  3 
principal  figures  form  the  Lire  Triangle,  and  further  represent  Lire  operating  in  the  other  three  Elements 
of  Air,  Earth,  and  Water.  The  central  lower  figure  with  his  back  turned  and  his  arms  extended  in  the  Sign 
of  Theoricus  is  Arel  the  Ruler  of  Latent  Heat,  he  is  rising  from  the  Earth,  as  if  to  receive  and  absorb  the 
properties  of  the  other  three.  He  is  also  Kasmillos  the  Candidate  in  the  Samothracian  Mysteries,  and  the 
Horns  of  Egypt.  He  rises  from  the  rock  hewn  cubical  tomb,  and  also  alludes  to  the  Candidate  who 
traverses  the  Path  of  Lire.  The  three  lower  Ligures  represent  the  Hebrew  Letter  Shin  to  which  fire  is 
especially  referred.  The  7 Hebrew  Yods  allude  to  the  Sephiroth  operating  in  each  of  the  Planets  and  to  the 
Schem-hamphorasch. 

Hiero: 

Returns  to  his  place. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  West. 


123 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiereus: 

Comes  forward  and  explains  the  two  Sephirotic  Tablets. 

Hiereus: 

The  Tablet  before  you  represents  the  10  Sephiroth  combined  in  seven  palaces.  The  first  Palace  contains 
Kether,  Chokmah  and  Binah,  the  2nd  Chesed,  the  3rd  Geburah,  the  4th  Tiphareth,  the  5th  Netzach,  the  6th 
Hod,  the  7th  Yesod  and  Malkuth.  This  second  Tablet  represents  the  attribution  of  the  10  Sephiroth  to  the  4 
letters  of  the  Holy  Name.  Kether  as  you  will  observe,  is  not  included  therein,  but  it  is  symbolized  by  the 
uppermost  point  of  Yod.  it  is  MACROPROSOPUS  or  ARIKH  ANPIN,  the  Vast  Countenance.  Chokmah 
is  attributed  to  Yod,  or  the  Father  Abba;  Binah  is  attributed  to  Heh  or  Aima,  the  Mother;  Vau  embraces 
the  six  next  Sephiroth,  which  together  form  MICROPROSOPUS  or  ZAUIR  ANPIN,  the  Lesser 
Countenance.  Malkuth  is  referred  to  the  Heh  final  or  the  Bride  of  the  Apocalypse. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  Tablet  of  7 Heavens  of  Assiah  in  South. 

Heg: 

These  are  the  7 Heavens  of  Assiah,  the  1st  is  Ghereboth,  referred  to  Chesed,  wherein  are  the  Treasures  of 
Blessings.  The  2nd  is  Mekon  referred  to  Geburah,  wherein  are  the  Treasures  of  the  Spirit  of  Life.  The  3rd  is 
Maghon  referred  to  Tiphareth,  wherein  are  Angels.  The  4th  is  Zebel,  referred  to  Netzach,  wherein  is  the 
Supernal  Altar,  whereon  Michael  the  great  High  Priest  sacrificeth  the  Souls  of  the  Just.  The  5th  is 
Shachaqim  referred  to  Hod,  wherein  is  the  manna.  The  6th  is  Raquie  wherein  are  the  Sun  and  Moon,  the 
Stars  and  Planets  and  all  the  10  Spheres;  it  is  referred  to  Yesod.  The  7th  is  Velun  referred  to  Malkuth. 
Following  this  is  Shamayim  containing  18,000  Worlds,  and  also  Gehennah,  and  the  Garden  of  Eden.  The 
9th  is  18,000  more  Worlds  wherein  abide  Shekinah  and  Metatron.  And  the  10th  is  Thebel  wherein  standeth 
the  earth,  between  Eden  and  Gehennah. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  Tablet  of  10  Averse  Sephiroth  in  North. 

Heg: 

Before  you  are  the  10  Averse  and  Evil  Sephiroth  of  the  Qlippoth  or  Shells,  collected  into  7 Palaces 
wherein  is  the  Apocalyptic  mystery  of  the  7 heads  and  10  horns.  The  Qlippoth  of  Kether  are  called 
Thaumiel  or  the  two  contending  Forces,  the  Shells  of  Chokmah  are  the  Ghogiel,  or  Hinderers.  Those  of 
Binah  are  the  Satariel  or  Concealers.  Those  of  Chesed  are  the  Gagh  Shekelah  or  Breakers  in  pieces.  To 
Geburah  belong  the  Golahab  or  Burners.  To  Tiphareth  the  Tagariron  or  Disputers.  To  Netzach  the  Gharab 
Zereq  or  Ravens  of  Death,  dispersing  all  things.  To  Hod  the  Samael  or  deceivers,  to  Yesod  the  Gamaliel 
or  Obscene.  And  the  Shell  of  Malkuth  is  Lilith  the  Evil  woman.  But  these  have  also  many  other 
appellations. 

Hiero: 

I have  much  pleasure  in  conferring  upon  you  the  Title  of  Lord  (Lady)  of  the  31st  Path.  You  will  now  quit 
the  Temple  for  a short  time,  and  on  your  return  the  ceremony  of  your  passage  of  the  30th  Path  will  take 
place. 


124 


Honored  Hegemon,  you  have  my  command  to  present  the  Theoricus  with  the  necessary  admission  Badge 
and  to  admit  him  (her). 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

Rises,  goes  to  door,  opens  it,  presents  Theoricus  with  the  Greek  Cross  of  the  13  squares  and  admits 
him. 

Heg: 

Behold  he  hath  placed  his  Tabernacle  in  the  Sun. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  North  East  and  places  him  before  and  facing  the  Pillars. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Frater  XYZ  (Sorer)  before  you  in  the  East  are  the  Portals  of  the  30th,  25th,  and  26th  Paths, 
leading  from  the  Grade  of  Theoricus  to  those  Grades  which  are  beyond.  Of  these  the  only  one  now  open 
to  you  is  the  30th  which  leads  to  the  Grade  of  Practicus.  Take  in  your  right  hand  the  Solar  Greek  Cross, 
and  follow  your  guide  through  the  path  of  the  Sun.  Unto  the  Intellectual  whirlings  of  Intellectual  Fire  all 
things  are  subservient,  through  the  Will  of  the  Father  of  All. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  between  Pillars  turns  to  right  and  halts  at  foot  of  Hierophant's  throne. 

Hiero: 

Rises  and  takes  Red  Lamp  in  his  hand. 

Hiero: 

Axieros  the  First  Kabir  spake  to  Kasmillos  the  Candidate  and  said  I am  the  Sun  in  greatest  elevation, 
bringing  upon  the  Earth  the  ripening  Heat,  fructifying  all  things,  urging  forward  the  growth  of  vegetable 
Nature.  Life  giving,  Light  producing,  crowning  summer  with  the  golden  harvest  and  filling  the  lap  of 
plenteous  Autumn  with  the  purple  vintage  of  the  Vine.  Thus  far  is  the  voice  of  Axieros. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  round  to  seat  of  Hiereus  and  halts  before  him  in  the  N.  W. 

Hiereus: 

Rises  with  Red  Lamp  in  his  hand. 

Hiereus: 

Axiokersos  the  Second  Kabir  spake  to  Kasmillos  the  Candidate  and  said,  I am  the  Sun  in  greatest 
depression  beneath  the  Equator,  when  Cold  is  greatest  and  heat  is  least,  withdrawing  his  light  in 
darkening  Winter,  the  dweller  of  Mist  and  the  Storm.  Thus  far  is  the  Voice  of  Axiokersos. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  round  to  his  own  seat  in  the  West  and  takes  Red  Lamp. 

Heg: 

Axiokersa  the  Third  Kabir  spake  to  Kasmillos  the  Candidate  and  said  I am  the  Sun  at  Equinox  initiating 
Summer  and  heralding  Winter,  mild  and  genial  in  operation,  giving  forth  or  withdrawing  the  vital  heat  of 
life.  Thus  far  is  the  Voice  of  Axiokersa. 

Heg: 

Places  Theoricus  in  a seat  in  West  between  himself  and  Hiereus,  facing  Hiereus  and  takes  from  him 
Solar  Greek  Cross. 

Hiero: 

The  Father  of  all  congregated  the  7 Firmaments  of  the  Kosmos  circumscribing  the  Heaven  with  Convex 
form.  He  constituted  a Septenary  of  wandering  existences  suspending  their  disorder  in  well  disposed 
zones.  He  made  them  6 in  number  and  for  the  7th  he  cast  into  the  midst  thereof  the  Fire  of  the  Sun;  into 
that  center  from  which  all  lines  are  equal.  That 


126 


VOLUME  SIX 


the  swift  Sun  may  come  round  that  center,  eagerly  urging  itself  towards  that  center  of  resounding  Light. 
As  rays  of  Light  his  locks  flow  forth,  stretching  to  the  confines  of  space.  And  of  the  Solar  Circles,  and  of 
the  Lunar  clashings  and  of  the  Aerial  recesses;  the  Melody  of  Ether,  and  of  the  Sun  and  of  the  passages  of 
the  Moon,  and  of  the  Sun  is  in  the  Supramundane  Orders,  for  therein  a solar  world  and  endless  Light 
subsist.  The  Sun  more  true  measureth  all  things  by  time,  for  he  is  the  time  of  time.  And  his  disc  is  in  the 
Starless  above,  the  Inerratic  Sphere,  and  he  is  the  center  of  the  Triple  World.  The  Sun  is  Fire  and  the 
Dispenser  of  Fire.  He  is  also  the  channel  of  the  Higher  Fire,  Aether,  Sun,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Moon,  ye 
are  the  Feaders  of  Air.  And  the  Great  Goddess  bringeth  forth  the  Vast  Sun  and  the  Brilliant  Moon,  and 
the  wide  Air,  and  the  Lunar  course  and  the  Solar  Pole.  She  collecteth  it  receiving  the  Melody  of  Ether, 
and  of  the  Sun,  and  of  the  Moon,  and  of  whatsoever  is  contained  by  Air.  Unwearied  doth  Nature  rule  over 
the  worlds  and  works,  so  that  the  periods  of  all  things  may  be  accomplished.  And  above  the  shoulders  of 
that  Great  Goddess  is  Nature  in  her  vastness  exalted.  Thus  far  the  Voice  of  the  Kabiri. 

Heg: 

Conducts  Theoricus  to  Hierophant's  Throne  and  hands  to  Theoricus  the  Solar  Creek  Cross. 

Hiero: 

The  Solar  Creek  Cross  is  formed  of  13  squares,  which  fitly  refer  to  the  Sun's  motion  through  the  Zodiac. 
These  signs  being  further  arranged  in  the  arms  of  the  cross  according  to  the  four  Elements  with  the  Sun  in 
the  center,  represent  that  luminary  as  the  center  of  the  The  30th  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah.  Which 
answereth  unto  the  letter  Resh  is  called  the  Collecting  Intelligence,  and  it  is  so  called  because  from  it 
astrologers  deduce  the  judgement  of  the  stars,  and  of  the  celestial  signs,  and  the  perfections  of  their 
science  according  to  the  rules  of  their  revolutions.  It  is  therefore,  the  reflection  of  the  sphere  of  the  Sun, 
and  the  Path  connecting  Yesod  with  Hod,  Foundation  with  Splendor. 

Hierophant,  Theoricus  and  Hegemon  come  to  West  of  Altar. 

Hiero: 

Before  you  upon  the  Altar  is  the  19th  Key  of  the  Tarot  which  symbolically  resumes  these  Ideas.  The  Sun 
has  12  principal  rays  which  represent  the  12  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  they  are  alternatively  waved  and  salient, 
as  symbolizing  the  alternation  of  the  masculine  and  feminine  natures.  These  are  again  subdivided  into  36 
rays  representing  the  36  Decanates  or  sets  of  10  degrees  in  the  Zodiac,  and  these  again  into  72  typifying 
the  72  Quinaries  or  sets  of  5 degrees  and  the  72  fold  name  SHEM-  HA-MEPHORASCH.  Thus  the  Sun 
itself  embraces  the  whole  Creation  in  its  rays.  The-7  Hebrew  Yods  on  each  side  falling  through  the  air, 
refer  to  the  Solar  influence  descending.  The  wall  is  the  circle  of  the  Zodiac  and  the  stones  are  its  various 
degrees  and  divisions.  The  two  children  standing  respectively  on  Water  and  Earth,  represent  the 
generating  influence  of  both  brought  into  action  by  the  rays  of  the  Sun.  They  are  the  two  Inferior  or 
passive  Elements,  as  the  Sun  and  the  Air  above  them  are  the  Superior  and  Active  Elements,  of  Fire  and 
Air.  Furthermore,  these  two  children  resemble  the  sign  Gemini,  which  unites  the  Earthly  sign  of  Taurus 
with  the  Watery  sign  of  Cancer  and  this  sign  was  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans  referred  to  Apollo  or  the 
Sun. 

Hiero: 

Returns  to  place. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  West. 


Ill 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiereus: 

( Showing  1st  Tablet)  The  Astrological  symbols  of  the  planets  are  derived  from  the  3 primary  forms  of  the 
circle,  the  crescent  and  the  cross,  either  singly  or  in  combination.  The  circle  denotes  the  Sun  and  gold,  the 
crescent  the  Moon  and  silver,  respectively,  analogous  to  the  Red  and  the  White  alchemical  natures.  The 
cross  is  the  symbol  of  corrosion  and  the  corrosion  of  metals  is  usually  of  the  complementary  color  to  that 
which  they  naturally  approximate.  Thus,  copper  which  is  reddish  becomes  green  in  verdigris  etc.  Mercury 
is  the  only  one  which  unites  these  primary  forms  in  one  symbol.  Saturn  is  composed  of  the  Cross  and  the 
Crescent,  showing  that  lead  is  corrosive  externally  and  Lunar  internally.  Jupiter  is  the  reverse,  Mars  is 
solar  internally  while  Venus  is  the  opposite,  for  Copper  is  externally  of  the  nature  of  Gold,  but  internally 
corrosive.  Wherefore,  also  the  Name  of  the  Sphere  of  Venus  Nogah,  denotes  External  Splendor. 

Heg: 

Shows  Theoricus  the  2"d  Tablet. 

Heg: 

This  shows  the  true  and  genuine  attribution  of  the  Tarot  trumps  to  the  Hebrew  alphabet  which  has  long 
been  a secret  among  the  Initiates  and  which  should  be  carefully  concealed  from  the  outer  world.  As  a 
MSS.  lecture  on  this  subject  is  circulated  among  the  Members  of  the  Grade  of  Practicus,  I shall  not  further 
enter  into  its  explanation. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  Tablet  in  the  South. 

Heg: 

Before  you  is  the  Tablet  of  the  Olympic  or  Aerial  Planetary  Spirits  with  their  Seals,  Arathror  of  Saturn, 
Bethor  of  Jupiter,  Phalegh  of  Mars,  Och  of  the  Sun,  Hagith  of  Venus,  Ophiel  of  Mercury  and  Phul  of  the 
Moon. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  Tablet  in  the  North. 

Heg: 

This  shows  you  the  Geomantic  Figures  with  their  ruling  Intelligences,  and  Genii;  also  the  talismanic 
Symbols  allotted  to  each  Geomantic  figure.  These  are  derived  from  them  by  drawing  lines  to  the  points 
composing  them,  so  as  to  form  mathematical  figures  therefrom.  A MSS.  lecture  on  Geomancy  is 
circulated  among  the  Members  of  Practicus  Grade. 

Hiero: 

I have  much  pleasure  in  conferring  upon  you  the  Title  of  Lord  (Lady)  of  the  30th  Path.  You  will  now  quit 
the  Temple  for  a short  time  and  on  your  return  the  Ceremony  of  your  reception  into  the  Grade  of 
Practicus  will  take  place. 


128 


VOLUME  SIX 


CEREMONY  OF  THE  GRADE  OF  PRACTICUS 


Part  III 


Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  instruct  the  Theoricus  in  the  proper  alarm,  present  him  with  the  necessary  admission 
badge  and  admit  him  (her). 

(Done) 

Hiero: 

Place  the  Theoricus  before  the  Portal  of  the  31st  Path,  by  which  he  (she)  has  symbolically  entered  this 
Grade,  from  the  Grade  Zelator. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  N.W.  corner  of  Temple. 

(Done) 

Hiero: 

Place  the  Theoricus  now  before  the  Portal  of  the  30th  Path  by  which  he  has  symbolically  entered  this 
Grade  from  the  Grade  of  Theoricus. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  S.  W.  corner  of  Temple. 

(Done) 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  S.W.  then  forward  to  Hiereus. 

Hiereus: 

By  what  symbol  dost  thou  enter  herein? 

Heg: 

By  the  peculiar  emblem  of  the  Stolistes,  which  is  the  Cup  of  Water. 


129 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiereus: 

The  Cup  of  the  Stolistes  partakes  in  part  of  the  symbolism  of  the  Laver  of  Moses  and  the  Sea  of  Solomon. 
On  the  Tree  of  Life  it  embraces  nine  of  the  Sephiroth,  exclusive  of  Kether.  Yesod  and  Malkuth  form  the 
Triangle  below,  the  former  the  apex  the  latter  the  base.  Like  the  Caduceus  it  further  represents  the  3 
elements  of  Water,  Air  and  Fire.  The  crescent  is  the  Water  which  is  above  the  firmament,  the  circle  is  the 
Firmament  and  the  Triangle  the  consuming  fire  below,  which  is  opposed  to  the  Celestial  Fire  symbolized 
by  the  upper  part  of  the  Caduceus. 

Heg: 

Places  Admission  badge  aside  and  leads  Theoricus  to  Hierophant  and  then  returns  to  his  place. 

Hiereus: 

Heg: 

Rise  and  face  inwards  towards  the  Altar. 

Hiero: 

(Rising  and  facing  inwards  to  the  Altar.)  Before  you  is  represented  the  symbolism  of  the  Garden  of 
Eden.  At  the  summit  are  the  Supernal  Sephiroth  summed  up  and  contained  in  Aima  Elohim,  the  Mother 
Supernal,  the  Woman  of  the  12th  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse  clothed  with  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  under  her 
feet  and  upon  her  head  the  Crown  of  12  Stars,  Kether.  And  whereas  the  Name  Tetragrammaton  is  joined 
to  the  Elohim  when  it  is  said  Tetragrammaton  Elohim  planted  a Garden  Eastward  in  Eden  so  this 
represents  the  power  of  the  Father  joined  thereto  in  the  Glory  from  the  face  of  the  Ancient  of  Days.  And 
in  the  Garden  were  the  Tree  of  Life,  and  the  Tree  of  the  Knowledge  of  good  and  Evil,  which  latter  is  from 
Malkuth,  which  is  the  lowest  Sephira  between  the  rest  of  the  Sephiroth  and  the  Kingdom  of  the  Shells, 
which  latter  is  represented  by  the  Great  Red  Dragon  coiled  beneath,  having  7 heads  (the  7 infernal 
Palaces)  and  ten  horns  (the  10  Averse  Sephiroth  contained  in  the  7 Palaces).  And  a River  Nahar  went 
forth  out  of  Eden,  (namely  the  Supernal  Triad)  to  water  the  Garden  (the  rest  of  the  Sephiroth)  and  from 
thence  it  was  divided  into  four  heads  in  DAATH  whence  it  is  said  In  Daath  the  depths  are  broken  up,  and 
the  clouds  drop  down  dew.  The  first  head  is  Pison  which  flows  into  Geburah  where  there  is  Gold,  it  is  the 
River  of  Fire.  The  second  head  is  Gihon  the  river  of  Waters,  flowing  into  Chesed.  The  third  is  Hiddekel 
the  River  of  air  flowing  into  Tiphareth.  And  the  fourth  River  which  receiveth  the  virtue  of  the  other  three 
is  Euphrates  which  floweth  down  upon  Malkuth,  the  Earth.  This  River  going  forth  out  of  Eden  is  the 
River  of  the  Apocalypse,  of  Waters  of  Life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  Throne  of  God  and  the 
Lamb  on  either  side  of  which  was  the  Tree  of  Life  bearing  12  manner  of  Fruit.  And  thus  do  the  Rivers  of 
Eden  form  the  Cross,  and  on  that  cross  the  great  Adam  the  Son  who  was  to  rule  the  Nations  with  a rod  of 
Iron  is  extended  from  Tiphareth  and  his  arms  stretch  out  to  Gedulah  and  Geburah,  and  in  Malkuth  is  Eve, 
the  completion  of  all,  the  Mother  of  All,  and  above  the  Universe  she  supporteth  with  her  hands  the  Eternal 
Pillars  of  the  Sephiroth.  As  it  was  said  to  you  in  the  30th  Path.  And  above  the  shoulders  of  that  great 
Goddess  is  Nature  in  her  Vastness  exalted.  The  grade  of  Practicus  is  referred  to  the  Sephira  Hod,  and  the 
30th  and  31st  Paths  which  are  those  of  Resh  and  Shin  are  bound  thereto.  The  sign  of  this  Grade  is  thus 
given;  stand  with  the  heels  together,  raise  the  arms  till  the  elbows  are  level  with  the  shoulders  bring  the 
hands  across  the  chest  touching  the  thumbs  and  tips  of  fingers  thus  forming  a triangle  apex  downwards. 


130 


VOLUME  SIX 


This  represents  the  element  of  Water  to  which  this  Grade  is  attributed,  and  the  Waters  of  Creation.  The 
Grip  or  token  is  the  general  grip  of  the  First  Order.  The  Grand  Word  is  Elohim  Tzabaoth  which  means  the 
Elohim  of  Hosts  and  of  Armies.  The  mystic  number  is  36  and  from  it  is  formed  the  Pass  Word  of  this 
Grade,  which  is  Eloah,  one  of  the  Divine  Names.  It  should  be  lettered  separately  when  given.  Unto  this 
Grade  and  unto  the  Sephira  Hod,  the  Eighth  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  is  referred.  It  is  called  the 
Absolute  or  Perfect  Path  because  it  is  the  means  of  the  Primordial  which  hath  no  root  to  which  it  may  be 
established,  except  in  the  Penetralia  of  that  Gedulah  (Magnificence)  which  emanates  from  the  subsisting 
properties  thereof.  The  distinguishing  badge  of  this  Grade  which  you  will  now  be  entitled  to  wear  is  the 
sash  of  a Theoricus  with  the  addition  of  a purple  or  violet  cross  above  the  white  cross  and  the  numbers  3 
and  8 within  a circle  and  a square,  respectively,  left  and  right  of  its  summit,  and  below  the  numbers  32, 
the  numbers  30  and  31  in  purple  or  violet,  between  narrow  parallel  purple  lines.  This  grade  is  especially 
referred  to  the  element  of  Water  and  therefore,  the  great  Watch  Tower  or  Terrestrial  Tablet  of  the  West 
forms  one  of  its  principal  emblems.  (Hierophant  goes  to  West  in  front  of  Water  Tablet  followed  by 
Theoricus.)  It  is  known  as  the  second  or  Great  Western  Quadrangle,  or  Tablet  of  Water,  and  it  is  one  of 
the  four  Great  Tablets  delivered  unto  Enoch  by  the  great  Angel  Ave.  From  it  are  drawn  the  3 Holy  secret 
names  of  God  EMPEH  ARSEL  GAIOL  which  are  borne  upon  the  Banners  of  the  West.  And  numberless 
divine  and  angelic  names  which  appertain  unto  the  Element  of  Water.  The  meaning  of  the  Tablet  of  Earth 
and  Air  were  explained  to  you  in  the  preceding  Grades. 

Hiero: 

Theor: 

Proceed  to  East.  Hierophant  indicates  Cross  and  Triangle  on  the  Altar. 

Hiero: 

The  Cross  above  the  Triangle  represents  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  Life  rising  above  the  Triangle  of  the 
Waters,  and  reflecting  the  Triune  therein,  as  further  marked  by  the  Lamps  at  the  angles.  While  the  Cup  of 
Water  placed  at  the  junction  of  the  Cross  and  Triangle  represents  the  maternal  letter  Mem.  The  Portals  in 
the  East  and  South  East  are  the  Paths  which  conduct  to  the  Higher  while  that  in  the  South  leads  to  the 
Grade  of  Philosophus,  the  highest  Grade  of  the  First  Order.  This  Grade  is  also  related  to  the  planet 
Mercury.  Its  Kamea  or  mystical  square  is  formed  of  64  squares  containing  the  numbers  from  1 to  64 
arranged  so  as  to  show  the  same  sum  each  way.  Its  ruling  numbers  are  8,  84,  260  and  2080.  This  Tablet 
(indicating  it)  shows  the  mystical  seals  and  Names  drawn  from  the  Kamea  of  Mercury.  The  seals  are 
formed  from  lines  drawn  to  certain  numbers  upon  the  square.  The  name  answering  to  8 is  Asboga,  those 
answering  to  64  Din,  Judgement  and  Doni,  that  answering  to  260  is  Tiriel  the  Intelligence  of  Mercury  and 
lastly,  that  answering  to  2080  is  Taphthartharath  the  name  of  the  Spirit  of  Mercury.  On  this  Tablet 
(indicating  it)  is  shown  the  meaning  of  the  symbol  of  Mercury  when  inscribed  upon  the  Tree  of  Life.  It 
embraces  all  but  Kether  and  the  horns  spring  from  Daath,  which  is  not  properly  speaking  a Sephira,  but 
rather  the  conjunction  of  Chokmah  and  Binah. 

Hiero: 

Resumes  his  seat. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  Hiereus  and  theygo  forward  to  West. 


131 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiereus: 

(Indicating  it)  This  Tablet  before  you  shows  the  7 Planes  of  the  Tree  of  Life  answering  to  the  7 Planets. 
Thus,  Saturn  answers  to  Kether,  Jupiter  to  Chokmah,  and  Binah;  Mars  to  Chesed  and  Geburah;  The  Sun 
to  Tiphareth;  Venus  to  Netzach  and  Hod,  Mercury  to  Yesod  and  Luna  to  Malkuth.  While  this  second 
Tablet  (indicating  it)  shows  the  Four  Planes  corresponding  to  the  elements;  the  four  Worlds  and  the 
letters  of  the  Holy  Name. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  Tablet  in  South. 

Heg: 

This  Tablet  shows  you  the  meaning  of  the  alchemical  Mercury  on  the  Tree  of  Life  of  the  first  form  of  the 
Alchemical  Sephiroth.  Here  again  it  embraces  all  but  Kether.  The  Radix  Metallorum,  the  triple  foliation  at 
the  bottom  of  the  Cross  refers  to  Fire  symbolized  by  the  addition  of  the  sign  Aries  thereto;  and  it  further 
alludes  to  the  3 principles  of  Sulphur,  Mercury  and  Salt. 

Heg: 

Leads  Theoricus  to  Tablet  in  the  North. 

Heg: 

The  Tablet  before  you  represents  the  symbol  the  Planets  resumed  in  a Mercurial  Figure.  In  gradual 
descent  we  obtain  Luna,  Mars,  Sol,  Venus,  and  below  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  right  and  left. 

Heg: 

Places  Theoricus  in  a seat  in  West  facing  Hierophant  and  returns  to  his  own  place. 

Hiero: 

I now  congratulate  you  on  having  passed  through  the  ceremony  of  the  Grade  of  Practicus  and  in 
recognition  thereof  I confer  upon  you  the  Mystic  title  of  Monokeros  de  Astris  which  means  the  Unicorn 
of  the  Stars,  and  I give  you  the  symbol  of  Mayim  which  is  the  Hebrew  Name  for  Water.  Take  your  seat  in 
the  South.  (Knocks)  In  the  Name  of  Elohim  Tzabaoth  I now  declare  that  you  have  been  duly  advanced  to 
the  Grade  of  Practicus,  and  Lord  (Lady)  of  the  30th  and  31st  Paths.  Before  you  are  eligible  for 
advancement  to  the  Grade  of  Philosophus  you  must  be  thoroughly  and  genuinely  perfect  in  certain 
subjects,  and  have  been  at  least  3 months  engaged  in  the  contemplation  of  the  mysteries  revealed  in  this 
Grade.  When  you  are  thoroughly  and  genuinely  perfect,  you  must  signify  the  same  by  letter  to  the  Scribe 
as  in  the  preceding  Grade.  A MSS.  lecture  on  those  subjects  is  circulated  among  the  members  of  this 
Grade. 


CLOSING 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Assist  me  to  close  the  Temple  in  the  Grade  of  Practicus.  Honored  Hegemon  see  that  the  Temple 
is  properly  guarded. 

(Done.) 

Heg: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant,  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Hiero: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Water. 

(Knocks) 

All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

Let  Elohim  Tzabaoth  be  praised  unto  the  Countless  Ages  of  Time.  Amen. 

Hiero: 

Quits  his  place  and  goes  to  Tablet  of  Water  in  West. 

All  face  West. 


132 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiero: 

Let  us  rehearse  the  Prayer  of  the  Undines  or  Water  Spirits.  ( Knocks ) Terrible  King  of  the  Sea,  Thou  who 
holdest  the  Keys  of  the  Cataracts  of  Heaven  and  who  enclosest  the  subterranean  Waters  in  the  cavernous 
hollows  of  Earth;  King  of  the  Deluge  and  of  the  Rains  of  Spring;  Thou  who  openest  the  sources  of  the 
Rivers  and  of  the  Fountains,  Thou  who  commandest  moisture  which  is  as  it  were  the  blood  of  the  earth,  to 
become  the  sap  of  the  plants,  we  adore  Thee  and  we  invoke  Thee.  Speak  thou  unto  us  Thy  mobile  and 
changeful  creatures  in  the  great  Tempests  of  the  Sea,  and  we  shall  tremble  before  Thee.  Speak  to  us  also 
in  the  murmur  of  the  limpid  waters  and  we  shall  desire  thy  love.  O Vastness  wherein  all  the  Rivers  of 
Being  seek  to  lose  themselves,  which  renew  themselves  ever  in  Thee,  O Thou  Ocean  of  infinite 
perfections,  0 Height  which  reflectest  Thyself  in  the  Depth,  O Depth  which  exhalest  thyself  into  the 
Height,  lead  us  into  the  true  Life  through  Intelligence,  through  Love.  Lead  us  unto  Immortality  through 
sacrifice,  so  that  we  may  be  found  worthy  to  offer  one  day  unto  Thee,  the  Water,  the  Blood  and  the  Tears, 
for  the  remission  of  Sins.  Amen. 

Hiero: 

Makes  Banishing  Circle  and  Pentagrams  in  the  Air  in  front  of  Tablet  with  his  scepter. 

Hiero: 

Depart  ye  in  peace  unto  your  abodes  and  habitations,  may  the  blessing  of  EL  be  upon  you.  Be  there  ever 
peace  between  us  and  you,  and  be  ye  ready  to  come  when  ye  are  called. 

Hiero: 

Knocks  and  returns  to  place. 

All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  Elohim  Tzabaoth  I declare  this  Temple  closed  in  the  Grade  of  Practicus. 

Hiero: 

( Knocks  1,  3, 1,3) 

Hiereus: 

( Knocks  1,  3, 1,  3) 

Heg: 

(Knocks  1,  3, 1,3) 


133 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


4 = 7 

The  Philosophus  Grade 
Part  I 


Part  I 


THE  OPENING 

(The  Throne  of  the  Hierophant,  beside  which  is  a Cup  of  Water  and  the  Banner  of  the  East,  is 
placed  before  the  Dais  N.E.  The  seat  of  the  Hegemon  is  before  the  Dais  in  the  S.E.  Hiereus  in  the  West. 
Each  officer  has  a Cup  of  Water.  The  Pillars  are  placed  about  2 feet  in  front  of  Hegemon's  seat,  and 
behind  her  is  the  letter  Qoph.  The  Altar  in  the  center  has  a candle  on  either  side.  On  it  is  the  Tarot  Key, 
The  Moon.  The  Elemental  Lights  are  lit.  Incense  burns  in  the  South.  Temple  arranged  as  for  Path  29. 
Members  assembled  and  Robed.) 


Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Honored  Fraters  and  Sorors,  assist  me  to  open  the  Temple  in  the  Grade  of  Philosophus. 
Honored  Hegemon  see  that  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Heg: 

Very  Honored  Hierophant  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 


134 


VOLUME  SIX 


Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  see  that  none  below  the  Grade  of  Philosophus  is  present. 

Hiereus: 

Honored  Fraters  and  Sorors,  give  the  sign  of  Philosophus. 

(Done) 

Hiereus: 

(Saluting.)  Very  Honored  Hierophant,  all  present  have  attained  the  Grade  of  Philosophus. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  to  what  particular  Element  is  this  Grade  attributed? 

Heg: 

To  the  Element  of  Fire. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  to  what  Planet  does  this  Grade  especially  refer? 

Hiereus: 

To  the  Planet  Venus. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  what  Paths  are  attached  to  this  Grade? 

Heg: 

The  29th,  28th  and  27th  Paths  of  Qoph,  Tzaddi  and  Peh. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  to  what  does  the  29th  Path  refer? 

Hiereus: 

To  the  reflection  of  the  Sphere  of  Pisces. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  to  what  does  the  28th  Path  allude? 

Heg: 

To  the  reflection  of  the  Sphere  of  Aquarius. 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hiereus,  to  what  does  the  27th  Path  allude? 

Hiereus: 

To  the  reflection  of  the  Sphere  of  Mars. 


135 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiero: 

( Knocks ) 

All  rise  and  face  East. 

Hiero: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Fire. 

Hiero: 

Tetragrammaton  Tzabaoth.  Blessed  be  Thou,  the  Leader  of  Armies  is  Thy  Name!  Amen. 

All  salute. 

Hiero: 

Quits  his  throne  and  proceeds  to  South  and  knocks. 

All  face  South. 

Hiero: 

Stands  before  the  Tablet  of  Fire.  He  makes  with  his  scepter  the  invoking  Circle  and  Pentagrams  before 
it  in  the  Air. 

Hiero: 

And  Elohim  said,  Let  us  make  Adam  in  our  Image  after  our  likeness,  and  let  them  have  Dominion.  In  the 
Name  of  Elohim,  Mighty  and  Ruling,  and  in  the  Name  of  Tetragrammaton  Tzabaoth,  Spirits  of  Fire, 
adore  your  Creator. 

Hiero: 

Takes  the  Incense  from  before  the  Tablet,  and  making  therewith  the  Sign  Leo  in  the  Air  before  it. 
Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  Michael  the  great  Archangel  of  Fire,  and  in  the  Sign  of  the  Lion,  Spirits  of  Fire,  adore 
your  Creator!  ( Making  with  Incense  the  sign  of  Cross.)  In  the  Names  and  Fetters  of  the  Great  Southern 
Quadrangle,  revealed  unto  Enoch  by  the  Angel  Ave,  Spirits  of  Fire,  adore  your  Creator.  ( Holding  Incense 
on  high.)  In  the  three  Great  Secret  Names  of  God,  borne  on  the  Banners  of  the  South,  OIP  TEEA 
PEDOCE  Spirits  of  Fire,  adore  your  Creator.  In  the  Name  of  EDELPERNA,  Great  King  of  the  South, 
spirits  of  Fire  adore  your  Creator. 

Hiero: 

Replaces  incense  and  returns  to  place. 

All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  Tetragrammaton  Tzabaoth,  I declare  the  Temple  opened  in  the  Grade  of  Philosophus. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks  3,3, 1) 

Hiereus: 

(. Knocks  3,  3,  1) 

Heg: 

( Knocks  3,  3,  1) 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  29th  PATH 

(Temple  arranged  for  Ritual  of  29th  Path,  as  in  Diagram.  The  Temple  is  darkened.) 

Hiero: 

( Knocks ) Honored  Fraters  and  Sorors,  our  Frater  XYZ  having  made  such  progress  in 


136 


VOLUME  SIX 


the  Paths  of  Occult  Science  as  has  enabled  him  to  pass  the  examination  in  the  requisite  knowledge  and 
further  having  been  a member  of  the  Grade  of  Practicus  for  a period  of  more  than  three  months,  is  now 
eligible  for  advancement  to  the  Grade  of  Philosophus,  and  I have  duly  received  a dispensation  from  the 
Greatly  Honored  Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order  to  advance  him  in  due  form.  Honored  Hegemon,  superintend 
the  preparation  of  the  Practicus  and  give  the  customary  alarm. 

Heg: 

Rises,  salutes  the  Hierophant,  quits  the  Temple  and  sees  that  the  Practicus  is  prepared  as  follows, 
wearing  sash  of  Practicus,  hoodwinked,  and  with  Calvary  Cross  formed  of  12  squares  in  right  hand. 
Hegemon  takes  Practicus  by  left  hand  and  gives  an  alarm  of  7 Knocks. 

Heg: 

And  the  RUACH  ELOHIM  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  Waters. 

Hiereus: 

Opens  door  and  admits  them,  then  returns  to  his  place. 

Heg: 

Conducts  Practicus  to  South  in  front  of  the  Tablet  of  Fire,  faces  him  to  East  and  takes  from  him  the 
Calvary  Cross. 

Hiero: 

Give  to  the  Hegemon  the  Sign,  Grip  or  Token,  Grand  Word,  Mystic  Number  and  Password  of  the  Grade 
of  Practicus. 

Pract: 

Sign,  General  Grip  of  1st  Order.  Grand  Word  Elohim  Tzabaoth,  No.  36,  Password  Eloah. 

(Done) 

Hiero: 

Give  me  also  the  Mystic  title  and  Symbol  which  you  received  in  that  Grade. 

Pract: 

Monokeros  de  Astris  Mayim. 

(Done) 

Heg: 

Places  Practicus  before  Tablet  of  Fire. 

Hiero: 

Frater  (XYZ)  do  you  solemnly  pledge  yourself  to  maintain  the  same  strict  secrecy  regarding  the  mysteries 
of  the  29th,  28th  and  27th  Paths  and  of  the  Grade  of  Philosophus,  which  you  have  already  sworn  to 
maintain  respecting  those  of  the  preceding  Grades? 

Pract: 

1 do. 

Hiero: 

Then  you  will  stretch  your  arms  above  your  head  to  their  full  limit  and  say  1 swear  by  the  torrent  of  Fire. 

Pract: 

1 swear  by  the  torrent  of  Fire 
(Done) 

Hiero: 

Let  the  hoodwink  be  removed. 

Heg: 

Removes  hoodwink. 

Heg: 

Places  in  his  hand  the  incense  from  before  the  Fire  Tablet. 

Hiero: 

Wave  the  incense  before  the  Tablet  of  Fire  and  say  Let  the  Powers  of  Fire  witness  my  Pledge. 

Pract: 

Let  the  powers  of  Fire  witness  my  Pledge. 

(Done) 


137 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

Replaces  Incense. 

Hiero: 

Conduct  the  Practicus  to  the  East  and  place  him  before  the  Mystic  Pillars. 
(Done.) 


THE  RITUAL  OF  THE  29th  PATH 

Hiero: 

Before  you  are  the  Portals  of  the  31st,  32nd  and  29th  Paths  as  in  the  Grade  of  Zelator.  The  two  former  you 
have  already  traversed,  and  the  Portal  of  the  29th  Path,  on  the  right  hand  leading  from  the  Grade  of  Zelator 
to  the  Grade  of  Philosophus  is  now  open  to  you.  Take  in  your  right  hand  the  Calvary  Cross  of  12  squares, 
and  follow  your  Guide  through  the  Path  of  the  Waters. 

Heg: 

Circumambulates  the  Hall  once  with  Practicus  having  previously  given  him  the  Calvary  Cross  to  bear. 
Hiereus: 

As  they  approach  rises  with  red  lamp  in  his  hand.  Hegemon  and  Practicus  halt  before  him. 

Hiero: 

The  Priest  with  the  mask  of  Osiris  spake  and  said  I am  the  Water,  Stagnant  and  Silent  and  Still,  reflecting 
all,  concealing  all.  I am  the  past.  1 am  the  Inundation.  He  who  riseth  from  the  Great  Waters  is  my  Name. 
Hail  unto  ye,  Dwellers  of  the  Land  of  Night,  for  the  rending  of  the  Darkness  is  near. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  round  to  seat  of  Hiereus. 

Hiereus: 

As  they  approach  takes  red  lamp  in  his  hand  and  rises.  Hegemon  and  Practicus  halt  before  him. 
Hiereus: 

The  Priest  with  the  mask  of  Horus  spake  and  said,  I am  Water  turbid  and  troubled.  I am  the  Banisher  of 
Peace  in  the  Vast  Abode  of  the  Waters.  None  is  so  strong  that  can  withstand  the  Great  Waters,  the 
vastness  of  their  Terror,  the  magnitude  of  their  Fear,  the  roar  of  their  thundering  Voice.  I am  the  Future, 
Mist-clad  and  shrouded  in  Gloom.  I am  the  Recession  of  the  Torrent,  the  Storm  veiled  in  Terror  is  my 
Name.  Hail  unto  the  Mighty  Powers  of  Nature,  and  the  Chiefs  of  the  Whirling  Storm. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  round  to  his  own  seat.  Takes  red  lamp  in  his  hand  and  addresses  Practicus. 

Heg: 

The  Priestess  with  the  mask  of  Isis  spake  and  said.  The  Traveller  through  the  Gates  of  Anubis  is  my 
Name.  I am  Water  pure  and  limpid,  ever  flowing  on  towards  the  Sea.  I am  the  ever-passing  Present, 
which  stands  in  the  place  of  the  Past.  I am  the  fertilized  Land.  Hail  unto  the  Dwellers  of  the  Wings  of  the 
Morning. 

Heg: 

Replaces  lamp.  Seats  Candidate  West  of  and  close  to  the  Altar  facing  Hierophant  and  returns  to  his 
own  place. 

Hiero: 

I arise  in  the  Place  of  the  Gathering  of  the  Waters  through  the  rolled  back  cloud  of  Night.  From  the  Father 
of  Waters  went  forth  the  Spirit  rending  asunder  the  veils  of  Darkness.  And  there  was  but  a Vastness  of 
Silence  and  of  depth  in  the  Place  of  the  Gathering  of  the 


138 


VOLUME  SIX 


Waters;  terrible  was  that  Silence  of  an  Uncreated  World,  immeasurable  the  depth  of  that  Abyss.  And  the 
Countenance  of  Darkness  half  formed,  arose.  They  abode  not,  they  hasted  away.  And  in  the  vastness  of 
Vacancy,  the  Spirit  moved,  and  the  Light-bearers  existed  for  a space.  I have  said  Darkness  of  Darkness; 
Are  not  the  countenances  of  Darkness  fallen  with  the  Kings?  Do  the  Sons  of  the  Night  of  Time  last 
forever?  And  have  they  not  passed  away?  Before  all  things  are  the  Waters,  and  the  Darkness,  and  the 
Gates  of  the  Land  of  Night.  And  the  Chaos  cried  aloud  for  the  Unity  of  Form,  and  the  Face  of  the  Eternal 
arose.  Before  the  Glory  of  that  Countenance  the  night  rolled  back  and  the  Darkness  hasted  away.  In  the 
Waters  beneath  was  that  Face  reflected,  in  the  Formless  Abyss  of  the  Void.  From  those  Eyes  darted  rays 
of  terrible  splendor  which  crossed  with  the  Currents  reflected.  That  Brow  and  those  Eyes  formed  the 
Triangle  of  the  measureless  Heavens,  and  their  reflection  formed  the  Triangle  of  the  Measureless  Waters. 
And  thus  was  formulated  the  Eternal  Hexad,  the  Number  of  the  Dawning  Creation. 

Heg: 

Turns  up  the  lights  and  then  conducts  the  Practicus  to  the  foot  of  Hierophant's  throne,  handing 
Practicus  the  Calvary  Cross  of  12  squares. 

Hiero: 

The  Calvary  Cross  of  12  Squares  fitly  represents  the  Zodiac,  which  embraces  the  Waters  of  Nu,  as  the 
ancient  Egyptians  called  the  heavens;  the  Waters  which  be  above  the  Firmament.  It  also  alludes  to  the 
Eternal  River  of  Eden  divided  into  four  heads  which  finds  their  correlatives  in  the  four  triplicities  of  the 
Zodiac.  (Places  Cross  aside.)  The  29th  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  which  answereth  to  the  letter  Qoph,  is 
called  the  Corporeal  Intelligence,  and  it  is  so  called  because  it  formeth  every  body  which  is  formed 
beneath  the  whole  Order  of  Worlds,  and  the  Increment  of  them.  It  is  there,  the  reflection  of  the  Sphere  of 
the  Watery  Sign  Pisces,  and  the  Path  connecting  the  Material  Universe  as  depicted  in  Malkuth,  with  the 
Pillar  of  Mercy,  and  the  side  of  Chesed  through  the  Sephira  Netzach.  And  through  it  do  the  Waters  of 
Chesed  flow  down. 

Hiero: 

Heg: 

Pract: 

Move  to  West  of  Altar. 

Hiero: 

Before  you  upon  the  Altar  is  the  18th  Key  of  the  Tarot,  which  symbolically  resumes  these  ideas.  It 
represents  the  Moon  with  four  Hebrew  Yods,  like  drops  of  dew  falling,  two  dogs,  two  towers,  a winding 
pathway  leading  to  the  horizon,  and  in  the  foreground,  Water,  with  a crayfish  crawling  through  it  towards 
land.  The  Moon  is  in  the  increase  on  the  side  of  Gedulah,  and  from  it  proceed  sixteen  principal  and 
sixteen  secondary  rays,  which  together  make  32,  the  number  of  the  Paths  of  Yetzirah.  She  is  the  Moon  at 
the  feet  of  the  Woman  of  the  Revelation,  ruling  equally  over  Cold  and  Moist  Natures,  and  the  Passive 
Elements  of  Earth  and  Water.  The  four  Hebrew  Yods  refer  to  the  four  letters  of  the  Holy  Name 
reconstituting  the  destroyed  World  from  the  Waters.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  symbol  of  the  Sign  Pisces  is 
formed  of  the  two  lunar  crescents  of  Gedulah  and  Geburah  bound  together,  and  thus  shows  the  lunar 
nature  of  the  Sign.  The  Dogs  are  the  Jackals  of  the  Egyptian  Anubis,  guarding  the  Gates  of  the  East  and  of 
the  West,  shown  by  the  two  Towers,  between  which  lies  the  Path  of  all  the  Heavenly  Bodies  ever  rising  in 
the  East  and  setting  in  the  West.  The  Crayfish  is  the  sign  Cancer,  and  was  anciently  the  Scarabus  or 
Khephra,  the  emblem  of  the  Sun  below  the  horizon  as  he  ever  is  when  the  Moon  is  increasing  above.  Also 
when  the  Sun  is  in  the  Sign  Pisces,  the  Moon  will  be  well  in  her  increase  in  Cancer  as  shown  by  the 
Crayfish  emblem. 

Hiero: 

Leads  Practicus  to  Tablet  of  the  Serpent  of  Brass  in  East. 

Hiero: 

This  is  the  Serpent  Nehushtan  which  Moses  made  when  the  Children  of  Israel  were  bitten  by  the  Serpents 
of  Fire  in  the  wilderness.  It  is  the  Serpent  of  the  Paths  of  the  Tree.  And  he  set  it  on  a pole,  that  is,  twined 
round  the  middle  Pillar  of  the  Sephiroth.  And  the  word  used  in  the  passage  in  Numbers  2 1 for  Fiery 
Serpents,  is  the  same  as  the  name  of  the  angels  of  Geburah,  the  same  spelling,  the  same  pointing, 


139 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Seraphim,  around  the  middle  Pillar  of  the  Sephiroth,  because  that  is  the  reconciler  between  the  Fires  of 
Geburah  and  Severity,  and  the  Waters  of  Chesed  or  Mercy,  and  hence  it  is  said  in  the  New  Testament, 
that  it  is  a type  of  Christ,  the  Reconciler.  And  the  Serpent  is  of  Brass,  the  Metal  of  Venus,  whose  Sphere 
is  called  Nogah  or  External  Splendor,  as  shown  further  in  the  Alchemic  symbol  of  the  Planet  Venus, 
wherein  the  circle  of  the  Sun  is  exalted  above  the  Cross  of  corrosion.  And  therefore  it  is  said  in  the  Zohar, 
that  alone  of  the  Shells  is  the  Serpent  Nogah  found  in  Holiness,  and  he  is  called  the  Bilanx  of  Justice. 

Why  then  is  he  called  the  External  or  false  Splendor?  Because  he  indeed  uniteth  the  Paths  but 
comprehendeth  not  the  Sephiroth.  Nevertheless  he  is  also  the  Celestial  Serpent  of  Wisdom.  But  the 
Serpent  of  Temptation  is  the  Serpent  of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of  Good  and  Evil  and  not  that  of  the  Tree 
of  Life. 

Hiero: 

Resumes  his  seat. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  Hiereus. 

Hiereus: 

(Indicating  Tablet ) This  is  the  so-called  Qabalah  of  Nine  Chambers.  In  it  the  letters  are  classed  together, 
according  to  the  similarity  of  their  numbers.  Thus,  in  one  chamber  you  will  see  Girnel,  Lamed  and  Shin 
classed  together,  whose  numbers  are  similar  3,  30,  300  and  so  on.  The  uppermost  is  the  most  usual  form 
of  the  diagram.  In  the  lower  the  chambers  are  arranged  according  to  the  Sephiroth.  This  Tablet  (indicating 
it)  represents  the  method  of  'forming  the  Tree  of  Life  in  the  Tarot.  The  four  Aces  are  placed  on  the  Throne 
of  Kether.  The  remaining  small  cards  of  each  suit  desired  are  then  placed  on  the  respective  Sephiroth,  2 
on  Chokmah,  3 on  Binah  and  so  on.  The  22  Trumps  are  then  arranged  on  the  letters  of  the  Paths  between 
them.  The  King  and  Queen  of  the  Suit  are  placed  beside  Chokmah  and  Binah  respectively,  the  Knight 
beside  Tiphareth  and  the  Knave  beside  Malkuth,  thus  representing  the  attribution  of  the  Sephiroth  to  the 
four  letters  of  the  Holy  Name  in  the  World  wherein  they  operate. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  Tablet  of  The  Pillars  in  South. 

Heg: 

This  Tablet  represents  the  formation  of  the  Hexagram  of  Tiphareth  from  the  Pillars  on  each  side.  In 
Chesed  is  the  Water  and  in  Geburah  is  the  Fire,  and  in  Tiphareth  is  the  uniting  and  reconciliation  of  both 
Triangles  in  the  Hexagram,  as  Aleph  forms  the  reconciliation  between  Mem  and  Shin  so  thus  stands  the 
reconciling  Pillar  between  the  Pillars  of  Fire  and  of  Cloud;  the  Yakin  and  Boat  of  Solomon's  Temple. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  Tablet  in  North. 

Heg: 

The  mode  of  using  the  Talismanic  forms  drawn  from  the  Geomantic  figures,  is  to  take  those  formed  by 
the  figures  under  the  Planet  required  and  place  them  at  the  opposite  ends  of  a wheel  of  8 radii  as  shown.  A 
versicle  suitable  to  the  matter  is  then  written  within  the  double  circle. 

Hiero: 

I have  much  pleasure  in  now  conferring  upon  you  the  title  of  Lord  (Lady)  of  the  29th  Path.  You  will  now 
quit  the  Temple  for  a short  time  and  on  your  return  the  ceremony  of  your  passage  of  the  28th  Path  will 
take  place. 


140 


VOLUME  SIX 


ADVANCEMENT  PATH  28 
Part  II 


Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  you  have  my  command  to  present  the  Practicus  with  the  necessary  admission  badge 
and  to  admit  him  (her). 

Heg: 

Rises  goes  to  door,  opens  it,  presents  Practicus  with  solid  pyramid  of  elements  and  admits  him. 

Heg: 

And  ever  forth  from  their  central  source  The  Rivers  of  Eden  flow. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  South  East  before  Pillars. 

Hiero: 

Frater  (XYZ)  the  Path  now  open  before  you  is  the  28th  leading  from  the  Grade  of  Theoricus  to  the  Grade 
of 


141 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Philosophus.  Take  in  your  right  hand  the  solid  Pyramid  of  the  Elements  and  follow  the  Guide  of  the  Path. 
Heg: 

Circumambulates  Hall  once  with  Practicus. 

Hiero: 

As  they  approach  rises,  the  red  lamp  in  his  hand.  They  halt  before  him. 

Hiero: 

The  Priestess  with  the  mask  of  Isis  spake  and  said  I am  the  rain  of  Heaven,  descending  upon  the  Earth, 
bearing  with  it  the  fructifying  and  germinating  Power.  I am  the  plenteous  yielder  of  Harvest;  I am  the 
Cherisher  of  Life. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  round  to  the  seat  of  the  Hiereus. 

Hiereus: 

As  they  approach  rises  with  red  lamp  in  his  hand.  They  halt  before  him. 

Hiereus: 

The  Priestess  with  the  Mask  of  Nephthys  spake  and  said  I am  the  Dew  descending  noiseless  and  silent, 
gemming  the  Earth  with  countless  Diamonds  of  Dew;  bearing  down  the  influences  from  above  in  the 
solemn  Darkness  of  Night. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  round  to  his  own  seat,  takes  red  lamp  in  his  hand  and  thus  addresses  the  Practicus. 
Heg: 

The  Priestess  with  the  Mask  of  Athor  spake  and  said  1 am  the  Ruler  of  Mist  and  Cloud;  wrapping  the 
Earth  as  it  were  with  a garment  floating  and  hovering  between  Earth  and  Heaven.  1 am  the  Giver  of  the 
Mist  Veil  of  Autumn,  the  successor  of  the  Dew  clad  Night. 

Heg: 

Replaces  lamp  and  seats  Practicus  West  of  and  close  to  the  Altar  facing  Hierophant,  then  returns  to  his 
own  seat. 

Hiero: 

Where  the  Paternal  Monad  is,  the  Monad  is  enlarged  and  generateth  two.  And  beside  him  is  seated  the 
Duad,  and  both  glittereth  with  intellectual  Sections,  also  to  govern  all  things  and  to  order  everything  not 
ordered.  For  in  the  whole  Universe  shineth  the  Triad,  over  which  the  Monad  ruleth.  This  Order  is  the 
beginning  of  all  Sections. 

Hiereus: 

For  the  Mind  of  the  Father  said,  that  all  things  should  be  cut  into  three  whose  will  assented,  and  then  all 
things  were  so  divided.  For  the  mind  of  the  Eternal  Father  said  into  three,  governing  all  things  by  Mind. 
And  there  appeared  in  it  the  Triad,  Virtue,  and  Wisdom  and  Multiscient  Truth. 

Hiereus: 

Thus  floweth  forth  the  form  of  the  Triad  being  preexistent  - Not  the  First  Essence,  but  that  whereby  all 
things  are  measured. 

Heg: 

For  thou  must  know  that  all  things  bow  before  the  Three  Supernals.  The  first  Course  is 


142 


VOLUME  SIX 


Sacred,  but  in  the  midst  thereof  another,  the  Third  Aerial  which  cherisheth  Earth  in  Fire  and  the  Fountain 
of  Fountain,  and  of  all  the  Fountains.  The  Matrix  containing  all,  thence  abundantly  springing  forth  the 
generation  of  multifarious  Matter. 

Heg: 

Conducts  Practicus  to  foot  of  the  Hierophant's  Throne  and  hands  to  the  Practicus  the  Solid  Pyramid  of 
the  elements. 

Hiero: 

This  Pyramid  is  attributed  to  the  Four  elements.  On  the  four  Triangles  are  their  names,  Asch,  Fire; 

Mayim,  Water;  Ruach,  Air;  Aretz,  Earth;  On  the  apex  is  the  word  Eth,  composed  of  the  first  and  last 
letters  of  the  Alphabet  and  implying  Essence.  The  Square  Base  represents  the  Material  Universe,  and  on  it 
is  the  word  Ohlam,  meaning  World.  (Places  Pyramid  aside.)  The  28th  Path  of  Yetzirah,  which  answereth 
unto  the  letter  Tzaddi  is  called  the  Natural  Intelligence,  and  it  is  so  called  because  through  it  is 
consummated  and  perfected  the  Nature  of  every  existing  being  under  the  Orb  of  the  Sun.  It  is  therefore 
the  reflection  of  the  Airy  Sign  of  Aquarius,  the  Water  bearer  unto  which  is  attributed  the  Countenance  of 
the  Man,  the  Adam,  the  restored  World. 

Hiero: 

Heg: 

Pract: 

Move  to  the  West  of  Altar. 

Hiero: 

Before  you  upon  the  altar  is  the  17th  Key  of  the  Tarot,  which  symbolically  resumes  these  ideas.  The  large 
Star  in  the  center  of  the  Heavens  has  seven  principal  and  14  secondary  rays,  and  thus  represents  the 
Heptad  multiplied  by  the  Triad  which  yields  21  the  number  of  the  Divine  name,  EHEIEH  which  as  you 
already  know  is  attached  to  Kether.  In  the  Egyptian  sense  it  is  Sirius,  the  Dog  Star  of  Isis  Sothis;  around  it 
are  the  Stars  of  the  Seven  Planets,  each  with  its  sevenfold  counterchanged  operation.  The  nude  female 
figure  with  the  Star  of  the  Heptagram  on  her  Brow  is  the  synthesis  of  Isis,  of  Nephthys  and  of  Athor.  She 
also  represents  the  Planet  Venus,  through  whose  Sphere  the  influences  of  Chesed  descend.  She  is  Aima, 
Binah  and  Tebunah,  the  Great  Supernal  Mother,  Aima  Elohim  pouring  upon  the  Earth  the  Waters  of 
Creation,  which  unite  and  form  a river  at  her  feet;  the  river  going  forth  from  the  Supernal  Eden,  which 
overfloweth  and  faileth  not.  Note  well  that  in  this  Key  she  is  completely  unveiled,  while  in  the  21st  Key, 
she  is  only  partly  so.  The  two  Urns  contain  the  Influences  from  Chokmah  and  Binah.  On  the  right  springs 
the  Tree  of  Life  and  on  the  left  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of  Good  and  Evil,  whereon  the  bird  of  Hermes 
alights.  And  therefore  does  this  Key  represent  the  Restored  World  after  the  Formless  and  the  Void  and  the 
Darkness,  the  New  Adam,  the  Countenance  of  the  Man  which  falls  in  the  Sign  Aquarius.  And  therefore 
doth  the  Astronomical  symbol  of  this  sign  represent  as  it  were,  the  waves  of  water,  the  ripples  of  that 
River  going  forth  out  of  Eden.  But  therefore,  also  it  is  justly  attributed  unto  Air  and  not  unto  Water, 
because  it  is  the  Firmament  dividing  and  containing  the  Waters. 

Hierophant  and  Practicus  go  to  East. 

Hiero: 

Before  you  is  shown  the  manner  of  writing  the  Holy  Name  in  each  of  the  four  Worlds  at  length,  by  giving 
the  spelling  of  each  letter.  You  will  note  that  the  spelling  of  the  letter  Yod  alone  alters  not.  It  is  a symbol 
of  the  unchangeableness  of  the  First  Cause.  The  total  of  the  spelling  in  each  World,  is  then  expressed  in 
Hebrew  letters  and  makes  the  Secret  name  of  that  World.  Thus,  in  Atziluth  the  total  is  72,  and  the  Secret 
name  AUB,  in  Binah  63  SEG,  in  Yetzirah  45  MAH  and  in  Assiah  52  BEN.  ( Indicating  the  end  Tablet.) 

In  the  Tablet  is  shown  the  method  of  writing  the  Hebrew  words  by  the  Yetziratic  attribution  of  the 
alphabet,  whence  result  some  curious  hieroglyphic  symbolism.  Thus,  Tetragrammaton  will  be  written  by 
Virgo,  Aries,  Taurus,  Aries.  Eheieh  by  Air,  Aries,  Virgo,  Aries;  from  Yeheshuah,  the  Qabalistic  mode  of 
spelling  Jesus,  which  is  simply  the  Tetragrammaton,  with  the  letter  Shin  placed  therein,  we  obtain  a very 
peculiar  combination;  Virgo,  Aries,  Fire,  Taurus,  Aries;  Virgo  born  of  a Virgin,  Aries  the  Sacrificial 
Lamb;  Fire  the  Fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  Taurus  the  Ox  of  Earth,  in  whose  manger  he  was  laid;  and  lastly 
Aries,  the  flocks  of  sheep  whose  herdsmen  came  to  worship  him.  Elohim  yields  Air,  Libra,  Aries;  Virgo, 


143 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Water;  the  Firmament,  the  Balanced  Force,  the  Fire  of  the  Spirit  (for  Aries  is  a fiery  sign  operating  in  the 
Zodiac)  the  Virgin  Goddess  and  the  Waters  of  Creation.  Returning  to  the  spelling  of  Yeheshuah,  it  is  easy 
to  see  that  the  Lamb  is  an  appropriate  symbol  of  Jesus,  from  the  prevalence  of  the  Aries  symbol,  whose 
Fire  is  subdued  and  modified  by  its  other  associations. 

Hiero: 

Returns  to  his  seat. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  West. 

Hiereus: 

In  the  Theoricus  grade  you  were  shown  the  lineal  figures  attributed  to  the  planets.  The  figures  as  shown 
consist  of  the  Dekagram,  Endekagram  and  Dodekagram,  together  with  the  two  forms  of  the  Enneagram 
and  the  remaining  forms  of  the  Heptagram  and  Octogram,  which  are  not  so  consonant  to  the  Planet.  The 
Heptagram  traced  in  a continuous  figure,  reflected  from  every  third  point,  relates  to  the  7 planets.  The 
Octagram  formed  of  two  squares,  to  the  eight  lettered  Name.  The  two  forms  of  the  Enneagram  refer  to  the 
Triple  Ternary.  The  three  forms  of  the  Dekagram  relate  to  the  duplicated  Fleh,  to  the  Ten  Sephiroth  and  to 
Malkuth.  The  three  forms  of  the  Endekagram  are  referred  to  the  Qlippoth.  The  four  forms  of  the 
Dodekagram  are  referred  to  the  Zodiac,  the  three  Quaternions  of  angular,  succedent,  cadent  and  movable, 
fixed  and  common,  the  4 Triplicities  and  the  24  thrones  of  the  Elders.  (Going  to  the  second  Tablet.)  The 
term  Polygon  is  referred  to  a figure  having  only  salient  or  projecting  angles,  the  term  Polygram  to  a figure 
having  reentering  angles  as  well.  The  number  of  possible  modes  of  tracing  the  lineal  figures  will  then  be 
Triangle,  1;  Square,  1;  Pentangle.  2:  Hexangle,  2;  Heptangle.  3;  Octangle.  3;  Enneangle,4;  Dekangle,  4; 
Endekangle,  4;  Dodekangle,  5. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  Tablet  in  the  South. 

Heg: 

Before  you  are  the  Geomantic  figures  arranged  according  to  their  planetary  attribution,  in  the  Tree  of 
Life.  You  will  note  that  Saturn  represents  the  three  Supernal  Sephiroth  summed  up  in  Binah.  while  Caput 
and  Cauda  Draconis  are  referred  to  Malkuth. 

Hiero: 

1 have  much  pleasure  in  conferring  upon  you  the  title  of  Lord  (Lady)  of  the  28th  Path.  You  will  now  quit 
the  Temple  for  a short  time,  and  on  your  return  the  ceremony  of  your  passage  of  the  27th  Path  will  take 
place. 


144 


VOLUME  SIX 


ADVANCEMENT  27™  PATH 
Part  III 


Part  III 

(Temple  arranged  as  in  diagram.  Temple  is  darkened.) 

Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon,  You  have  my  command  to  present  the  Practicus  with  the  necessary  Admission  Badge 
and  to  admit  him  (her). 

Heg: 

Rises  goes  to  door,  opens  it,  presents  Practicus  with  Calvary  Cross  of  10  squares  and  admits  him. 

Heg: 

The  river  Kishon  swept  them  away,  that  ancient  river,  the  river  Kishon,  O my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden 
down  Strength. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  south  and  places  him  before  the  mystic  Pillars. 

Hiero: 

Monokeris  de  Astris,  the  Path  now  Open  to  you  is  the  27th  which  leads  from  the  Grade  of  Practicus  to  the 
Grade  of  Philosophus.  Take  in  your  right  hand  the  Calvary  cross  of  10  Squares,  and  follow  your  Guide 
through  the  Path  of  Mars. 


145 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

The  Lord  is  a Man  of  War,  the  Lord  of  Armies  is  his  Name. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  round  to  foot  of  the  Dais. 

Hiero: 

Rises  with  red  lamp  in  his  hand. 

Hiero: 

Ere  the  Eternal  instituted  the  Formation,  Beginning  and  End  existed  not.  Therefore,  before  Him,  he 
expanded  a certain  Veil,  and  therein  has  instituted  the  Primal  Kings.  And  these  are  the  Kings  who  reigned 
in  Edom  before  there  reigned  a King  over  Israel  but  they  subsisted  not.  When  the  Earth  was  formless  and 
void;  behold  this  is  the  reign  of  Edom;  and  when  Creation  was  established,  lo  this  is  the  reign  of  Israel. 
And  the  Wars  of  Titanic  Force  in  the  Chaos  of  Creation,  lo  these  are  the  Wars  between  them.  From  a 
Light  Bearer  of  insupportable  brightness  proceeded  a radiating  Flame,  hurling  forth  like  a vast  and  mighty 
hammer  those  sparks  which  were  the  primal  Worlds.  And  these  Sparks  flamed  and  scintillated  awhile,  but 
being  unbalanced  they  were  extinguished.  Since  lo,  the  Kings  assembled,  they  passed  away  together. 

They  themselves  beheld,  so  were  they  astonished,  they  feared,  they  hasted  away.  And  these  be  the  Kings 
who  reigned  in  Edom,  before  there  reigned  a King  over  Israel. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  round  the  Temple  and  again  halts  before  Dais. 

Hiereus: 

Rises  with  red  lamp  in  his  hand. 

Hiereus: 

The  Dukes  of  Edom  were  amazed,  trembling  took  hold  of  the  Mighty  of  Moab.  Lord  when  thou  wentest 
out  of  Seir,  when  thou  marchedst  out  of  the  field  of  Edom,  the  Earth  trembled  and  the  Heavens  dropped, 
the  Clouds  also  dropped  water.  Curse  ye  Meroz  said  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  curse  ye  bitterly  the 
inhabitants  thereof,  because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the 
Mighty.  The  river  Kishon  swept  them  away,  that  ancient  river,  the  river  Kishon,  O my  soul  thou  hast 
trodden  down  strength.  He  bowed  the  Heavens  also  and  came  down  and  Darkness  was  under  His  Feet.  At 
the  Brightness  that  was  before  Him,  the  thick  clouds  passed.  The  Lord  thundered  through  the  Heavens, 
and  the  highest  gave  His  Voice,  hailstones  and  flashings  of  Fire.  He  sent  out  his  arrows  and  scattered 
them;  he  hurled  forth  his  Lightnings  and  destroyed  them.  Then  the  channels  of  the  Waters  were  seen,  and 
the  Foundations  of  the  world  were  discovered.  At  thy  rebuke  O Lord,  at  the  blast  of  the  Breath  of  Thy 
nostrils.  The  Voice  of  Thy  Thunder  was  in  the  Heavens,  the  Lightnings  lightened  the  World,  the  Earth 
trembled  and  shook.  Thy  Way  is  in  the  Sea,  and  Thy  Path  is  in  the  Great  Waters,  and  Thy  Footsteps  are 
not  known. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  round  and  halts  at  Dais  as  before.  Ascends  Dais  and  takes  red  lamp  in  his  hand. 

Heg: 

O Lord  I have  heard  Thy  Speech  and  was  afraid.  The  Voice  of  the  Lord  is  upon  the  Waters;  the  God  of 
Glory  thundered,  the  Lord  is  upon  many  Waters.  The  Voice  of  the  Lord  is  powerful,  the  Voice  of  the  Lord 
is  full  of  majesty.  The  Voice  of  the  Lord  breaketh  the  Cedars,  yea,  the  Lord  breaketh  the  Cedars  of 
Lebanon.  The  Voice  of  the  Lord  divide th  the 


146 


VOLUME  SIX 


Flames  of  Fire.  The  Voice  of  the  Lord  shaketh  the  Wilderness,  yea,  the  Lord  shaketh  the  Wilderness  of 
Kadesh. 

Heg: 

Places  Candidate  in  a seat  in  West  of  Altar  and  facing  East  and  takes  Calvary  Cross  from  him,  returns 
to  place. 

Hiero: 

Eloah  came  from  Teman  of  Edom,  and  the  Holy  One  from  Mount  Paran.  His  Glory  covered  the  Heavens, 
and  the  Earth  was  full  of  His  praise,  and  His  brightness  was  as  the  Light.  He  had  Karnaim  in  his  hands, 
and  there  was  the  hiding  of  his  Power.  Before  him  went  the  Pestilence  and  Flaming  Fire  went  forth  at  his 
feet.  He  stood  and  measured  the  Earth.  He  beheld  and  drove  asunder  the  nations  and  the  everlasting 
Mountains  were  scattered  and  the  perpetual  Hills  did  bow,  His  ways  are  everlasting.  I saw  the  tents  of: 
Cushan  in  affliction  and  the  curtains  of  the  land  of  Midian  did  tremble.  Was  the  Lord  displeased  against 
the  rivers?  Was  thine  anger  against  the  Rivers?  Was  thy  wrath  against  the  Sea,  that  thou  didst  ride  upon 
thine  horses  and  Thy  chariots  of  Salvation?  Thou  didst  cleave  asunder  the  Earth  with  the  Rivers.  The 
Mountains  saw  Thee  and  they  trembled;  the  Deluge  of  Waters  rolled  by;  the  Deep  uttered  his  Voice  and 
lifted  up  his  hands  on  high.  The  Sun  and  the  Moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation;  at  the  light  of  thine 
arrows  they  went;  at  the  shining  of  thy  glittering  spear.  Thou  didst  march  through  the  land  in  indignation. 
Thou  didst  thresh  the  heathen  in  thine  anger.  Thou  didst  march  through  the  Sea  with  Thine  horses, 
through  the  Depth  of  the  mighty  Waters. 

Heg: 

Conducts  Practicus  to  Hierophant  and  hands  to  Practicus  the  Calvary  Cross.  Lights  turned  up. 

Heg: 

The  Calvary  Cross  of  10  squares  refers  to  the  10  Sephiroth  in  balanced  disposition,  before  which  the 
formless  and  the  void  rolled  back.  It  also  is  the  opened  out  form  of  the  double  Cube,  and  of  the  Altar  of 
Incense.  ( Places  cross  aside.)  The  27th  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  which  answereth  unto  the  letter  Peh  is 
called  the  Exciting  Intelligence,  and  it  is  so  called  because  by  it  is  created  the  Intellect  of  all  created 
beings  under  the  highest  Heaven  and  the  excitement  of  the  motion  of  them.  It  is,  therefore,  the  reflection 
of  the  Sphere  of  Mars,  and  the  reciprocal  Path  connecting  Netzach  with  Hod,  Victory  with  Splendor;  it  is 
the  lowermost  of  the  three  reciprocal  Paths. 

Hiero: 

Heg: 

Pract: 

Move  to  the  West  of  Altar. 

Heg: 

Before  you  upon  the  Altar  is  the  16th  Key  of  the  Tarot  which  symbolically  resumes  these  Ideas.  It 
represents  a Tower  struck  by  a lightening  Flash,  proceeding  from  a rayed  circle  and  terminating  in  a 
Triangle.  It  is  the  Tower  of  Babel  struck  by  the  Fire  from  Heaven.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  Triangle  at  the 
end  of  the  Flash  issuing  from  the  circle  forms  exactly  the  astrological  symbol  of  Mars.  It  is  the  power  of 
the  Triad  rushing  down  and  destroying  the  Columns  of  Darkness.  Three  holes  are  rent  in  the  walls, 
symbolizing  the  establishment  of  the  Triad  therein,  and  the  Crown  at  the  summit  of  the  Tower  is  falling, 
as  the  Crowns  of  the  Kings  of  Edom  fell,  who  are  also  symbolized  by  the  men  falling  headlong.  On  the 
right  hand  side  of  the  Tower  is  Light,  and  the  representation  of  the  Tree  of  Life  by  the  ten  circles  thus 
disposed.  On  the  left  hand  side  is  Darkness  and  eleven  circles,  symbolizing  the  Qlippoth. 

Hiero: 

Heg: 

Pract: 

Move  to  the  Tablet  in  the  East. 


147 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

This  represents  the  Alchemical  symbol  of  Sulphur  on  the  Tree  of  Life.  It  does  not  touch  the  4 lower 
Sephiroth.  The  Cross  terminates  in  Tiphareth,  whereby  as  it  were  the  Supernal  Triangle  is  to  be  grasped, 
and  Tiphareth  is  the  purified  Man.  The  meaning  of  the  Alchemical  Symbol  of  Mercury  was  explained  to 
you  in  the  previous  Grade.  The  symbol  of  Salt  embraces  all  the  Sephiroth  but  Malkuth,  and  is  as  it  were, 
the  reconciler  between  the  Sulphur  and  the  Mercury.  The  horizontal  dividing  line  implies  the  precept  of 
Hermes  as  above,  so  below. 

Hiero: 

Resumes  his  place. 

Hiereus: 

Heg: 

Pract: 

Move  to  the  Tablets  in  the  West. 

Hiereus: 

This  Tablet  represents  the  Trinity  operating  through  the  Sephiroth,  and  reflected  downwards  in  the  four 
Triangles  of  the  Elements,  through  the  Tree  of  Life.  Notice  that  Air  is  reflected  from  Kether  through 
Tiphareth  to  Yesod.  Water  is  reflected  from  Binah  through  Chesed  to  Hod;  and  Fire  is  reflected  from 
Chokmah  through  Geburah  to  Netzach.  While  Malkuth  is  Earth,  the  receptacle  of  the  other  three.  On  this 
second  Tablet  is  the  Image  of  Nebuchadnezar,  whose  head  was  of  Gold,  the  breast  and  the  arms  of  Silver, 
the  belly  and  thighs  of  Brass,  the  legs  of  Iron,  the  feet  part  of  Iron  and  part  of  Clay.  In  his  hands  are 
represented  the  Hot  and  Moist  Natures. 

Heg: 

Conducts  Practicus  to  Tablet  of  Yetziratic  Palaces  in  the  South. 

Heg: 

These  are  the  Seven  Yetziratic  Palaces,  containing  the  10  Sephiroth.  In  each  Palace  are  the  six  letters 
from  the  Divine  Name  of  42  letters.  Thus,  the  Name  of  42  letters  has  been  taken  from  the  42  first  letters 
of  the  History  of  Creation,  as  far  as  Beth  of  the  word  "Bohu"  by  various  transmutations  which  are 
described  at  length  in  the  Sepher  Pardes. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  Tablet  in  North. 

Heg: 

These  are  the  Qlippoth  with  their  12  Princes,  who  are  the  heads  of  the  12  months  of  the  year.  In  the 
central  square  are  placed  Samael  and  Asmodai.  At  the  South  East  are  the  Man,  the  Serpent  and  the  Elder 
Lilith,  the  wife  of  Samael.  At  the  North  East  angle  are  the  Ox  and  the  Ass,  the  Aggareth,  the  Daughter  of 
Machalath.  At  the  North  West  angle  are  the  Scorpion  and  Asimon  the  unnamed  One,  and  Nehemah.  And 
at  the  South  West  are  the  Lion  and  the  Horse,  the  Younger  Lilith,  the  Wife  of  Asmodai. 

Hiero: 

1 have  much  pleasure  in  conferring  upon  you  the  title  of  Lord  (Lady)  of  the  27th  Path.  You  will  now  quit 
the  Temple  for  a short  time,  and  on  your  return  the  Ceremony  of  your  reception  in  the  Grade  of 
Philosophus  will  take  place. 


148 


VOLUME  SIX 


ADVANCEMENT  CEREMONY  OF  PHILOSOPHUS 

Part  IV 


Hiero: 

Honored  Hegemon  instruct  the  Practicus  in  the  proper  alarm,  present  him  with  the  necessary  admission 
badge  and  admit  him.  (Hegemon  goes  without  and  instructs  the  Practicus  to  give  an  alarm  of  7 Knocks. 
Hegemon  then  admits  Practicus.)  In  the  North  West  are  the  Portals  of  the  29th  and  28th  Paths  by  which  you 
have  symbolically  entered  this  Grade  from  the  Zelator  and  Theoricus  Grades,  respectively,  while  in  the 
North  is  the  Portal  of  the  27th  Path,  by  which  you  have  just  passed  from  the  Grade  of  Practicus. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  forward  to  Hiereus. 

Hiereus: 

By  what  symbol  dost  thou  enter  herein? 

Heg: 

By  the  peculiar  emblem  of  the  Hegemon,  which  is  the  Calvary  Cross  of  6 squares  within  a circle. 


149 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiereus: 

This  Cross  embraces  as  you  see  Tiphareth,  Netzach,  Hod  and  Yesod  and  rests  upon  Malkuth.  The 
surrounding  circle  includes  Chesed,  Geburah  and  Malkuth.  Also  the  Calvary  Cross  of  6 squares  forms  the 
cube,  and  is  thus  referred  to  the  6 Sephiroth  of  Microprosopus,  which  are  Chesed,  Geburah,  Tiphareth, 
Netzach,  Hod  and  Yesod. 

Heg: 

Resumes  his  seat. 

Hiero: 

Moves  to  West  of  Altar. 

Hiero: 

This  is  the  symbolic  representation  of  the  Fall.  For  the  Great  Goddess  who  in  the  Practicus  Grade  was 
supporting  the  columns  of  the  Sephiroth  in  the  form  of  the  Sign  of  Theoricus  being  tempted  by  the  Tree 
of  Knowledge  (whose  branches  indeed,  tend  upward  into  the  Seven  lower  Sephiroth,  but  also  tend 
downwards  into  the  Kingdom  of  the  Shells)  reached  down  into  the  Qlippoth,  and  immediately  the 
columns  were  unsupported,  and  the  Sephirotic  system  was  shattered,  and  with  it  fell  Adam,  the 
Microprosopus.  Then  arose  the  Great  Dragon  with  7 heads  and  10  horns,  and  the  Garden  was  made 
desolate,  and  Malkuth  was  cut  off  from  the  upper  Sephiroth  by  his  intersecting  folds,  and  linked  unto  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Shells,  and  the  7 lower  Sephiroth  were  cut  from  the  three  Supernal  in  Daath;  at  the  feet  of 
Aima  Elohim.  And  on  the  heads  of  the  Dragon  are  the  Names  and  Crowns  of  the  eight  Edomite  Kings, 
and  upon  the  horns  are  the  names  of  the  1 1 Dukes  of  Edom.  And  because  in  DAATH  was  the  utmost  rise 
of  the  Great  Serpent  of  Evil,  therefore  is  there  as  it  were,  another  Sephira,  making  eight  heads  according 
to  the  number  of  the  8 Kings.  And  for  the  Infernal  and  Averse  Sephiroth  1 1 instead  of  10,  according  to  the 
number  of  the  Dukes  of  Edom.  And  hence  were  the  Rivers  of  Eden  desecrated,  and  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Dragon  rushed  the  Infernal  Waters  in  DAATH.  And  this  is  Leviathan,  the  piercing  Serpent,  even 
Leviathan,  the  Crooked  Serpent.  But  between  the  devastated  Garden  and  the  Supernal  Eden, 
Tetragrammaton  Elohim  placed  the  letters  of  the  Name  and  the  Flaming  Sword,  that  the  uppermost  part  of 
the  Tree  of  Life  might  not  be  involved  in  the  Fall  of  Adam.  And  thence  was  it  necessary  that  the  Second 
Adam  should  come  to  restore  all  things  and  that  the  First  Adam  had  been  extended  on  the  Cross  of  the 
Celestial  Rivers,  so  the  Son  should  be  crucified  on  the  Cross  of  the  Infernal  Rivers  in  Daath.  Yet  to  do 
this  he  must  descend  unto  the  lowest  first  even  unto  Malkuth  and  be  born  of  her.  The  Grade  of 
Philosophus  is  referred  unto  the  Sephira  Netzach  and  the  27th,  28th,  and  29th  Paths  are  bound  thereto.  The 
Sign  of  the  Grade  is  given  by  raising  the  arms  above  the  head  making  with  the  thumbs  and  fingers  a 
triangle  apex  upwards.  This  represents  the  element  of  Fire,  to  which  this  Grade  is  attributed,  and  also  the 
Spirit  which  moved  upon  the  Waters  of  Creation.  The  Grip  or  Token  is  the  general  grip  of  the  First  Order. 
The  Grand  Word  is  a name  of  nine  letters  Tetragrammaton  Tzabaoth,  which  means  the  Lard  of  Armies. 
The  mystic  number  is  28  and  from  it  is  formed  the  Pass  Word  of  the  Grade  which  is  Koch  (Kaph,  Cheth) 
meaning  Power.  It  should  be  lettered  separately  when  given.  Unto  this  Grade  and  unto  the  Sephira 
Netzach,  the  7th  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  is  referred.  It  is  called  the  Recondite  Intelligence  and  it  is  so 
called  because  it  is  the  Refulgent  Splendor  of  all  the  intellectual  Virtues  which  are  perceived  by  the  Eyes 
of  the  Mind  and  by  the  contemplation  of  Faith.  The  distinguishing  badge  of  this  Grade,  which  you  will 
now  be  entitled  to  wear,  is  the  sash  of  a Practicus,  with  the  addition  of  a bright  green  cross  above  the 
violet  cross  and  the  numbers  4 and  7 within  a circle  and  a square  respectively  left  and  right  of  its  summit, 
and  below  the  number  37,  the  numbers  27,  28  and  29  in  bright  green  between  narrow  parallel  lines  of  the 
same  color.  This  Grade  is  especially  referred  unto  the  element  of  Fire  and  therefore  the  Great  Watch 
Tower  or  Terrestrial  Tablet  of  the  South  forms  one  of  its  principal  emblems. 

Hiero: 

Pract: 

Move  to  the  South. 

Hiero: 

It  is  known  as  the  fourth  or  great  Southern  Quadrangle,  or  Tablet  of  Fire  and  it  is  one  of  the  four  Great 
Tablets  delivered  unto  Enoch  by  the  Great  Angel  Ave.  From  it  are  drawn  the  3 Great  Holy  Secret  Names 


150 


VOLUME  SIX 


of  God  OIP  TEEA  PDOCE  which  are  borne  upon  the  Banners  of  the  South,  and  the  numberless  Divine 
and  Angelic  names  which  appertain  unto  the  Element  of  Fire.  The  meaning  of  the  other  Tablets  have  been 
already  explained  to  you. 

Hiero: 

Pract: 

Move  to  the  Altar. 

Hiero: 

The  triangle  surmounting  the  cross  upon  the  Altar,  represents  the  Fire  of  the  Spirit  surmounting  the  cross 
of  Life  and  of  the  Waters  of  Eden.  You  will  note  that  it  thus  forms  the  alchemical  emblem  of  Sulphur. 

The  red  lamps  at  the  angles  of  the  triangles  are  the  three  fold  forms  of  Fire. 

Hiero: 

Pract: 

Proceed  to  the  East. 

Hiero: 

The  Portals  in  the  East  and  North  East  conduct  to  the  Higher.  The  others  are  those  of  the  Paths  you  have 
already  traversed.  This  Grade  is  also  related  to  the  Planet  Venus.  Its  Kamea  or  mystical  square  is  formed 
of  49  squares  containing  the  numbers  from  1 to  49  arranged  so  as  to  show  the  same  sum  each  way.  The 
ruling  numbers  are  7,  49,  175  and  1252.  This  Tablet  (indicating  it)  shows  the  mystical  Names  and  Seals 
drawn  from  the  Kamea  of  Venus.  The  Seals  are  formed  by  lines  drawn  from  and  to,  certain  numbers  upon 
the  Square.  The  name  answering  to  7 is  AHA,  that  answering  to  49  is  HAGIEL,  the  Intelligence  of 
Venus;  that  answering  to  175  is  Qedemei  the  Spirit  of  Venus  and  lastly  that  answering  to  1252  is  BENI 
SERAPHIM  the  name  of  the  Intelligence  of  Venus.  On  this  Tablet  is  shown  the  meaning  of  the  symbol  of 
Venus  on  the  Tree  of  Life.  It  embraces  all  the  Sephiroth,  and  is  therefore  the  fitting  symbol  of  the  Isis  of 
Nature.  Hence  also  its  circle  is  always  represented  larger  than  that  of  Mercury. 

Hiero: 

Resumes  his  seat. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  Hiereus. 

Heg: 

Hiereus: 

Pract: 

Move  to  West. 

Hiereus: 

On  this  Tablet  (indicating  it)  are  shown  the  Paths  when  arranged  with  DAATH  added  to  the  Sephirotic 
Tree.  It  differs  from  the  other  and  more  usual  attributions.  Furthermore  it  is  not  so  correct,  as  Daath  is  not 
properly  speaking,  a Sephira.  On  this  Tablet  (indicating  it)  is  shown  the  arrangement  of  the  Sephiroth  in 
the  Four  Worlds,  each  Sephira  with  its  own  10  Sephiroth  inscribed  inside,  so  that  the  total  number  is  400, 
the  number  of  Tau  the  last  letter  of  the  alphabet. 

Hiereus: 

Resumes  his  place. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  Tablet  in  South. 

Heg: 

This  is  the  symbolism  of  the  Altar  of  Burnt  Offering  which  King  Solomon  built.  It  was  formed  of  a four- 
fold cube,  20  cubits  square  and  10  feet  high,  10  are  the  principal  parts  which  you  here  see  classified 
above,  as  under  the  Sephiroth,  and  forming  thus  the  Triangle  of  Fire  above  it. 

Heg: 

Leads  Practicus  to  Tablet  in  North. 

Heg: 

This  is  the  symbolism  of  the  Brazen  Sea,  which  King  Solomon  made.  It  was  10  cubits  diameter  answering 
to  the  Sephiroth;  the  height  was  5 cubits  the  number  of  the  letter  Heh.  30  cubits  was  its  circumference,  the 


151 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


10  cubits  multiplied  by  the  Ternary.  Beneath  the  rim  were  300  knots,  the  number  of  the  Holy  letter  Shin 
and  of  the  name  Ruach  Elohim  and  it  stood  upon  the  12  oxen,  answering  to  the  12  Stars  of  the  Crown  of 
Aima,  the  Great  Mother.  It  is  the  synthesis  of  Binah,  containing  the  Waters  of  Creation. 

Heg: 

Places  Candidate  in  a seat  in  West  facing  Hierophant. 

Hiero: 

Returns  to  place. 

Hiero: 

1 now  congratulate  you,  Honored  Frater  (Soror)  on  having  passed  through  the  ceremony  of  Philosophus 
and  in  recognition  thereof,  I confer  upon  you  the  Mystic  title  of  Pharos  llluminans,  which  means  the 
illuminating  Tower  of  Light  and  I give  you  the  symbol  of  ASCH,  which  is  the  Hebrew  word  for  Fire.  And 
as  having  attained  at  length  unto  the  highest  Grade  of  the  First  Order,  and  being  as  it  were,  the  connecting 
link  with  the  Second  Order,  I further  confer  upon  you  the  title  of  respect  of  Honored  Frater(Soror)  and  1 
give  you  the  further  symbol  of  Phrath  or  Euphrates,  the  4th  River. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  In  the  Name  of  Tetragrammaton  Tzabaoth,  I now  proclaim  that  you  have  been  duly  advanced  to 
the  Grade  of  Philosophus  and  that  you  are  Lord  (Lady)  of  the  27th,  28th  and  29th  Paths. 

Hiereus: 

Honored  Frater,  as  a member  of  this  important  Grade,  you  are  eligible  for  the  post  of  Hiereus.  When  a 
vacancy  occurs  you  are  furthermore  expected,  as  having  risen  so  high  in  the  Order,  to  aid  to  your  utmost 
the  members  of  the  Second  Order  in  the  working  of  the  Temple  to  which  you  are  attached.  To  study 
thoroughly  the  mysteries  which  have  been  unfolded  to  your  view,  in  your  progress  from  the  humble 
position  of  a Neophyte.  So  that  yours  may  be  not  the  merely  superficial  knowledge  which  marks  the 
conceited  and  ignorant  man,  but  that  you  may  really  and  thoroughly  understand  what  you  profess  to 
know,  and  not  by  your  ignorance  and  folly  bring  disgrace  on  that  Order  which  has  honored  you  so  far. 
Your  duty  is  also  to  supervise  the  studies  of  weaker  and  less  advanced  brethren,  and  to  make  yourself  as 
far  as  possible  an  ornament  alike  to  your  Temple  and  to  your  Order. 


CLOSING 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Honored  Fraters  and  Sorors,  assist  me  to  close  the  Temple  in  the  Grade  of  Philosophus. 
Honored  Hegemon,  see  that  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

(Done.) 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  Very  Honored  Hierophant  the  Temple  is  properly  guarded. 

Hiero: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Fire.  (Knocks) 

All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

Tetragrammaton  of  Hosts,  Mighty  and  Terrible;  the  Commander  of  the  Ethereal  Armies  art  Thou.  Amen. 
All  salute. 

Hiero: 

Quits  his  throne  and  goes  to  Tablet  of  Fire  in  South. 

All  face  South. 

Hiero: 

Let  us  rehearse  the  prayer  of  the  Salamanders  or  Fire  Spirits.  (Knocks)  Immortal,  Eternal,  Ineffable  and 
uncreated  Father  of  All,  borne  upon  the  Chariot  of  Worlds,  which  ever  roll  in  ceaseless  motion.  Ruler 
over  the  Ethereal  Vastness,  where  the  Throne  of  Thy  Power  is  raised  from  the  summit  of  which  Thine 
eyes  behold  all,  and  Thy  pure  and  Holy  ears  hear  all,  help  us  thy  children,  whom  thou  hast  loved  since  the 
Birth  of  the  Ages  of  Time.  Thy  Majesty  Golden,  Vast  and  Eternal,  shineth  above  the  Heaven  of  Stars; 


152 


VOLUME  SIX 


above  them  art  Thou  exalted,  O Thou  Flashing  Fire.  There  Thou  illuminateth  all  things  with  Thine 
insupportable  Glory,  whence  flow  the  ceaseless  streams  of  splendor  which  nourish  Thine  Infinite  Spirit. 
This  Infinite  Spirit  nourisheth  all,  and  maketh  that  inexhaustable  treasure  of  generation  which  ever 
encompasseth  Thee,  replete  with  the  numberless  forms  wherewith  Thou  hast  filled  it  from  the  beginning. 
From  this  Spirit  arise  those  most  Holy  Kings,  who  are  around  Thy  Throne  and  who  compose  Thy  court.  O 
Universal  Father!  One  and  Alone!  Father  alike  of  Immortals  and  of  Mortals!  Thou  hast  especially  created 
Powers  similar  unto  Thy  thought  Eternal  and  unto  Thy  venerable  Essence.  Thou  hast  established  them 
above  the  Angels  who  announce  Thy  Will  to  the  World.  Lastly,  thou  hast  created  us  as  a Third  Order  in 
our  Elemental  Empire.  There  our  continual  exercise  is  to  praise  and  to  adore  Thy  desires.  There  we 
ceaselessly  burn  with  Eternal  Aspiration  unto  Thee  O Father,  O Mother  of  Mothers,  O Archetype  Eternal 
of  Maternity  and  of  Love,  O Son,  the  flower  of  all  Sons,  Form  of  all  forms,  Soul,  Spirit,  Harmony  and 
Numeral  of  all  Things.  Amen. 

Hiero: 

Making  with  his  scepter  the  banishing  Circle  and  Pentagram  in  the  air  in  front  of  the  Tablet. 

Hiero: 

Depart  ye  in  peace  unto  your  abodes  and  habitations.  May  the  blessing  of  Elohim  be  upon  you.  Be  there 
ever  peace  between  us  and  you  and  be  ye  ready  to  come  when  ye  are  called.  ( Knocks ) 

Hiero: 

Returns  to  place. 

All  face  East. 

Hiero: 

In  the  Name  of  Tetragrammaton  Tzabaoth,  I declare  This  Temple  closed  in  the  Grade  of  Philosophus. 

Hiero: 

(Knocks  3,  3,  1) 

Hiereus: 

( Knocks  3,  3,  1) 

Heg: 

( Knocks  3.  3,  1) 


153 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


154 


VOLUME  SIX 


RITUALS  OF  THE  R.R.  ET  A.C.  WITH 
THOSE  OF  WAITE’S  FELLOWSHIP 


155 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


156 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


VOLUME  SEVEN 

RITUALS  OF  THE  R.R.  ET  A.C.  WITH 
THOSE  OF  THE  WAITES  FELLOWSHIP 


i 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


RITUAL  OF  THE  PORTAL  OF  THE  VAULT  OF  THE  ADEPTI 


$ 


m 


REQUIREMENTS 

Chief  Adept:  White  Cassock,  Yellow  Shoes,  Red  Cloak  of  Hierophant,  Yellow  and  White 
Nemyss,  Rose-Cross  on  Yellow  Collar.  Sceptre  of  five  Elemental  Colours  surmounted  by  Pentagram, 
White  Lamp  and  Brazier  and  Candle. 

Second  Adept:  White  Cassock  and  Collar,  Blue  Shoes,  Blue  and  Orange  Cloak  and  Nemyss, 
Lamen  of  Red  Triangle  in  Green  Pentagram,  Red  Wand  headed  by  Red  Sulphur  Symbol,  Red  Lamp  and 
Incense  Sticks. 

Third  Adept:  White  Cassock,  Blue  Collar,  and  Red  Shoes,  Red  and  Green  Nemyss  and  Cloak, 
Blue  Wand  headed  by  Blue  Salt  Symbol,  Lamen  of  Blue,  Cup  on  Orange  Octagram,  Cup  of  Water. 


2 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Hiereus:  Black  Cassock,  Black  Collar,  Black  and  White  Nemyss,  Red  Shoes  and  Collar,  Sword, 
Lamen  of  Four  Colours  of  Malkuth  with  White  Hexagram,  Salt. 

Hegemon:  Black  Cassock,  White  Cloak,  Red  Shoes,  Yellow  and  Purple  Nemyss,  Mitre -headed 
Sceptre,  Lamen  of  Red  and  Blue  Hexagram  on  White  Ground,  Yellow  Collar,  Rose  Leaves. 

OPENING 

(Chief  Adept  is  behind  the  Veil  in  the  East,  symbolically  in  Tiphareth,  other  Officers  in  their 
Sephirotic  Stations.  Third  Adept  in  the  North  East,  Second  Adept  in  the  South  East.  Hiereus  in  West, 
Hegemon  East  of  Altar.  The  Hall  is  in  Darkness,  the  Elemental  Lamps  unlit,  no  lights  except  those 
burning  behind  the  Veil  and  shaded  candles  for  Officers.  Any  Members  attending  must  give  the  Portal 
Signs  on  entering  the  Temple.  Portal  Members  sit  in  the  North,  full  Adepti  Minores  in  the  South.) 

2nd  Ad: 

(Knock.  All  rise.)  Very  Honoured  Fratres  and  Sorores,  assist  me  to  open  the  Portal  of  the  Vault 
of  the  Adepti.  Honoured  Hiereus,  see  that  the  entrance  is  closed  and  guarded. 

Hiereus: 

Very  Honoured  Fratres  and  Sorores,  in  token  of  our  search  for  the  Light,  give  the  Sign  of  the 
Grade  of  Neophyte.  (All  turn  East  and  stand  in  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer.  From  behind  the  Curtain,  the 
Chief  Adept’s  hand  is  stretched  out,  holding  a white  Lamp  or  Candle.  Chief  Adept  unseen,  gives  the 
Sign  of  Silence,  all  repeat  Sign  as  Light  is  withdrawn.) 

Ch.Ad: 

The  Light  shineth  in  Darkness,  but  the  Darkness  comprehendeth  it  not. 

2nd  Ad: 

The  Dukes  of  Edom  ruled  in  Chaos,  Lords  of  unbalanced  force.  Honoured  Hiereus,  what  is  the 
Symbol  upon  the  Altar? 

Hiereus: 

The  Symbol  of  the  equated  forces  of  the  Four  Elements. 

2nd  Ad: 

Banished  be  the  Power  of  the  Dukes  of  Edom,  and  let  the  Power  of  the  Cross  be  established. 
(Chief  Adept  signs  Cross  with  lighted  candle.  Hiereus  goes  to  East,  begins  Lesser  Banishing  Ritual  of 
Pentagram.  When  he  returns  East  all  Officers  and  Members  make  Qabalistic  cross,  facing  East  and 
repeat  words  with  him.  Hiereus  returns  to  West  and  makes  the  Zelator  Sign.  Hegemon  in  the  East  makes 
the  Theoricus  Sign  and  Knocks.  Third  Adept  in  North  makes  the  Practicus  Sign  and  Knocks.  Second 
Adept  in  South  makes  the  Philosophus  Sign  and  Knocks.) 


3 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Ch.  Ad: 

The  Cross  upon  the  Altar  is  also  a Cross  of  corrosion,  corruption,  disintegration  and  death. 
Therefore,  doth  it  fall  in  the  Paths  of  Death  and  the  Devil.  Unless  in  Hod,  the  Glory  triumpheth  over 
matter  and  the  Corruptible  putteth  on  Incorruption,  thus  attaining  unto  the  beauty  of  Tiphareth;  unless  in 
Netzach,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  Victory  and  the  Transformer  becometh  the  Transmuter  into  Pure 
Alchemic  Gold.  Except  ye  be  born  of  Water  and  the  Spirit,  ye  cannot  enter  the  Kingdom  of  God.  What 
then  Very  Honoured  Third  Adept,  is  the  additional  Mystic  Title  bestowed  upon  a Philosophus  as  a link 
with  the  Second  Order? 

3rd  Ad: 

Phrath,  the  Fourth  River  of  Eden. 

Hiereus: 

Tau. 

Heg: 

Resh. 

3rd  Ad. 

Peh. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Very  Honoured  Second  Adept,  what  may  be  added  to  this  Word? 

2nd  Ad: 

Kaph  (Knock) 

Hiereus: 

Tau  (Knock) 

Heg: 

Resh  (Knock) 

3rd  Ad: 

Peh  (Knock) 

Ch.  Ad: 

The  whole  Word  is  Paroketh,  which  is  the  Veil  of  the  Tabernacle.  (All  make  Signs  of  Rending  of 
the  Veil.) 

Ch.  Ad: 


4 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


(Knocks)  In  and  by  that  Word,  I permit  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepti  to  be 


5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


opened.  (Second  and  Third  Adepts  draw  aside  curtains  revealing  Chief  Adept  who  rises  with  Pentacle 
and  taper  in  left  hand,  Sceptre  in  right.)  Let  us  establish  the  Dominion  of  the  Mystic  ETH  over  the  Four 
Elements.  (Chief  Adept  faces  East.  All  face  East.  Chief  Adept  having  descended  from  the  Dais  and  taken 
his  position  in  front  of  Air  Tablet,  Hegemon  stands  behind  Chief  bearing  Rose  Leaves.  All  make 
Qabalistic  Cross.  Hegemon  places  Rose  Leaves  before  Air  Tablet  and  stands  in  the  Theoricus  Sign. 
Chief  lights  the  Lamps  as  he  goes  round.  Chief  Adept  invokes  Air  and  lights  Lamp.  Hegemon  takes  Rose 
Leaves  to  Altar  and  puts  them  on  Air  arm  of  Cross  and  remains  East  of  Altar  facing  West.  Chief  Adept 
goes  to  South.  Second  Adept  comes  behind,  places  sticks  of  incense  before  Tablet  and  stand  in 
Philosophus  Sign.  Chief  Adept  invokes  Fire  and  lights  Lamp  as  before.  Second  Adept  takes  incense  to 
Altar  and  places  it  on  Fire  arm  of  the  Cross  and  stands  at  South  of  Altar  looking  North. 

Chief  Adept  goes  West  lights  Lamp.  Third  Adept  stands  behind  him,  places  Cup  before  Tablet 
and  stands  in  Sign  of  Practicus.  Chief  Adept  invokes  Water.  Third  Adept  takes  Cup  to  Altar,  places  it  on 
Water  arm  of  Cross  and  stands  in  Sign  of  Practicus.  Chief  Adept  goes  North.  Lights  Lamp,  Hiereus 
stands  behind  him,  places  Salt  before  Tablet  and  stands  in  Zelator  Sign.  Chief  Adept  invokes  Earth. 
Hiereus  takes  Salt  to  the  Altar,  places  it  on  Earth  arm  of  Cross  and  stands  at  the  North  of  Altar.  Chief 
Adept  completes  circle  in  East,  then  circumambulates  with  Sol  to  West  of  Altar,  having  now  lit  all  the 
Elemental  Lamps.)  In  the  Great  Name  YOD  HE  VAU  HE.  (All  give  Neophyte  Signs  towards  Altar,  and 
then  stand  in  Elemental  Signs.  Chief  Adept  makes  Invoking  Spirit  Pentagrams  with  Deity  Names 
EHEIEH  and  AGLA  closing  with  the  Qabalistic  Cross.  He  moves  round  the  Altar  to  East  faces  West 
lays  Pentacle  over  Cross.  Holds  Candle  and  Wand  on  high.) 

May  the  Cross  of  the  Four  Elements  become  truly  purified  and  planted  in  Incorruption. 
Wherefore  in  the  Name  of  YOD  HE  VAU  HE  and  in  the  Concealed  Name  YEHESHUAH,  do  I add  the 
power  of  the  Pentagram  constituting  the  Glorified  Body  of  Osiris,  the  Sign  of  the  Microcosmos. 

(All  lights  are  turned  up.  Chief  Adept  lays  Pentacle  for  a moment  on  Cross  then  hangs  it  on  hook 
in  centre  of  Hall,  raises  Sceptre  and  Candle  on  high,  and  invokes:) 

OL  SONUF  VA-ORSAGI  GOHO  IADA  BALATA.  ELEXARPEH  COMANANU 
TABITOM.  ZODAKARA,  EKA  ZODAKARE  OD  ZODAMERANU.  ODO  KIKLE  QAA  PIAPE 
PIAMOEL  OD  VAOAN. 

(Chief  Adept  returns  to  Dais.  Second  and  Third  follow  and  stand  by  Pillars.  Hiereus  and 
Hegemon  face  East,  North  and  South  of  Altar.)  Let  us  adore  the  Lord  and  King  of  Hosts. 

Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

Holy  art  Thou  Whom  Nature  hath  not  formed; 


6 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Holy  art  Thou  the  Vast  and  the  Mighty  One, 

Lord  of  the  Light  and  of  the  Darkness. 

By  the  Word  Paroketh  and  in  the  Sign  of  the  Rending  of  the  Veil,  I declare  that  the  Portal  of  the 
Vault  of  the  Adepti  has  been  opened. 

Ch.  Ad: 

(Knocks  4,  1) 

2nd  Ad: 

(Knocks  4,  1) 

3rd  Ad: 

(Knocks  4,  1) 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks  4,  1) 

Heg: 

(Knocks  4,  1) 

(He  circumambulates  once,  then  returns  to  seat.  All  take  seats,  after  the  Elements  are  replaced  in 
Four  Quarters  by  respective  Officers.) 

THE  RITUAL  OF  THE  CROSS  AND  FOUR  ELEMENTS 


Ch.  Ad: 

(Concealed  behind  the  Veil)  The  Portal  symbolically  opened  for  the  Order,  is  yet  closed  to  the 
unprepared  Candidate.  (Elemental  Lamps  are  veiled.  Temple  in  darkness  save  at  East.) 

2nd.  Ad: 

V.H.  Fratres  and  Sorores,  our  Honoured  Frater  (XYZ)  having  been  a member  of  the  Grade  of 
Philosophus  for  the  space  of  7 months  and  having  passed  the  five-fold  examination  prescribed  for 
admission  to  the  Second  Order,  has  been  duly  approved.  I hold  a Dispensation  from  the  G.  H.  Chiefs  of 
the  Second  Order  to  permit  him  to  approach  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepti.  V.  H.  3rd  Adept,  see 
that  he  is  duly  prepared  by  wearing  the  Sash  of  the  Philosophus  Grade,  admit  him,  and  having  examined 
him  in  his  knowledge,  having  placed  around  his  neck  the  Admission  Badge,  the  Grip,  Sign,  Words,  etc. 
of  the  Philosophus  Grade  and  of  the  Word  Phrath  before  you  instruct  him  in  the  necessary  Knock. 
(Lights  are  extinguished.  2nd.  Ad.  stands  before  the  Veil.  Hiereus  and  Heg.  bar  the  way  near  the  door. 
3rd  Adept,  having  prepared  Philosophus  opens  door  showing  Darkness  but  for  faint  Light  in  the  East, 
and  brings  Philosophus  just  within  the  door.) 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

The  Realm  of  Chaos  and  of  Ancient  Night,  ere  ever  the  Aeons  were,  when  there  was  neither 
Heaven  or  Earth,  nor  was  there  any  Sea,  when  naught  was,  save  the  Shape  Unluminous,  formless  and 
void. 


Hiereus: 

To  and  fro  in  the  Deeps,  swayed  the  coils  of  the  Dragon  with  8 Heads  and  11  Horns.  Eleven 
were  the  curses  of  Mount  Ebal,  eleven  the  Rulers  of  the  Qlippoth,  and  at  their  head  were  the  Dual 
Contending  Forces.  (Hiereus  and  Heg.  lower  weapons  and  step  back.) 

2nd  Ad: 

(Faces  East)  Then  breathed  forth  Tho-oth  out  of  the  Unutterable  Abyss  the  Word!  Then 

stood  forth  Tho-oth  in  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer,  on  the  Threshold  of  the  Hall  of  Time  as 

Time  was  born  of  the  Eternal.  (Gives  Neophyte  Sign)  So  stood  Tho-oth  in  the  Power  of  the 

Word,  giving  forth  Light,  while  the  Aeons  that  were  unbegotten  unfolded  before  him. 

(Philosophus  directed  to  give  Neophyte  Sign.) 

2nd  Ad: 

And  Elohim  said  Let  there  be  Light.  (The  hand  of  the  Ch.  Ad.  hands  out  the  Candle.  2nd  Ad. 
receives  it  and  gives  Sign  of  Silence.  Philosophus  is  directed  to  make  Sign.  3rd  Ad.  leaves  Philosophus 
comes  East.  Takes  Candle  and  returns  with  So!.  He  holds  Candle  before  Philosophus  and  takes  Banner 
of  West  in  left  hand.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Honoured  Frater,  what  was  the  Title  you  received  in  the  Grade  of  Philosophus? 

Phil: 

(Unprompted)  Pharos  Illuminans. 

3rd  Ad: 

(Gives  Philosophus  Candle  and  takes  his  station  on  the  left  hand  of  Philosophus.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Honoured  Frater  Pharos  Illuminans,  we  are  here  assembled  to  open  for  you  the  Portal  of  the 
Vault  of  the  Adepti,  which  admits  you  to  the  Second  Degree  and  brings  you  to  the  Threshold  of  the  Inner 
or  Second  Order.  But  because  of  the  increased  influence  over  the  Members  of  the  Order  that  such 
advancement  necessarily  confers,  and  because  of  the  increased  power  for  good  or  evil  that  will  follow  if, 
with  steadfast  will  and  aspiration,  you  take  this  step  in  essence  as  well  as  in  form,  it  is  needful  that  you 
take  further  pledges,  which  however,  as  in  the  previous  Degree,  contain  nothing  contrary  to  your  civil, 
moral  or  religious  duties.  Are  you  willing  to  take  these  pledges? 


8 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Phil: 

I am  willing. 

2nd  Ad: 

Then  you  will  take  in  your  right  hand  the  Banner  of  the  West  (3rd  Ad.  gives  it  to  him)  and  place 
your  left  hand  in  that  of  the  Very  Honoured  3rd  Adept,  who  is  the  living  Symbol  of  the  Black  Pillar 
which  ruleth  in  the  Outer  Order,  and  touch  the  corresponding  Emblem,  the  Black  Sash  of  restriction,  on 
your  breast,  and  thus  bind  yourself  while  raising  the  Light  which  you  hold,  in  witness  of  your  pledge. 
(Philosophus  raises  right  hand  holding  Banner  and  Light,  while  his  left  hand,  held  by  3rd  Ad.  touches 
Sash.) 


2nd  Ad: 

Lirstly,  do  you  pledge  yourself  never  to  reveal  the  Secrets  and  Mysteries  of  these  Paths  and  of 
this  Ceremony,  either  to  the  outer  and  uninitiated  world,  or  to  a Member  of  the  1st  Order,  save  in  full 
Temple  and  with  due  sanction. 

Phil: 

Ido. 

2nd  Ad: 

Secondly,  do  you  further  solemnly  promise  to  use  whatever  practical  knowledge  you  may  now, 
or  at  any  future  time  possess,  for  a good  end  alone? 

Phil: 

Ido. 

2nd  Ad: 

Thirdly,  do  you  also  promise  to  regard  all  the  knowledge  imparted  to  you  as  a trust,  given  into 
your  hands,  not  for  your  selfish  advantage,  but  for  the  service  of  all  mankind,  that  the  ancient  tradition  of 
Initiation  be  kept  pure  and  undefiled,  and  the  Light  be  not  lost  for  those  that  seek  it  in  this  Path? 

Phil: 

Ido. 

2nd  Ad: 

And  lastly,  do  you  solemnly  promise  to  exercise  brotherly  love,  charity  and  forbearance  towards 
the  Members  of  the  Order,  neither  slandering,  backbiting  nor  reviling  them,  whether  you  have  cause  for 
the  same  or  not,  but  uniting  with  them  to  form  a fabric  of  mutual  confidence  and  support;  and  do  you 
further  undertake,  not  to  be  a stirrer  up  of  strife,  of  schism,  or  of  opposition  to  the  Chiefs,  but  rather  to 
uphold  their  authority  in  all  loyalty? 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Phil: 

Ido. 

2nd  Ad: 

Then,  realising  the  Cross  about  your  neck,  you  will  lift  up  your  right  hand,  holding  the  Banner 
and  the  Light  and  say:  I undertake  to  maintain  the  Veil  between  the  First  and  the  Second  Orders,  and 
may  the  Powers  of  the  Elements  bear  witness  to  my  pledges.  (Done.  Philosophus  repeating  words  as 
directed.  3rd  Ad.  leaves  Philosophus  and  returns  to  his  place,  having  replaced  Banner  of  West.) 

2nd  Ad: 

The  Symbol  of  the  1st  Grade  of  Neophyte  is  0-0.  To  the  first  0 is  attached  a Circle,  to  the 
second,  a Square.  The  union  of  the  circle  and  the  square  hath  many  meanings,  of  which  one  must  be  put 
before  you,  for  this  you  must  accomplish  in  your  own  person,  ere  you  can  advance  further.  For  if  in  the 
mystic  sphere  of  Truth,  the  way  of  Initiation  may  be  trodden  alone,  yet  in  another  Sphere,  it  hath  a three- 
fold aspect.  Part  that  can  be  given  to  man  from  without,  part  that  can  be  attained  by  man  himself,  part 
that  can  only  come  from  the  Divine.  Now,  in  the  Order,  you  were  given  intellectual  teaching,  and  won 
your  Grades  in  tests  of  what  was  taught.  Here,  you  must  prove  that  you  have  truly  attained  thus  far  of 
your  own  strength,  and  after,  you  may  progress  by  the  higher  Soul  within  you.  Round  your  neck,  you 
wear  the  Symbol  of  the  Cross  of  Four  Elements,  equilibriated  and  equated.  Establish  it  firmly  in  the 
Sphere  of  your  own  being  and  advance  with  courage.  (Hiereus  and  Hegemon  bar  the  way  as  in  Zelator 
Grade.) 


Hiereus: 

Give  me  the  Signs  and  Words  of  the  Grade  of  Zelator.  (Done.  Hegemon  returns  to  place.) 

Hiereus: 

Give  me  also  the  Grip  of  the  First  Order.  (Done.  He  takes  Philosophus  to  North  directing  him  to 
take  up  Salt  from  before  Earth  Tablet.  They  face  North,  Hiereus  makes  a cross  over  Salt  with  Sword  then 
stands  in  the  Zelator  Sign  while  Philosophus  circumambulates  with  Sol  repeating  Earth  Names.) 

Phil: 

Adonai  Ha  Aretz.  Emor  Dial  Hectega.  Auriel.  Ic  Zod  Heh  Chal.  (He  returns  to  North.  Hiereus 
makes  Earth  Pentagram  over  Salt.  Philosophus  reveals  Lamp.  Hiereus  takes  Philosophus  to  Altar  and 
directs  him  to  place  Salt  at  North  side  of  Altar.  Hiereus  takes  him  to  diagrams  in  West.) 

Hiereus: 

The  Cross  of  Four  Triangles  called  the  Maltese  Cross,  is  a Symbol  of  the  Four  Elements  in 
balanced  disposition.  It  is  here  given  in  the  colours  of  the  King’s  scale,  and  is  also  assigned  to  the  Four 
Sephiroth  ruling  the  Grades  of  the  Outer.  Earth  to  Malkuth,  Air  to  Yesod,  Water  to  Hod  and  Fire  to 


10 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Netzach.  It  is  again,  the  Cross  which  heads  the  Praemonstrator’ s Wand,  who  represents  the  Sephira 
Chesed,  the  Fourth  Sephira.  Four  is  also  the  Number  of  Jupiter,  whose  Path  unites  Chesed  to  Netzach. 
The  Cross  is  therefore  a fit  Emblem  for  the  Grade  of  Philosophus.  In  this  diagram  are  represented  the 
Circle,  the  Point,  the  Line,  the  Cross,  the  Square  and  the  Cube.  For  the  Circle  is  the  Abyss,  the 
Nothingness,  the  AIN.  The  Point  is  Kether.  Now,  the  Point  has  no  dimension,  but  in  moving,  it  traces  the 
Line.  This  gives  the  first  number,  Unity,  yet  therein  lies  duality  unmanifest,  for  two  Points  mark  its  ends. 
The  movement  of  the  line  maketh  the  Plane  or  Square.  The  motion  of  the  Point  at  angles  to  its  first 
direction  and  intersecting  it  maketh  the  Cross.  So  therefore,  are  the  Square  and  the  Cross  but  one 
Symbol,  deriving  from  the  Circle  and  the  Point.  Below,  is  shown  the  Occult  Symbol  of  Malkuth,  the 
Tenth  Sephira.  It  is  in  Pour  parts,  corresponding  to  the  Maltese  Cross.  They  are  Lire  of  Earth,  Water  of 
Earth,  Air  of  Earth,  Earth  of  Earth,  as  is  indicated  by  the  Symbol.  They  correspond  to  the  Four  Grades  of 
the  First  Order,  which  in  one  sense,  quitteth  not  Malkuth,  being  the  Grades  of  the  Four  Lowest  Sephiroth 
of  Malkuth  in  Assiah.  Upon  them,  is  surcharged  a white  Hexagram  in  a Circle.  The  6 and  the  4 make  10, 
the  number  of  Malkuth  on  the  Tree.  The  Hexagram  is  also  the  Sign  of  the  Macrocosm,  of  Tiphareth,  and 
of  the  Six  Upper  Sephiroth,  wherefore  here  it  is  white,  Spirit  ruling  over  matter.  Six  is  a perfect  number, 
for  its  whole  equals  the  sum  of  its  parts.  Six  are  the  middle  points  of  the  planes  bounding  a cube,  which 
derives  from  the  square,  and  from  the  Cross,  if  the  centre  point  moves.  In  these  numbers  and  figures  are 
hid  many  revelations.  Remember  that  the  whole  number  of  Malkuth  is  496,  which  is  again  a perfect 
number.  Malkuth  must  then  be  equated  and  perfected  by.  the  6 ruling  the  4,  and  the  link  between  6 and  4 
is  the  number  of  the  Pentagram. 

2nd  Ad: 

Having  achieved  the  entry  into  Malkuth,  it  is  needful  that  you  should  pass  through  the  Path  of 
Tau,  the  dark  Path  of  the  Astral  Plane.  Go,  therefore,  to  the  Tablet  of  the  East. 

(Phil,  goes  to  East,  Hiereus  and  Hegemon  bar  the  way,  points  of  implements  downwards  and 
touching.  Hegemon  demands  Theoricus  Sign  and  Words.  Hiereus  returns  to  place.  Hegemon  leads 
Philosophus  to  Tablet,  gives  Philosophus  rose  leaves,  makes  Cross  over  bowl  and  directs  Philosophus  to 
circumambulate  repeating  Names.  Hegemon  stands  in  Theoricus  Sign  while  Philosophus  traverses  Path 
of  Tau  in  the  Names  of  Shaddai  El  Chai,  Raphael,  ORO  IBAH  AOZPI  and  Bataivah.  Philosophus 
returns  to  East.  Hegemon  makes  invoking  Pentagram  and  directs  Philosophus  to  uncover  Lamp. 
Hegemon  takes  Philosophus  to  Altar  and  directs  him  to  put  Rose  leaves  at  East  side,  then  standing  East 
of  the  Altar  in  Yesod,  Hegemon  shows  Great  Hermetic  Arcanum.) 

Heg: 

This  Symbol  represents  the  Great  Hermetic  Arcanum.  The  feet  of  the  Figure  rest  upon  the  Earth 
and  the  Sea.  In  the  Hand  are  represented  the  hot  and  moist  natures,  symbolised  by  the  torch  and  the  horn 
of  water.  These  are  further  strengthened  by  the  Solar  and  fiery  Emblems  of  the  King  and  Lion,  and  the 
Luna  and  watery  emblems  of  the  Queen  and  Dolphin.  Above  the  whole  figure  rise  the  wings  of  the  aerial 
nature,  the  Reconciler  between  the  Fire  and  the  Water.  Compare  this  Symbol  with  the  Angel  described  in 
the  10th  Chapter  of  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John.  And  I saw  another  mighty  Angel  come  down  from 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


heaven  clothed  with  a cloud;  and  a rainbow  was  upon  his  head,  and  his  face  as  it  were,  the  Sun,  and  his 
feet  were  as  pillars  of  fire,  and  he  had  in  his  hand  a little  book  open;  and  he  set  his  right  foot  upon  the 
Sea  and  his  left  foot  upon  the  Earth,  and  he  cried  with  a loud  voice  as  when  a lion  roareth,  the  Green 
Lion,  the  Path  of  Leo  above  Tiphareth,  referring  to  Teth  and  when  he  cried,  seven  thunders  uttered  their 
voices,  seven  Aeons,  represented  under  the  regimen  of  the  Planets.  The  Dragon  issuing  from  the  cave 
represents  volcanic  fires.  (Heg.  leads  Phil,  once  round,  and  hands  him  over  to  Hiereus  in  the  North  and 
returns  to  place.) 

Hiereus: 

This  is  the  Image  of  the  Vision  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  which  was  showed  you  in  the  passage  of  the 
27th  Path,  leading  to  the  Grade  of  Philosophus.  Thou,  0 King,  sawest  and  beheld  a great  image.  This 
Great  Image,  whose  brightness  was  excellent  stood  before  thee  and  the  form  thereof  was  terrible.  This 
Image’s  head  was  pure  gold,  his  breast  and  his  arms  were  silver,  his  belly  and  his  thighs  were  brass,  his 
legs  of  iron  and  his  feet  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay.  Thou  sawest  till  that  a stone  was  cut  out  without 
hands,  which  smote  the  Image  upon  its  feet,  which  were  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay.  And  brake  them  to 
pieces.  Then  was  the  iron,  the  clay,  the  brass,  the  silver  and  the  Gold  broken  to  pieces  together  and 
became  like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing  floors;  and  the  wind  carried  them  away  and  no  place  was 
found  for  them;  and  the  stone  that  smote  the  image  became  a great  mountain  and  filled  the  whole  earth. 
Thou,  0 King,  art  a King  of  Kings,  for  the  God  in  heaven  hath  given  unto  thee  (makes  Qabalistic  Cross) 
the  Kingdom,  the  Power  and  the  Glory! 

Thou  art  this  head  of  Gold,  (to  Phil.)  Thou  art  this  head  of  Gold!  Thy  head  represents  in  thee  the 
dominion  of  the  Divine  ruling  over  the  rest  of  the  body.  The  Silver  is  the  world  of  the  heart,  the  brass  is 
the  material  passion,  the  iron  is  the  firm  purpose,  and  the  feet,  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay,  are  the 
mingled  strength  and  infirmity  of  the  natural  man.  And  the  Stone  made  without  hands  is  the  Eternal 
Stone  of  the  Wise,  which  will  become  the  Mountain  of  Initiation,  whereby  the  whole  Earth  shall  be  filled 
with  the  knowledge  of  God.  (Hiereus  takes  Philosophus  to  second  diagram.) 

Hiereus: 

This  Tablet  shows  the  symbolic  manner  in  which  certain  names  have  been  used  by  our  ancient 
brethren.  You  will  note  that  the  initials  of  this  sentence  make  the  Latin  word  Vitriolum,  Sulphuric  acid. 
Furthermore,  the  word  Vitriol,  Sulphur,  and  Mercury  each  consist  of  seven  letters  answering  to  the 
alchemic  powers  of  the  seven  Planets.  The  initials  of  the  following  sentence  in  Latin,  the  subtil  fluid,  the 
Light  of  the  Earth,  make  the  word  S.A.L.T.salt,  and  further,  the  four  words  of  the  sentence  answer  to  the 
four  Elements: 

Subtilis,  Air;  Aqua,  Water;  Lux,  Fire;  and  Terra,  Earth.  And  the  four  words  united  yield  20 
letters,  that  is,  the  product  of  four,  the  number  of  the  Elements,  multiplied  by  Five,  the  number  of  the 
Pentagram.  The  words  Fiat  Lux,  meaning  Let  there  by  Light,  consist  of  7 letters.  The  letters  of  Fiat  form 
the  initials  of  Flatis,  Air;  Aqua,  Water;  Ignus,  Fire;  and  Terra,  Earth.  (Hegemon  goes  to  South).  Which 
four  names  again  yield  20  letters  as  in  the  previous  case.  And  the  word  Lux  is  formed  from  the  angles  of 
the  Cross,  LVX.  (He  leads  Philosophus  once  round  and  then  to  Hegemon  who  awaits  them  in  the  South.) 


12 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Heg: 

These  are  the  Seven  Palaces  of  Holiness  of  the  Briatic  World.  The  first  is  the  Palace  of  the  Holy 
of  Holies  answering  to  Kether,  Chokmah  and  Binah,  and  the  Divine  Name  EL.  The  second  is  the  Palace 
of  Love,  answering  to  Chesed  and  the  Divine  Name  MATZPATZ  (Mem,  Tzaddi,  Peh,  Tzaddi),  which  is 
a Temurah  of  Tetragrammaton.  The  third  is  the  Palace  of  Merit,  answering  to  Geburah,  and  the  Divine 
Name  YEHEVID  (Yod,  Heh,  Vau,  Daleth).  The  fourth  is  the  Palace  of  Benevolence,  answering  to 
Tiphareth  and  TETRAGRAMMATON.  The  fifth  is  the  Palace  of  the  Substance  of  Heaven,  answering  to 
Netzach  and  ELOHIM.  The  sixth  is  the  Palace  of  Severity  answering  to  Hod  and  MATZPATZ.  The 
seventh  is  the  Palace  of  Crystal  Whiteness  answering  to  Yesod  and  Malkuth,  and  the  Divine  Name  YAH 
and  ADONAI.  But  the  synthesis  of  these  Holy  Names  is  to  be  found  in  the  word  TAKLITH  which  is 
Perfection.  (Points  to  another  Tablet  in  the  North). 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Heg: 

The  Seraphim  in  the  vision  of  Isaiah  are  described  as  having  six  wings:  With  twain  He  covered 
his  face,  and  with  twain  He  covered  his  feet,  and  with  twain  He  did  fly.  That  is,  his  synthesis  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Hexagram  and  in  the  idea  of  the  Seven,  more  especially  dominating  the  planetary  region. 
But  the  Kerubim  of  Ezekiel  have  each  4 faces,  those  of  the  Lion,  the  Bull,  the  Man  and  the  Eagle 
counterchanged  with  each  other  by  revolution,  whence  the  symbolic  forms  of  the  wheels  beside  them, 
wherein  was  the  Spirit;  and  with  two  of  the  wings  they  covered  their  bodies  and  two  were  stretched 
upwards,  one  to  another.  So  the  synthesis  of  the  Kerubim  is  found  in  the  revolving  Cross,  in  the 
Pentagram,  and  in  the  idea  of  one  Spirit  dominating  the  four  Elements.  But  the  Kerubim  of  St.  John’s 
vision  in  the  Apocalypse  are  uncompounded,  having  single  heads,  but  they  have  six  wings  and  thus  unite 
the  powers  of  the  seven  with  the  four.  And  their  cry  is  similar  to  that  of  the  Seraphim  of  Isaiah:  Holy, 
Holy,  Holy. 

(Hegemon  returns  to  place.  2nd  and  3rd  Ad.  bar  way  in  S.W.  Ask  for  Practicus  Words.  3rd  Ad. 
comes  forward  and  conducts  Philosophus  to  West.  He  gives  Philosophus  cup  of  Water,  directs 
Philosophus  to  go  around  repeating  the  Words  while  he  remains  standing  in  the  Practicus  Sign. 
Philosophus  returns  to  West.  3rd  Ad.  makes  invoking  Pentagram  of  Water  over  Cup.  Philosophus 
removes  shade  from  Light.  3rd  Ad.  takes  him  to  Altar  where  he  places  cup  in  the  West.  2nd  Ad.  and  3rd 
Ad.  bar  way  and  ask  for  Philosophus  Words.  2nd  Ad.  comes  forward  and  conducts  Philosophus  to  South. 
3rd  Ad.  remaining  at  Altar  in  Practicus  Sign,  while  Hiereus  and  Hegemon  come  to  North  and  East  of 
Altar  and  stand  in  Grade  Signs.  2nd  Ad.  in  South  gives  Philosophus  incense,  makes  a Cross  over  it. 
Philosophus  walks  around  repeating  Philosophus  Words  while  2nd  Ad.  stands  in  Philosophus  Sign. 
Philosophus  returns  South  removes  shade.  2nd  Ad.  takes  him  to  Altar,  directs  him  to  place  Incense  at 
South.  He  takes  Cross  from  Philosophus’  neck  and  places  it  in  the  midst  of  the  Four  Elements. 
Philosophus  is  directed  to  stand  West  of  Altar  in  Neophyte  Sign.  3rd  Ad.  behind  him.  The  four  Officers 
in  Grade  Signs.) 

Hiereus: 

From  the  centre  outwards,  so  moveth  the  point  as  it  traceth  the  line  and  the  Cross.  Equated  and 
equilibriated  lie  here  the  Four  Elements  of  the  body  of  Osiris  slain. 

2nd  Ad: 

May  the  corrosive  Cross  return  upon  itself,  from  without  inward  from  the  Four  Quarters  to  the 
Center,  and  become  by  sacrifice  and  transmutation,  an  offering  acceptable,  a body  glorified.  (Chief 
Adept  unseen  sounds  gongs  once.) 

2nd  Ad: 

(To  Phil.)  You  will  now  quit  the  Temple  for  a short  time,  and  on  your  return  the  Ceremony  of 
your  advance  will  be  proceeded  with.  (Philosophus  gives  Sign  of  Silence  and  is  led  out  by  Hiereus.) 


14 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


RITE  OF  THE  PENTAGRAM  AND  THE  FIVE  PATHS 


Temple  arranged  as  in  Diagram.  2nd  Ad.  sits  on  Dais  at  S.E.  3rd  Ad.  sits  on  Dais  to  N.E. 
Altar  in  Yesod  under  hanging  Pentagram.  On  it  are  the  4 Elemental  Emblems,  Incense,  Cup,  Rose 
Leaves,  and  Salt.  In  middle,  Greek  Cross  of  5 squares.  Hegemon  West  of  Altar  facing  West. 
Hiereus  in  West  facing  East.  Admission  Badge,  Lamen  of  Hiereus.  Temple  lighted  as  at  end  of  Part 
One. 


2nd  Ad: 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


3rd  Ad: 

Heg: 

Hiereus: 

(Each  Knocks  once.) 

(Ch.  Ad.  parts  curtain,  makes  Pentagram  with  Torch,  knocks  and  withdraws.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Hon.  Hiereus,  you  have  my  permission  to  present  the  Philosophus  with  the  necessary  admission 
Badge.  Instruct  him  in  the  proper  alarm  and  admit  him. 

(Hiereus  salutes,  makes  Qabalistic  Cross  and  goes  out.  He  gives  Lamen  to  Philosophus  who 
knocks  five  times.  Hegemon  opens  door.  Philosophus  enters,  makes  Qabalistic  Cross.  Hegemon  returns 
to  place.  Hiereus  takes  Philosophus  to  West  and  points  out  Diagram  of  Malkuth.) 

Hiereus: 

Herein  has  been  established  the  Equated  Cross,  which  is  ruler  over  the  Kingdom  of  Matter.  This 
Symbol  may  be  found  even  upon  the  crowns  of  ‘the  Kings  of  this  Earth.  (Hands  Philosophus  Tau  Portal.) 
The  Letter  Tau  leads  from  the  Airy  quarter  of  Malkuth  into  Yesod.  Air  is  uppermost  in  the  Symbol  as  in 
the  Planet  Earth  where  the  atmosphere  is  furthest  from  the  Core.  Moreover,  the  Letter  Tau  signifieth  the 
Cross,  the  impact  of  Spirit  upon  matter.  My  Lamen  is  given  you  as  your  Badge,  for  I am  the  Ruler  in 
Malkuth,  and  the  Guardian  against  the  underworld,  lam  also  Lord  of  the  Path  Tau,  the  link  between  the 
first  and  second  degrees,  and  also  between  the  Outer  and  the  Inner.  This  Path  of  Tau,  dark  and  full  of 
mystery,  under  the  presidency  of  Saturn  and  the  Tarot  Key  of  the  Universe,  leads,  as  you  have  learnt  in 
the  Theoricus  Grade,  through  the  Astral  Plane.  Therefore,  in  the  Ritual  of  the  32nd  Path,  you  were 
passed  by  the  Four  Kerubic  Stations’,  as  a foreshadowing  of  the  Rites  of  the  Cross,  the  full  completion 
of  the  First  Order  which  you  have  now  accomplished.  Having  traversed  the  Path  of  Tau,  the  darkness  of 
the  Astral  Plane  and  of  the  Black  Pillar,  stand  firm  in  Yesod,  that  the  Black  Pillar  may  become  the 
White.  (Hiereus  takes  away  Tau  after  leading  Philosophus  to  Hegemon  at  Altar.  Hegemon  rises  but 
stands  between  Philosophus  and  the  Altar,  so  that  Philosophus  does  not  too  clearly  apprehend  the  change 
of  Symbols.) 

Heg: 

Before  you,  in  the  East,  are  the  Five  Portals  of  the  2 1st,  24th,  25th,  26th  and  23rd  Paths.  Five 
will  divide  the  Number  of  the  Letter  of  each  of  them,  as  it  will  divide  without  remainder  that  of  every 
Path  from  Yod  20th,  to  Tau,  the  32nd.  The  Five  Paths  here  visible  are  assigned  to  Mem,  Water;  Ayin, 
Capricornus,  an  Earthy  Sign;  Samekh,  Sagittarius,  a Fiery  Sign;  Nun,  Scorpio,  a Watery  Sign,  but  in  its 
highest  aspect  also  a Ruler  of  Fire;  and  Kaph,  Jupiter,  which  Planet  is  akin  to  Spirit,  and  rules  especially 
Aspiration.  Thus  both  in  number  and  in  significance  these  Planets  jointly  set  forth  the  eternal  symbol  of 
the  Pentagram.  This  Symbol  must  now  be  established  wherefore  advancing  by  the  Kerubic  Path  of 
Aquarius  approach  the  highest  in  Netzach.  (Flegemon  leads  Philosophus  to  foot  of  Dais  to  2nd  Ad. 


16 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


before  Kaph  and  Nun.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Wherefore  do  you  stand  at  the  base  of  the  White  Pillar,  being  but  Lord  of  the  First  Degree? 

Phil: 

(Prompted)  I seek  the  Path  of  Kaph,  the  Path  of  Aspiration. 

Hierens: 

(Knocks)  Beware.  Temerity  is  not  courage,  Lord  of  the  First  Degree.  Remember  the  warning  of 
the  Tower  struck  by  Lightning  that  was  revealed  in  the  highest  Path  you  have  yet  adventured.  As  a house 
built  upon  the  Sand  cannot  endure,  so  without  the  strength  of  Geburah  the  height  of  Chesed  cannot  be 
scaled.  Stay,  therefore,  ere  your  limbs  be  broken  upon  the  Wheel. 

2nd  Ad: 

The  Portal  of  Kaph  is  barred,  yet  it  is  well  to  aspire,  though  it  may  be  folly  to  attempt.  This  Path 
is  governed  by  the  Wheel  of  Life  and  Death,  and  hard  it  is  to  be  freed  from  that  Wheel. 

Phil: 

(Prompted  by  Heg.)  Let  me  seek  then  the  Path  of  Nun. 

2nd  Ad: 

It  is  open  to  you,  unto  the  limits  of  your  strength.  (Hegemon  returns  to  Altar.  2nd  Ad.  guides 
Philosophus  to  West  Hiereus  bars  way.) 

Hiereus: 

In  the  Power  of  Typhon  the  Destroyer,  and  of  Death  the  Transformer,  stand.  (Knocks.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Thus  far  and  no  farther  is  it  permitted  to  penetrate  into  the  Path  of  Nun.  The  mysteries  may  now 
partially  be  revealed  unto  you.  (2nd  Ad.  takes  Philosophus  to  Tarot  Key  of  Death.) 

2nd  Ad: 

The  13th  Key  of  Tarot  represents  the  figure  of  a Skeleton,  upon  which  some  portions  of  flesh 
still  remain.  In  a field  he  is  reaping  off  with  the  Scythe  of  Death  the  fresh  vegetation  which  springs  from 
corrupting  bodies  buried  therein,  fragments  of  which  such  as  hands,  heads  and  feet  appear  above  the  soil. 
Bones  also  are  strewn  upon  the  surface.  One  of  the  heads  wears  a kingly  crown;  another  is  apparently 
that  of  a person  of  little  note,  showing  that  Death  is  the  equalizer  of  all  conditions.  The  five  extremities, 
the  head,  hands  and  feet,  allude  to  the  powers  of  the  number  five,  the  Letter  Heh,  the  Pentagram,  the 
concealed  Spirit  of  Life  and  the  Four  Elements,  the  originator  of  all  living  form.  The  Sign  of  Scorpio 
especially  alludes  to  stagnant  and  foetid  water,  that  property  of  the  moist  nature  which  initiates 
putrefaction  and  decay.  The  eternal  change  from  life  into  death  through  death  into  life,  is  symbolised  by 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  grass  which  springs  from  and  is  nourished  by  putrifying  and  corrupting  carcasses;  the  herbiage,  in  its 
turn  affords  food  to  animals  and  man,  which  again  when  dead,  nourisheth  vegetable  life  and  brings  to 
growth  and  perfection  the  living  herbiage.  This  is  further  shown  by  the  figure  itself  putrifying  and 
decaying  as  it  reaps  the  grass  of  the  field.  As  for  man,  his  days  are  as  grass,  as  a flower  of  the  field,  so  he 
flourisheth.  The  top  of  the  scythe  forms  the  Tau  Cross  of  Life,  showing  that  what  destroys  also  renews. 
The  whole  is  a representation  of  the  eternal  transmutation  of  the  life  of  nature,  which  reforms  all  things 
into  fresh  images  and  similitudes.  This  symbol  represents  the  corrosive  and  destructive  action  of  the 
infernal  Fire  as  opposed  to  the  Celestial,  the  Dragon  of  the  Waters,  the  Typhon  of  the  Egyptians,  the 
Slayer  of  Osiris,  which  later  yet  rises  again  in  Horns.  The  Scorpion,  Serpent  of  Evil,  delineated  before 
the  figure  of  Death  in  the  more  ancient  form  of  the  Key,  refers  to  the  mixed  and  transforming,  therefore 
deceptive,  nature  of  this  emblem.  Behind  him,  is  the  Symbol  of  the  Nameless  One,  representing  the  Seed 
and  its  germ,  not  yet  differentiated  into  Life,  therefore  incapable  of  definition.  The  Scorpion  is  the 
emblem  of  ruthless  destruction.  The  Snake  is  the  mixed  and  deceptive  nature,  serving  alike  for  good  and 
evil.  The  Eagle  is  the  higher  and  Divine  Nature,  yet  to  be  found  herein,  the  Aichemical  Eagle  of 
distillation,  the  Renewer  of  life.  As  it  is  said  Thy  youth  shall  be  renewed  like  the  Eagles.  Great  indeed, 
and  many  are  the  mysteries  of  this  terrible  Key. 

(2nd  Ad.  and  Hiereus  show  Philosophus  the  figure  of  Typhon.) 

Hiereus: 

This  drawing  represents  the  symbolic  figure  of  Typhon,  the  Destroyer.  The  eleven  circles 
represent  the  eleven  Averse  Sephiroth.  He  stands  upon  Earth  and  Ocean,  his  head  lost  in  the  clouds,  a 
colossal  image  of  evil  and  destruction.  The  brow  denotes  the  confusion  of  opposing  Elemental  Forces  in 
the  higher  regions  of  the  Air,  and  confusion  of  mind  and  madness  in  man.  The  eyes  are  the  devouring 
flames  of  lust  and  violence,  the  breath  is  storm,  devastation  and  rage,  alike  in  the  Universe  which  is  the 
greater  world,  and  in  Man  who  is  the  lesser.  The  arms  and  the  hands  are  the  swift  executors  of  evil 
works,  the  bringers  of  pestilence  and  disease.  The  heart  is  malice  and  envy  in  man,  the  nourisher  of  evil 
in  the  atmosphere,  which  later  are  again  symbolised  by  the  numerous  and  twining  serpents. 

2nd  Ad: 

The  24th  Path  of  Sepher  Yetzirah  to  which  the  Tarot  Key  of  Death  is  referred  is  the  Imaginative 
Intelligence,  and  it  is  so  called  because  it  giveth  form  to  all  similitudes  which  are  created  in  like  manner 
similar  to  its  harmonious  elegances.  For  the  outward  form  always  follows  the  hidden  law,  thus  from 
Chaos  is  produced  Harmony,  just  as  a beautiful  flower  is  produced  from  decaying  matter.  Return  not  to 
Yesod,  for  here  no  more  may  be  spoken.  (2nd  Ad.  returns  to  place.  Philosophus  goes  to  Hegemon  near 
Altar.) 

Heg: 

Approach  now  the  station  of  Hod  by  the  Path  of  Resh,  the  Sun.  (Philosophus  approaches  the  3rd 

Ad.) 


3rd  Ad: 

Already  the  Sash  of  the  Black  Pillar  is  upon  you,  already  you  have  passed  the  dark  Path  of  Tau. 


18 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


What  more  do  you  seek  of  me,  Lord  of  the  1st  Degree? 

Phil: 

(Prompted  by  Heg.)  I seek  the  Path  of  Mem,  the  Path  of  Sacrifice. 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks)  Be  warned,  0 vainglorious  one.  Samson  broke  down  the  Two  Pillars  and  perished. 
Having  but  one  Pillar,  can  you  bear  up  the  might  of  Geburah?  Can  you  attain  strength  without  the  Life  of 
Tiphareth? 

3rd  Ad: 

The  Portal  of  Mem  is  barred.  Yet  it  is  well  to  be  willing  for  the  Sacrifice  itself,  if  as  yet  not  fully 
prepared.  For  in  the  Path  of  Mem  rules  the  Hanged  Man,  the  power  of  the  Great  Waters.  Can  your  tears 
prevail  against  the  Tide  of  the  Sea,  your  might  against  the  waves  of  the  storm,  your  love  against  the 
sorrows  of  all  the  world? 

Phil: 

(Prompted  by  Heg.)  Let  me  seek  then  the  path  of  Ayin. 

3rd  Ad: 

It  is  open  to  you  to  the  limit  of  your  strength.  (Hegemon  returns  to  Altar.  3rd  Ad.  descends  and 
leads  Philosophus  with  So!  to  West.  Hiereus  going  to  North  bars  their  way.) 

Hiereus: 

(Knocks)  By  the  Power  of  Pan  and  the  Goat  of  Mendes,  stand. 

3rd  Ad: 

Thus  far  and  no  farther  are  you  permitted  to  penetrate  the  Path  of  Ayin,  whose  mysteries  may 
now  be  partially  revealed  to  you.  The  15th  Key  of  the  Tarot  represents  a goat-headed,  satyr-like  Demon 
whose  legs  are  hairy,  his  feet  and  claws  standing  upon  a Cubical  Altar.  He  has  heavy  bat-like  wings.  In 
his  left  hand,  which  points  downwards,  he  holds  a lighted  torch,  and  in  his  right,  which  is  elevated,  a 
horn  of  water.  The  left  hand  points  downwards  to  show  that  it  is  the  infernal  and  burning,  not  the 
celestial  and  life-giving  flame  which  is  kindled  in  his  torch,  just  as  when  the  Sun  is  in  Capricornus,  to 
which  cold  and  earthy  Sign  this  Key  corresponds,  Solar  light  is  at  its  weakest  and  the  natures  of  cold  and 
moisture  triumph  over  heat  and  dryness.  The  cubical  Altar  represents  the  Universe,  right  and  left  of  it, 
bound  thereto  by  a cord  attached  to  acircle  which  typifies  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  are  two  smaller 
demons,  one  male  and  one  female.  They  hold  a cord  in  their  hands.  The  whole  figure  shows  the  gross 
generative  powers  of  nature  on  the  material  plane,  and  is  analogous  to  the  Pan  of  the  Greeks  and  the 
Egyptian  Goat  of  Mendes  the  symbol  of  Khem.  In  certain  aspects,  this  Key  represents  the  brutal  forces 
of  nature,  which  to  the  unbelieving  man  only  obscure  and  do  not  reflect  the  Luminous  Countenance  of 
God.  It  also  alludes  to  the  sexual  powers  of  natural  generation.  Thus  therefore  the  Key  fitly  balances  the 


19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


symbol  of  Death  on  the  other  side  of  the  Tree  of  Life. 

Of  the  smaller  demons,  one  points  downwards  and  one  upwards,  answering  to  the  positions  of 
the  hands  of  the  central  figures.  Beneath  his  feet  are  Pentagrams  on  which  he  tramples  (whence  comes 
their  title  of  Wizard’s  foot)  and  his  head  is  covered  with  the  evil  and  reversed  Pentagram.  As  his  hands 
bear  the  torch  and  the  horn,  the  symbols  of  Fire  and  Water,  so  does  his  form  unite  the  Earth  in  his  hairy 
and  bestial  aspect,  and  the  Air  in  his  bat-like  wings.  Thus  he  represents  the  gross  and  materialized 
Elemental  Forces  of  Nature;  and  the  whole  would  be  an  evil  symbol  were  it  not  for  the  Pentagram  of 
Light  above  his  head  which  regulates  and  guides  his  movements.  He  is  the  eternal  renewer  of  all  the 
changing  forms  of  Creation  in  conformity  with  the  Law  of  the  All  Powerful  One,  Blessed  be  He,  which 
controlling  law  is  typified  by  the  controlling  Pentagram  of  Light  surmounting  the  whole. 

This  Key  is  an  emblem  of  tremendous  force;  many  and  universal  are  its  mysteries. 

(Hiereus  and  3rd  Ad.  go  to  diagram  of  Pan.) 

Hiereus: 

This  drawing  represents  the  symbolic  figure  of  Pan,  the  Greek  God  of  Nature.  He  stands  upon 
the  Cube  of  the  Universe,  holding  in  his  right  hand  the  pastoral  staff  of  rural  authority,  and  in  his  left  the 
7 reeded  pipe  symbolical  of  the  harmony  of  the  Planetary  Spheres.  The  Nine  Circles  represent  the 
Sephiroth  with  the  exception  of  Kether,  exactly  those  which  are  included  in  the  symbol  on  the  Tree  of 
Life.  The  ruddy  face  is  the  heat  of  the  Earth,  the  horns  are  the  Rays,  the  body  contains  the  Elements  and 
the  Cube  is  the  firm  basis.  Observe  that  the  higher  part  of  the  figure  is  human,  growing  more  bestial  as  it 
nears  the  Earth. 

3rd  Ad: 

The  26th  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah,  to  which  the  Tarot  Key  of  the  Devil  is  referred,  is  called 
the  Renovating  Intelligence,  because,  by  it,  God  the  Holy  One  reneweth  all  the  changing  forms  which 
are  renewed  by  the  Creation  of  the  World.  Return  again  to  Yesod,  for  here  no  more  may  be  spoken.  (3rd 
Ad.  returns  to  place.  Hiereus  to  Altar.  Hegemon  rises  as  Philosophus  comes  to  Altar.  Hiereus  and 
Hegemon  stand  on  either  side  of  Philosophus  West  of  Altar,  facing  East.) 

Hiereus: 

In  guardianship  and  not  in  enmity,  have  I barred  your  venturing,  0 Philosophus.  Now  may  it  be 
revealed  unto  you  how  that  in  my  Lamen  of  Office  is  hidden  the  Key  which  you  seek.  For  the  Triangle  in 
the  Circle  is  the  high  symbol  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  and  the  first  three  Sephiroth  and  of  Binah  wherein  is 
the  Sphere  of  Saturn,  Ruler  of  the  Path  Tau.  Therefore  do  I wear  it,  and  therefore,  when  you  entered  the 
Hall  of  the  Neophytes  in  the  Neophyte  Grade,  when  first  the  hoodwink  was  raised,  you  beheld  before 
you  the  Sword  that  barred  and  the  Symbol  which  overcometh  the  barrier.  The  Lamen  in  its  more  special 
attribution  to  the  Hiereus,  has  the  following  meanings.  In  the  circle  are  the  Four  Sephiroth,  Tiphareth, 
Netzach,  Hod  and  Yesod.  The  first  three  mark  the  angles  of  the  Triangle  inscribed  within,  while  the  sides 
are  the  Paths  of  Nun,  Ayin  and  Peh,  respectively.  In  the  centre  is  marked  the  Letter  Samekh  indicating 
the  25th  Path.  While  the  Wheel  revolves,  the  hub  is  still.  Seek  ever  then  the  centre,  look  from  without  to 


20 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


within.  Behold  the  Key  of  your  Path.  (Puts  Badge  aside.) 

Heg: 

Five  Paths  are  before  you,  four  have  you  attempted  and  each  was  guarded  by  a symbol  sinister 
and  dread.  Remember  that  in  the  Zelator  Grade  it  was  told  you,  that  above  Malkuth  were  the  Paths  Qoph, 
Shin,  Tau,  making  Qesheth,  the  Bow  of  promise.  From  the  many  coloured  Bow,  is  loosed  in  Yesod,  the 
Arrow  of  Sagittarius,  Samekh,  soaring  upward  to  cleave  open  the  Veil  unto  the  Sun  in  Tiphareth.  Thus  it 
is  a fit  symbol  for  hope  and  aspiration,  for  in  the  Sign  Sagittarius,  Jupiter,  Ruler  of  Kaph  is  Lord.  Thus, 
by  this  straight  and  arrow  way  only,  is  advance  between  the  dangers  that  have  threatened  you,  possible. 
(3rd  Ad.  descends  to  North  side  of  Altar.) 

3rd  Ad: 

But  Sagittarius,  the  Archer,  is  a bi-corporate  Sign,  the  Centaur,  the  Man  and  the  Horse 
combined.  Recall  what  was  said  unto  thee  in  the  passage  of  the  31st  Path  of  Fire,  leading  unto  the  Grade 
of  Practicus.  Also  there  is  the  vision  of  the  fire  flashing  Courser  of  Light,  or  also  a child  borne  aloft  upon 
the  shoulders  of  the  Celestial  Steed,  fiery  or  clothed  with  gold,  or  naked  and  shooting  from  the  bow, 
shafts  of  light,  and  standing  on  the  shoulders  of  a horse.  But,  if  thy  meditation  prolongeth  itself  thou 
shalt  unite  all  these  symbols  in  the  form  of  a Lion.  For  thus  wilt  thou  cleave  upward  by  the  Path  of 
Sagittarius,  through  the  Sixth  Sep  hira  into  the  Path  of  Teth,  answering  to  Leo,  the  Lion,  the  reconciling 
Path  between  Mercy  and  Severity,  Chesed  and  Geburah,  beneath  whose  centre  hangs  the  glorious  Sun  of 
Tiphareth.  Therefore,  by  the  straight  and  narrow  Path  of  Sagittarius,  let  the  Philosophus  advance,  like  the 
arrow  from  the  centre  of  Qesheth,  the  Bow.  And  as  this  Sign  of  Sagittarius  lieth  between  the  Sign  of 
Scorpio,  Death  and  Capricornus  the  Devil,  so  had  Jesus  to  pass  through  the  Wilderness,  tempted  by 
Satan.  (2nd  Ad.  descends  to  South  of  the  Altar.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Before  you  upon  the  Altar,  lie  the  Four  Emblems  of  your  purified  body,  and  over  them  is  the 
symbol  of  the  Pentagram,  while  beneath  in  the  midst  is  the  five-squared  Cross  of  the  Four  Elements  and 
the  Spirit  within  them.  If  you  are  willing,  in  service  and  in  sacrifice  to  offer  the  purified  powers  of  your 
body,  bind  about  your  neck  the  Cross,  and  stretch  the  Light  (gives  Philosophus  light)  you  carry  over  the 
Four  Emblems  in  prayer  and  offering.  (Philosophus  does  so.  All  come  East  of  the  Altar.  Philosophus  in 
middle  with  candle  and  Cross  on  neck.  2nd  Ad.  right  and  3rd  Ad.  left.  Hegemon  and  Hiereus  behind. 
Each  takes  Elemental  Emblems,  Hiereus  Salt,  Hegemon  Rose-leaves,  2nd  Ad.  Incense,  3rd  Ad.  Water 
and  Philosophus  Motto  written  on  paper.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Honoured  Philosophus,  what  was  the  additional  title  given  you  in  the  Philosophus  Grade  as  a 
link  with  the  Second  Order? 

Phil: 

Phrath.  (All  advance  to  Dais.) 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


2nd  Ad: 

O Hidden  Warden  of  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  here  is  one  who  cometh  in  the  Word  Phrath. 

Ch.  Ad: 

(Knocks  gong  unseen.)  If  he  would  rend  the  Veil,  let  him  complete  the  Word. 

2nd  Ad: 

O Hidden  Warden  of  the  Portal  of  the  Vault,  here  is  one  who  cometh  in  the  Word  Phrath. 

Ch.  Ad: 

(Knocks  gong  unseen.)  If  he  would  rend  the  Veil,  let  him  complete  the  Word. 

2nd  Ad: 

Honoured  Hiereus,  what  know  you  of  the  word? 

Hiereus: 

Tau,  the  Letter  of  Saturn,  ruling  the  Path  of  Malkuth  to  Yesod,  linked  to  Earth. 

2nd  Ad: 

Honoured  Hegemon,  what  know  you  of  the  Word? 

Heg: 

Resh,  the  Letter  of  So!,  of  the  Path  joining  Yesod  to  Hod,  and  it  is  also  the  Letter  linked  with 
rule  over  Air  as  the  Sun  ru!eth  the  Air  in  Tiphareth. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Very  Honoured  3rd  Ad.  what  know  you  of  the  Word? 

3rd  Ad: 

Peh,  the  Letter  of  Mars,  of  the  Path  joining  Hod  to  Netzach,  which  is  also  a Letter  linked  to 
Water,  as  Mars  ruleth  Water,  and  to  Fire,  as  Mars  ruleth  Fire  in  Geburah. 

2nd  Ad: 

Mars  in  Peh,  linketh  the  base  of  the  Black  Pillar  to  the  Base  of  the  White  Pillar,  and  the  converse 
of  Mars  is  Jupiter  - for  Jupiter  is  Lord  of  Fire,  but  in  Chesed  he  ruleth  Water,  balancing  Mars  in 
Geburah.  Now,  the  Letter  of  Jupiter  is  Kaph,  linking  Netzach  with  Chesed;  and  Kaph  continueth  the  Path 
Peh  to  Chesed,  and  is  the  highest  Path  now  visible  to  you.  It  is  the  Path  of  Aspiration  and  its  Planet 
Jupiter  rules  also  in  Sagittarius.  Therefore,  take  the  Light  of  the  Highest  for  Guide,  and  thus  do  I reveal 
the  Letter  Kaph  unto  you  and  complete  the  Word. 

3rd  Ad: 


22 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Peh  (Knocks,  gives  Sign  of  Water.) 

Heg: 

Resh  (Knocks,  gives  Sign  of  Air.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Kaph  (Knocks,  gives  Sign  of  Fire.) 

Hiereus: 

Tau  (Knocks,  gives  Sign  of  Earth.) 

All: 

Paroketh  (All  make  Qabalistic  Cross  saying  the  words.) 

Phil: 

(Prompted  by  3rd  Ad.)  In  the  Word  Paroketh,  in  the  Power  of  the  Cross  and  the  Pentagram,  I 
claim  to  behold  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepti. 

Ch.  Ad: 

(Unseen,  sounds  gong.)  It  is  the  Word  of  the  Veil,  the  Veil  of  the  Tabernacle,  of  the  Temple, 
before  the  Holy  of  Holies,  the  Veil  which  was  rent  asunder.  It  is  the  Veil  of  the  Four  Elements  of  the 
Body  of  Man,  which  was  offered  upon  the  Cross  for  the  service  of 

Man.  (Ch.  Ad.  stands.)  In  the  Word  Phrath,  in  the  Spirit  of  service  and  sacrifice  draw  nigh.  (2nd 
and  3rd  Ads.  stand  at  the  Veil.  2nd  shows  Phil,  opening  Sign.) 

2nd  Ad: 

This  is  the  Sign  of  the  rending  of  the  Veil,  and  thus  standing,  you  form  the  Tau  Cross. 

(Phil,  gives  the  Sign.  2nd  and  3rd  Ad.  draw  back  Veil,  revealing  Ch.  Ad.  who  stands  also  in  the 
Sign  of  Tau,  with  Sceptre  and  White  Lamp.  2nd  and  3rd  Ad.  and  Phil,  mount  Dais.  Phil,  if  able  should 
stand  in  Sign  during  Offering  Ritual.  Lights  turned  up.  Hiereus  and  Heg.  stand  behind  Phil.,  who  is 
between  the  Pillars  - 2nd  Ad.  South  and  3rd  Ad.  North.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

Lreely  and  of  full  purpose  and  with  understanding  do  you  offer  yourself  upon  the  Altar  of  the 

Spirit? 


Phil: 

Ido. 

(As  they  say  their  Words,  Hiereus  and  Heg.  ascend  Dais  to  drop  their  emblems  into  the  brazier. 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Each  officer  makes  his  Grade  Sign  as  he  does  so.  Ch.  Ad.  makes  appropriate  Pent,  holding  up  White 
Lamp.  Phil,  drops  in  Motto.) 

Hiereus: 

In  the  Letter  Tau.  (Salt.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

In  the  Letter  Heh.  (Incense.) 

Heg: 

In  the  Letter  Resh.  (Rose  leaves.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

In  the  Letter  Yau.  (Incense.) 

3rd  Ad: 

In  the  Letter  Peh.  (Water.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

In  the  Letter  Heh.  (Incense.) 

2nd  Ad: 

In  the  Letter  Kaph.  (Incense  sticks.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

In  the  Letter  Yod.  (Incense.) 

ALL: 

In  the  Letter  Shin.  (Phil,  drops  in  Motto.) 

(Ch.  Ad.  makes  Spirit  Pentagrams  over  the  whole,  then  stretching  out  Sceptre  touches  Phil,  on 
the  breast.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

May  this  offering  be  as  the  offering  of  Abel,  which  ascended  unto  God.  (Phil,  lowers  his  arms. 
Ch.  Ad.  sits  down.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

Stretch  out  your  left  hand  to  touch  the  Black  Pillar  (done)  the  Pillar  of  the  Lirst  Degree,  wherein 
all  was  as  yet  in  the  darkness  of  the  Path  Tau.  This  was  a period  of  restriction  and  of  groping,  as  was 
shown  by  the  black  sash,  the  Sign  of  the  Lirst  Degree.  Among  its  symbols  were  the  Cross,  upon  which 
meditate,  that  the  mysteries  of  growth  and  change  may  become  revealed. 


24 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Stretch  out  now  your  right  hand  to  touch  the  White  Pillar  (done)  the  Pillar  of  the  Second  Degree, 
wherein  is  the  Fire  of  the  Path  Samekh.  Its  token  in  our  Order,  is  the  White  Sash.  Standing  thus  you  are 
in  the  point  of  equilibrium.  Master  of  both.  Lord  of  the  Second  Degree,  Lord  of  the  Paths  of  the  Portal  of 
the  Vault  of  the  Adepti  - wherefore,  in  recognition  of  your  achievement,  I confer  upon  you  the  White 
Sash  of  Probation.  (3rd  Ad.  puts  on  white  sash).  The  grip  of  this  Degree  is  the  Grip  of  the  First  Order, 
but  given  with  the  left  hand,  and  represents  the  Sephira  Chesed,  and  the  White  Pillar.  The  Sign  is  given 
thus: 

(gives  it)  and  symbolises  the  rending  asunder  of  a curtain  or  veil.  The  answering  Sign  is  given  by 
the  converse  thus.  (Gives  it.)  The  Pass-word  is,  as  you  have  been  told,  Paroketh,  which  is  the  Veil  of  the 
Tabernacle,  and  is  exchanged  by  letter  thus: 

Ch.  Ad: 

Peh. 

Phil: 

(Prompted)  Resh. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Kaph. 

Phil: 

Tau. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Further,  I give  you  the  Word  ETH  which  crowns  the  Pyramid  of  the  Four  Elements  in  the  4-7 
Grade,  and  is  one  symbol  of  the  Spirit  which  converts  the  Cross  into  the  Pentagram.  Wherefore,  above 
my  Throne  is  this  Tablet  (points  to  Tablet  of  Union)  which  is  called  the  Tablet  of  Union,  and  binds 
together  the  Four  Tablets  into  one  under  the  presidency  of  the  Spirit. 

Thus  far  by  work  of  the  intellect,  and  by  aid  of  our  Rites,  have  you  come.  Now  must  you  labour 
to  establish  the  Pentagram  in  yourself.  That  it  be  the  Pentagram  of  Good,  upright  and  balanced,  not  the 
evil  and  reversed  Pentagram  of  the  Goat  of  Mendes;  to  make  yourself  truly  a Microcosm  reflecting  the 
Macrocosm  whose  symbolic  Hexagram  of  Tiphareth  presides  above  you. 

This  Degree  is  in  one  sense  attributed  to  Yesod,  base  of  the  Path  of  probation,  Sagittarius.  In 
Yesod  is  the  Sphere  of  Utna,  who  in  her  fullness  reflects  the  Sun  of  Tiphareth.  The  number  given  to  the 
Moon  in  the  2-9  is  Nine,  but  in  a more  esoteric  sense  the  number  of  Luna  is  Five,  the  number  of  the 
Pentagram  and  the  Microcosm. 

(Ch.  Ad.  rises  with  Sceptre  and  white  Lamp.  2nd  Ad.  places  Tablet  of  Union  on  thQ  Altar  in 
readiness.  Heg.  places  two  forms  of  Temperance  by  Altar  W.  Ch.  Ad.  puts  white  lamp  on  Altar.  Officers 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


replace  Elements  before  their  respective  Tablets,  and  return  to  form  a Cross  round  the  Altar.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

This  drawing  represents  the  more  ancient  form  of  the  14th  Key  of  Tarot,  for  which  the  later  and 
more  usual  form  of  Temperance  was  soon  substituted,  as  better  representing  the  natural  symbolism  of 
the  Path  Sagittarius.  The  earler  figure  was  considered  not  so  much  a representation  of  this  Path  alone,  as 
the  synthesis  of  that  and  the  others  conjoined.  The  later  figure,  therefore,  is  better  adapted  to  the  more 
restricted  meaning.  The  more  ancient  form  shows  a female  figure  crowned  with  the  crown  of  five  rays, 
symbolising  the  Five  Principles  of  Nature,  the  concealed  Spirit  and  the  Four  Elements  of  Earth,  Air, 
Water  and  Fire.  About  her  head  is  a halo  of  light.  On  her  breast  is  the  Sun  of  Tiphareth.  The  Five -rayed 
Crown  further  alludes  to  the  Five  Sephiroth  Kether,  Chokmah,  Binah,  Chesed  and  Geburah.  Chained  to 
her  waist  are  a Lion  and  an  Eagle,  between  which  is  a large  cauldron  whence  arise  steam  and  smoke.  The 
Lion  represents  the  Fire  in  Netzach  - the  Blood  of  the  Lion,  and  the  Eagle  represents  the  Water  in  Hod, 
the  Gluten  of  the  Eagle  whose  reconciliation  is  made  by  the  Air  in  Yesod,  uniting  with  the  volatilised 
Water  arising  from  the  cauldron  through  the  influence  of  the  Fire  beneath  it.  The  chains  which  link  the 
Lion  and  the  Eagle  to  her  waist,  are  symbolic  of  the  Paths  of  Scorpio  and  Capricornus  as  shown  by  the 
Scorpion  and  the  Goat  in  the  background.  In  her  right  hand,  she  bears  the  Torch  of  Solar  Fire  elevating 
and  volatilising  the  Water  in  Hod  by  the  fiery  influence  of  Geburah,  while  with  her  left  hand,  she  pours 
from  a vase  the  Waters  of  Chesed  to  temperate  and  calm  the  Fires  of  Netzach.  This  later  form  is  the 
usual  figure  of  Temperance,  symbolising  in  a more  restricted  form  than  the  preceding,  the  peculiar 
properties  of  this  Path.  It  represents  an  Angel  with  the  Solar  emblem  of  Tiphareth  on  her  brow,  and 
wings  of  the  aerial  and  volatilising  nature,  pouring  together  the  fluidic  Fire  and  the  fiery  Water  thus 
combining,  harmonising  and  tempering  those  opposing  elements. 

One  foot  rests  on  dry  and  volcanic  land,  in  the  background  of  which  is  a volcano  whence  issues 
an  eruption.  The  other  foot  is  in  the  water  by  whose  border  springs  fresh  vegetation,  contrasting  strongly 
with  the  arid  and  dry  nature  of  the  distant  land.  On  her  breast  is  a square,  the  emblem  of  rectitude.  The 
whole  figure  is  a representation  of  that  straight  and  narrow  way  of  which  it  is  said  “few  there  be  that  find 
it”  which  alone  leads  to  the  higher  and  glorified  life.  For  to  pursue  that  steady  and  tranquil  mean  between 
two  opposing  forces,  is  indeed  difficult,  and  many  are  the  temptations  to  turn  aside  either  to  the  right  or 
to  the  left  wherein,  remember,  are  but  to  be  found  the  menacing  symbols  of  Death  and  the  Devil. 

The  25th  Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  to  which  the  Tarot  Key  of  Temperance  is  referred,  is  called 
the  Intelligence  of  Probation,  and  it  is  so  called  because  it  is  the  primary  temptation  by  which  the  Creator 
tries  all  righteous  person.  That  is,  that  in  it,  there  is  ever  present  the  temptation  to  turn  aside  to  the  one 
hand  or  to  the  other. 

(2nd  and  3rd  Ad.  give  Cup  and  red  lamp  to  Phil,  who  holds  them  in  form  of  Tau  Cross.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

Let  this  remind  you  once  more,  that  only  in  and  by  the  reconciliation  of  opposing  forces  is  the 


26 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Pathway  made  to  true  occult  knowledge  and  practical  power.  Good  alone  is  mighty  and  Truth  alone  shall 
prevail.  Evil  is  but  weakness  and  the  power  of  evil  magic  exists  but  in  the  contest  of  unbalanced  forces, 
which  in  the  end,  will  destroy  and  ruin  him  who  hath  subjugated  himself  thereto.  As  it  is  said  “Stoop  not 
down,  for  a precipice  lieth  beneath  the  Earth  - a descent  of  seven  steps;  and  therein,  is  established  the 
throne  of  an  evil  and  fatal  force.  Stoop  not  down  unto  that  dark  and  lurid  w rid.  Defile  not  thy  brilliant 
flame  with  the  earthy  dross  of  matter.  Stoop  not  down,  for  its  splendour  is  but  seeming,  it  is  but  the 
habitation  of  the  sons  of  the  Unhappy.” 

(2nd  and  3rd  Ad.  take  back  red  lamp  and  Cup  and  restore  them  to  their  Tablets.  On  the 

Altar  is  the  White  Lamp  and  the  Tablet  of  Union.  Phil,  is  seated  West  of  Altar.  2nd  and  3rd 

Ad.  return  to  places.  Hs.  goes  to  N.  Heg.  to  S.  Ch.  Ad.  returns  to  Throne  in  E.  takes  up 

Banner  of  the  East  and  Hierophant’s  Lamen.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

Seeing  that  you  are  now  Lord  of  the  Paths  of  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepti,  and  are 
entered  into  the  Second  Degree,  approaching  the  Second  or  Inner  Order,  it  is  fitting  that  you  should  have 
the  knowledge  of  these  emblems  to  complete  as  far  as  may  be,  your  understanding  of  the  Powers  of  the 
Officers  of  the  First  or  Outer  Order.  Both  refer  in  natural  succession  of  numbers  to  the  six  following  the 
five.  Thus  all  progress  is  by  steps,  gradual  and  secure.  The  inner  revelation  may  come  suddenly  to  some, 
even  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  or  it  may  be  after  long  waiting  - a slow  and  gradual  process  from  the 
beginning,  yet  ever  the  liquid  must  be  prepared  to  the  point  of  saturation. 

The  Hierophant’s  Lamen  is  a synthesis  of  Tiphareth,  to  which  the  Calvary  Cross  of  six  squares, 
forming  the  cube  opened  out,  is  fitly  referred.  The  two  colours,  red  and  green  the  most  active  and  the 
most  passive,  whose  conjunction  points  out  the  practical  application  of  the  knowledge  of  equilibrium, 
are  symbolic  of  the  reconciliation  of  the  celestial  essences  of  Fire  and  Water,  for  the  reconciling  yellow 
unites  with  blue  in  green,  which  is  the  complementary  colour  to  red,  and  with  red  in  orange  which  is  the 
complementary  colour  to  blue.  The  small  inner  circle  placed  upon  the  Cross  alludes  to  the  Rose  that  is 
conjoined  therewith  in  the  symbolism  of  the  Rose  and  Cross  of  our  Order. 

The  field  of  the  Banner  of  the  East  is  White,  the  colour  of  light  and  purity.  As  in  the  previous 
case,  the  Calvary  Cross  of  six  squares  is  the  number  six  of  Tiphareth,  the  yellow  Cross  of  Solar  Gold, 
and  the  cubical  stone  bearing  in  its  centre  the  sacred  Tau  of  Life,  and  having  bound  together  upon  it  the 
form  of  the  Macrocosmic  Hexagram,  the  red  triangle  of  Fire  and  the  blue  triangle  of  Water  - the  Ruach 
Elohim  and  the  Waters  of  Creation.  The  six  angles  of  the  Hexagram  described  upon  the  Tree  of  Life  will 
give  the  Planets  referred  to  it  as  follows:  Daath,  Saturn;  Chesed,  Jupiter;  Geburah,  Mars;  Netzach, 
Venus;  Hod,  Mercury;  Yesod,  Luna;  while  in  the  centre  is  the  Sun  of  Tiphareth. 

Upon  my  breast  is  a symbol,  which,  0 Lord  of  the  Paths  of  the  Portal  of  the  Adepti,  is  as  yet 
unknown  to  you.  It  is  no  Symbol  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  nor  of  the  First  or  Outer  Order,  nor 
even  of  your  Degree.  It  is  the  symbol  of  the  Red  Rose  and  the  Cross  of  Gold,  uniting  the  powers  of  the  4 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


and  5 and  of  the  6 within  itself,  but  to  learn  its  full  meaning,  it  is  needful  that  you  be  admitted  to  the 
fellowship  of  that  other  Order  to  which  the  Golden  Dawn  is  one  of  the  Veils.  Of  this  matter,  you  have  no 
right  to  speak  to  any  below  your  degree. 

Admission  further  can  be  earned  no  more  by  excellence  in  intellectual  learning  alone,  though 
that  also  is  required  of  you.  In  token  that  all  true  knowledge  cometh  of  grace,  not  of  right,  such 
admission  is  granted,  not  on  demand,  but  at  the  discretion  of  the  Greatly  Honoured  Chiefs  of  the  Second 
Order.  Moreover,  an  interval  of  nine  months  must  elapse  before  the  portal  is  again  opened  to  you.  Nine 
is  the  number  of  Luna  in  Yesod,  nine  lunar  months  are  the  period  of  gestation  before  birth;  Five  is  the 
number  of  the  Pentagram  of  the  Microcosm,  the  esoteric  Luna  number  - the  number  of  the  Spirit  and  the 
Four  Elements  - of  the  Soul  entering  the  body.  Nine  multiplied  by  five  yields  45,  the  number  of  Yesod, 
and  the  supreme  number  of  the  Square  of  Saturn,  as  the  Triad  expanded  into  matter. 

Ch.  Ad: 

(Knocks)  Very  Honoured  Fratres  and  Sorores,  assist  me  to  close  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the 
Adepti.  (All  rise.)  Honoured  Hiereus  see  that  the  entrance  is  properly  guarded. 

Hiereus: 

Very  honoured  Chief  Adept,  the  entrance  is  properly  guarded. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Very  Honoured  Fratres  and  Sorores,  give  the  Signs  of  the  Neophyte,  Zelator,  Theoricus, 
Practicus  and  Philosophus.  Give  the  Sign  of  the  Rending  of  the  Veil.  Give  the  Sign  of  the  Closing  of  the 
Veil.  Very  Honoured  2nd  Ad.  what  is  the  Word? 

2nd  Ad: 

Peh. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Resh. 

2nd  Ad: 

Kaph. 

Ch.  Ad. 

Tau. 

2nd  Ad: 

The  whole  Word  is  Paroketh,  which  is  the  Veil  of  the  Tabernacle. 

Ch.  Ad: 

In  and  by  that  Word,  I declare  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepti  duly  closed. 


28 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


(Ch.  Ad.  draws  curtain.  Officers  take  up  their  stations  before  Elemental  Tablets.  Ch.  Ad.  stands 
W.  of  the  Altar,  facing  East.  Phil,  stands  behind  him.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

In  the  Power  of  the  Name  Yod,  Heh,  Vau,  Heh,  and  in  the  might  of  the  concealed  Name 
YEHESHUAH,  in  the  symbol  of  the  Tablet  of  Union  and  by  the  Word  Eth,  Spirits  of  the  Five  Elements, 
adore  your  Creator. 

(At  the  word  “depart,”  below  each  Officer  simultaneously  makes  banishing  Pentagram  of  his 
own  Element  before  the  Tablet,  ending  with  Grade  Sign.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

Depart  in  peace  unto  your  habitations.  May  there  be  peace  between  us  and  you,  and  be  ye  ready 
to  come  when  you  are  called. 

Ch.  Ad: 

(Makes  banishing  Pent,  of  Spirit  and  gives  LVX  Signs.  All  face  East  and  make  Qab.  Cross  all 
saying  together.) 

All: 

Unto  Thee  Tetragrammaton,  be  ascribed  Malkuth,  Geburah,  Gedulah,  unto  the  Ages, 

AMEN. 

Ch.  Ad: 

3rd  Ad: 

2nd  Ad: 

Hiereus: 

Heg: 

(All  give  knocks  4,  1 in  succession.) 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

5 = 6 

CEREMONY  OF  THE  GRADE  OF  ADEPTUS  MINOR 


Chief  Adept  7 = 4,  Merciful  Exempt  Adept. 
Second  Adept  6 = 5,  Mighty  Adeptus  Major. 
Third  Adept  5 = 6,  Associate  Adeptus  Minor. 


30 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Candidate  - Hodos  Chamelionis. 

These  Officers  should  have  attained  at  least  these  ranks  and  may  be  of  higher  Grade.  Men  and 
Women  are  equally  eligible  for  any  of  these  offices.  The  ordinary  members  are  entitled  Very  Honored 
Fraters  et  Sorors.  This  ceremony  is  divided  into  Three  Points. 


31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


LIST  OF  REQUIREMENTS 

Robes: 

Chief  Adept:  Blue  and  purple,  with  winged  Sphere  Wand. 

2nd  Adept:  Red  and  Orange,  with  Phoenix  Wand. 

3rd  Adept:  Yellow  and  Rose  Pink,  with  Lotus  Wand. 

All  may  wear  golden  slippers  or  shoes  to  match  robes.  Candidates  should  have  crossed 
Sashes,  Declaration,  and  Recommendation  signed  by  the  two  Chiefs.  Admission  Badges;  Hiereus 
Lamen,  Sword  and  Serpent  diagram.  Black  Sash  and  White  Sash  for  Candidates.  Black  Robe  and  Cords, 
Admission  Badges.  Attestation  of  Examinations  and  Recommendations.  On  Altar  Cup  of  Wine,  Candle, 
Crucifix,  Chain,  Dagger,  Crook  and  Scourge.  Incense.  Cross.  Each  Officer  carries  a Crux  Ansata  on  his 
left  wrist. 


32 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


OPENING 


Ch.  Ad: 

( Knocks ) 

All  Rise 
2nd  Ad: 

( Knocks ) 

3rd  Ad: 

( Knocks ) 

Ch.  Ad: 

( Knocks ) 

3rd  Ad: 

( Knocks ) 

2nd  Ad: 

( Knocks ) 

Ch.  Ad: 

Avete,  Fraters  et  Sorors. 

2nd  Ad: 

Roseae  Rubeae. 

3rd  Ad: 

Et  Aureae  Cracis. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Very  Honored  Fraters  et  Sorors,  assist  me  to  open  the  Tomb  of  the  Adepti.  Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  see 
that  the  Portal  is  closed  and  guarded. 

3rd  Ad: 

Does  so  and  salutes. 

3rd  Ad: 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  is  closed  and  guarded. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  by  what  sign  hast  thou  entered  the  Portal? 

2nd  Ad: 

By  the  Sign  of  the  Rending  Asunder  of  the  Veil,  (gives  it.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  by  what  sign  hast  thou  closed  the  Portal. 

3rd  Ad: 

By  the  Sign  of  the  Closing  of  the  Veil,  (gives  it) 

2nd  Ad: 

PEH. 

3rd  Ad: 

RESH. 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


2nd  Ad: 

CAPH. 

3rd  Ad: 

TAU. 

2nd  Ad: 

PAROKETH. 

3rd  Ad: 

Which  is  the  Veil  of  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  Mystic  Number  of  this  Grade? 

2nd  Ad: 

Twenty-one. 

Ch.  Ad: 

What  is  the  Password  formed  therefrom? 

3rd  Ad: 

ALEPH. 

Ch.  Ad: 

HEH. 

3rd  Ad: 

YOD. 

Ch.  Ad: 

HEH. 

3rd  Ad: 

EHEIEH. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts? 

2nd  Ad: 

The  symbolic  burying  place  of  our  Founder  Christian  Rosenkreutz,  which  he  made  to  represent  the 
Universe. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  in  what  part  of  it  is  he  buried? 

3rd  Ad: 

In  the  center  of  the  heptagonal  sides  and  beneath  the  Altar,  his  head  being  towards  the  East. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Minor,  why  in  the  center? 

2nd  Ad: 

Because  that  is  the  point  of  perfect  equilibrium. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  does  the  Mystic  Name  of  our  Founder  signify? 

3rd  Ad: 

The  Rose  and  Cross  of  Christ;  the  fadeless  Rose  of  Creation  - the  immortal  Cross  of  Light. 


34 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  was  the  Vault  entitled  by  our  more  ancient  Fraters  and  Sorors? 

2nd  Ad: 

The  Tomb  of  Osiris  Onnophris,  the  Justified  One. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  of  what  shape  was  the  Vault? 

3rd  Ad: 

It  was  that  of  an  equilateral  Heptagon  or  figure  of  Seven  Sides. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  unto  what  do  these  seven  sides  allude? 

2nd  Ad: 

Seven  are  the  lower  Sephiroth,  Seven  are  the  Palaces,  Seven  are  the  days  of  the  Creation:  Seven  in  the 
Height  above,  Seven  in  the  Depth  below. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  where  is  this  Vault  symbolically  situated? 

3rd  Ad: 

In  the  center  of  the  Earth,  in  the  Mountain  of  Caverns,  the  Mystic  Mountain  of  Abiegnus. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Minor,  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  title  Abiegnus? 

3rd  Ad: 

It  is  Abi-Agnus,  Lamb  of  the  Father.  It  is  by  metathesis  Abi-Genos,  born  of  the  Father,  Bia-Genos, 
Strength  of  our  Race,  and  the  Four  Words  make  the  sentence,  Mountain  of  the  Lamb  of  the  Father,  and 
the  Strength  of  our  Race.  IAO.  YEHESHUAH.  Such  are  the  words! 

All  salute  with  5-6  Signs. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  key  to  this  Vault? 

2nd  Ad: 

The  Rose  and  Cross  which  resume  the  Life  of  Nature  and  the  Powers  hidden  in  the  word  I.  N.  R.  I. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  is  the  Emblem  which  we  bear  in  our  left  hands? 

3rd  Ad: 

It  is  a form  of  the  Rose  and  Cross,  the  ancient  Crux  Ansata  or  Egyptian  symbol  of  life. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  its  meaning? 

2nd  Ad: 

It  represents  the  force  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  in  Nature,  divided  into  a Hexad  and  a Tetrad.  The  Oval 
embraces  the  first  six  Sephiroth  and  the  Tau  Cross  the  lower  Four,  answering  to  the  four  Elements. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  is  the  Emblem  which  I bear  upon  my  breast? 

3rd  Ad: 

The  complete  symbol  of  the  Rose  and  Cross. 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  its  meaning? 

2nd  Ad: 

It  is  the  Key  of  Sigils  and  of  Rituals,  and  represents  the  force  of  the  twenty  two  Letters  in  Nature,  as 
divided  into  a Three,  a Seven,  and  a Twelve.  Many  and  great  are  its  mysteries. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  is  the  Wand  which  thou  bearest? 

3rd  Ad: 

A simple  Wand  having  the  colors  of  the  twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  and  surmounted  by  the  Lotus  Flower 
of  Isis.  It  symbolizes  the  development  of  Creation. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  thy  Wand  and  its  meaning? 

2nd  Ad: 

A Wand  terminating  in  the  symbol  of  the  Binary  and  surmounted  by  the  Tau  Cross  of  Life,  or  the  Head 
of  the  Phoenix,  sacred  to  Osiris.  The  seven  colors  between  Light  and  Darkness  are  attributed  to  the 
Planets.  It  symbolizes  rebirth  and  resurrection  from  death. 

Ch.  Ad: 

My  Wand  is  surmounted  by  the  Winged  Globe,  around  which  the  twin  serpents  of  Egypt  twine.  It 
symbolizes  the  equilibriated  Force  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Four  Elements  beneath  the  everlasting  Wings  of 
the  Holy  One.  Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  are  the  words  inscribed  upon  the  door  of  the  Vault,  and 
how  is  it  guarded? 

3rd  Ad: 

Post  Centum  Viginti  Annos  Patebo.  After  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  I shall  open,  and  the  door  is 
guarded  by  the  Elemental  Tablets  and  by  the  Kerubic  Emblems. 

Ch.  Ad: 

The  120  years  refer  symbolically  to  the  5 Grades  of  the  First  Order  and  to  the  revolution  of  the  Power  of 
the  Pentagram;  also  to  the  five  preparatory  examinations  for  this  Grade.  It  is  written  His  days  shall  be 
120  years.  120  divided  by  5 yields  24,  the  number  of  hours  in  a day  and  of  the  Thrones  of  the  Elders  in 
the  Apocalypse.  Further  120  equals  the  number  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  multiplied  by  that  of  the  Zodiac, 
whose  Key  is  the  working  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Elements  typified  in  the  Wand  which  I bear. 

All  face  East. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Opens  the  Door  wide,  passes  to  East  or  head  of  Pastos  of  C.R.C.,  and  faces  West. 

2nd  Ad: 

Enters  and  passes  to  South  facing  North. 

3rd  Ad: 

Third  enters  and  passes  to  North  facing  South. 

Other  members  remain  without,  but  Hodos  may  enter  Vault  to  form  fourth  side  in  making 
Signs.  The  Three  Officers  raise  their  Wands  to  form  Pyramid  above  altar,  Cruces  touching  below 
Wands. 


36 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Ch.  Ad: 

Let  us  analyze  the  Key  Word.  I. 

2nd  Ad: 

N. 

3rd  Ad: 

R. 

All: 

1. 

Ch.  Ad: 

YOD. 

2nd  Ad: 

NUN. 

3rd  Ad: 

RESH. 

All: 

YOD. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Virgo,  Isis,  Mighty  Mother. 

2nd  Ad: 

Scorpio,  Apophis,  Destroyer. 

3rd  Ad: 

Sol,  Osiris,  Slain  and  Risen. 

All: 

Isis,  Apophis,  Osiris  - I.A.O. 

All  separate  Wands  and  Cruces,  and  give  Sign  of  Cross. 

All: 

The  Sign  of  Osiris  Slain. 

Ch.  Ad: 

L — The  Sign  of  the  Mourning  of  Isis.  (With  bowed  head.) 

2nd  Ad: 

V — The  Sign  of  Typhon  and  Apophis.  (With  head  erect.) 

3rd  Ad: 

X — The  Sign  of  Osiris  Risen.  (With  head  bowed.) 

All! 

L V X,  (Lux)  the  Light  of  the  Cross.  (Saluting  Sign  and  head  bowed.) 

All  quit  Tomb  and  return  to  previous  places. 

Ch.  Ad: 

In  the  Grand  Word  YEHESHUAH  by  the  Key-Word  I.N.R.I.,  and  through  the  concealed  Word  LVX,  I 
have  opened  the  tomb  of  the  Adepti. 

All  present  give  LVX  Signs. 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


FIRST  POINT 

(The  Tomb  is  prepared  as  before,  but  closed,  and  curtains  drawn.  Chief  Adept  is  not  seen  as 
such;  Second  Adept  is  Principal  Officer,  3rd  Associate  Adept,  Introducing  Adept  -Hodos 
Chamelionis.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Very  Honored  Fraters  et  Sorors,  our  H.  Frater  (XYZ),  Lord  of  the  24th,  25th,  and  26th  Paths  of  the 
Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepti,  is  a Candidate  for  admission  to  the  Second  Order,  and  is  waiting 
without.  V.H.  Frater  Hodos  Chamelionis,  prepare  the  Aspirant  and  act  as  his  introducer.  Associate 
Adeptus  Minor,  guard  the  hither  side  of  the  Portal,  and  admit  them  in  due  form. 

Aspirant  is  prepared  by  making  him  wear  Portal  Sash  across  that  of  the  Philosophus  Grade. 
He  carries  Lamen  of  Hiereus,  and  Recommendation  from  the  Chiefs  of  his  Temple,  a certificate  of 
having  passed  the  requisite  examinations,  and  a written  speech. 

3rd  Ad: 

(Opening  door)  Whom  bringest  thou  here  with  thee? 

Aspirant: 

(Loudly  and  firmly .)  Hear  ye  all  that  I,  the  Honored  Frater  (XYZ)  stand  before  you,  being  a member  of 
the  Philosophus  Grade  of  the  First  Order,  the  Highest  Grade  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  a 
Philosophus;  one  qualified  to  fill  the  important  post  of  Hiereus  in  a Temple  of  the  First  Order,  one  who 
hath  passed  the  five  examinations  prescribed  between  the  First  and  Second  Orders,  and  hath  been 
declared  Lord  of  the  24th,  25th,  and  26th  Paths  in  the  Portal  of  the  Adepti.  I bear  a written 
recommendation  from  the  Chiefs  of  my  Temple  guaranteeing  my  qualifications,  honor  and  fidelity;  as 
also  an  attestation  of  my  having  passed  the  Pentagonal  Examination.  By  virtue  of  these  honors  and 
dignities,  I now  come  to  demand  my  reception  and  acknowledgement  as  an  Adeptus  Minor  of  the 
Second  Order. 

2nd  Ad: 

O Aspirant ! It  is  written  that  he  who  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased,  but  that  he  who  humbleth  himself 
shall  be  exalted,  and  that  blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit  for  theirs  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  It  is  not  by 
proclamation  of  honors  and  dignities,  great  though  they  may  be,  that  thou  canst  gain  admission  to  the 
Tomb  of  the  Adepti  of  the  Rose  of  Ruby  and  the  Cross  of  Gold,  but  only  by  that  humility  and  purity  of 
spirit  that  befitteth  the  aspirant  unto  higher  things.  Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  bring  unto  me  the 
recommendation  and  attestation  which  he  beareth;  and  test  thou  his  knowledge  ere  he  be  rejected  for  the 
sins  of  presumption  and  spiritual  pride. 

3rd  Ad: 

Thou  knowest  the  arrangement  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  on  the  Tree  of  Life;  now  what  symbolic  weapon 
doth  their  natural  succession  form? 

Aspirant  answers  unprompted. 

3rd  Ad: 

And  what  symbolic  creature  is  traced  by  the  natural  succession  of  the  Paths? 

Aspirant  answers  unprompted. 


38 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


2nd  Ad: 

O Aspirant.  Let  this  be  a sign  unto  thee.  For  the  Flaming  Sword  and  the  Serpent  of  Wisdom  shall  be  the 
symbol  which  shall  procure  thee  admission.  Return  thou  then,  and  divest  thyself  of  these  ornaments. 
They  are  not  humble  enough  to  entitle  thee  to  be  received.  V.  H.  Frater  Hodos  Chamelionis,  clothe  him 
in  the  black  robe  of  mourning.  Let  his  hands  be  bound  behind  his  back,  symbolic  of  the  binding  force  of 
his  obligations,  and  put  a chain  about  his  neck,  the  emblem  of  repentance  and  humility. 

Hodos: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  it  shall  be  done. 

Hodos: 

Salutes  and  retires  with  Aspirant,  strips  him  of  all  ornaments,  brings  him  back  to  door  in  plain  black 
robe,  roped  and  carrying  diagram  of  Sword  and  Serpent.  Gives  one  gentle  knock. 

3rd  Ad: 

Opens  door,  saying. 

3rd  Ad: 

By  the  aid  of  what  symbol  do  ye  seek  admission? 

Hodos: 

(Shows  diagram)  By  the  aid  of  the  Flaming  Sword,  and  the  Serpent  of  Wisdom. 

3rd  Ad: 

Takes  badge,  admits  them,  and  closes  door. 

2nd  Ad: 

Whom  bringest  thou  there? 

Hodos: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  I bring  with  me  one  who  has  passed  the  trial  of  humiliation,  and  who  humbly 
desireth  admission  to  the  Tomb  of  the  Mystical  Mountain. 

2nd  Ad: 

Let  the  Aspirant  be  assisted  to  kneel. 

Aspirant  is  brought  to  curtained  door  of  Tomb  between  Third  Adept  and  Hodos. 

All  face  East,  and  kneel. 

2nd  Ad: 

From  Thine  Hand,  O Lord,  cometh  all  good.  The  characters  of  Nature  with  Thy  Fingers  Thou  hast 
traced;  but  none  can  read  them  unless  he  hath  been  taught  in  Thy  school.  Therefore,  even  as  servants 
look  unto  the  hands  of  their  masters  and  handmaidens  unto  their  mistresses,  even  so  our  eyes  look  unto 
Thee,  for  Thou  alone  art  our  help.  O Lord  our  God,  who  should  not  extol  Thee?  Who  should  not  praise 
Thee?  All  is  from  Thee,  All  belongeth  unto  Thee.  Either  Thy  Love  or  Thy  Anger  all  must  again  re-enter. 
Nothing  canst  thou  lose,  for  all  must  tend  unto  Thy  Honor  and  Majesty.  Thou  are  Lord  alone,  and  there 
is  none  beside  Thee.  Thou  doest  what  Thou  wilt  with  Thy  mighty  Arm,  and  none  can  escape  from  Thee. 
Thou  alone  helpest  in  their  necessity  the  humble,  the  meek-hearted,  and  the  poor,  who  submit 
themselves  unto  Thee;  and  whosoever  humbleth  himself  in  dust  and  ashes  before  Thee,  unto  such  an  one 
Thou  art  propitious.  Who  should  not  praise  Thee,  then,  0 Lord  of  the  Universe,  unto  Whom  there  is  none 
like?  Whose  dwelling  is  in  Heaven,  and  in  every  virtuous  and  God-fearing  heart.  O God  the  Vast  One, 
Thou  art  in  all  things.  O Nature,  Thou  Self  from  Nothing,  for  what  else  can  I call  Thee?  In  myself  I am 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


nothing.  In  Thee  I am  Self,  and  exist  in  Thy  Self-hood  from  Nothing.  Live  Thou  in  me,  and  bring  me 
unto  that  Self  which  is  in  Thee.  Amen.  Let  the  hands  of  the  Aspirant  be  unbound. 

(Done) 

Aspirant  remains  kneeling. 

Officers  rise. 

3rd  Ad: 

Think  not,  O Aspirant,  that  the  trial  of  humility  through  which  thou  hast  passed,  was  ordained  but  to  jest 
with  thy  feelings.  Far  from  us  be  any  such  design.  But  it  was  intended  to  point  out  to  thee  that  the  truly 
wise  man  is  but  little  in  his  own  eyes,  however  great  his  attainments  may  appear  to  the  ignorant,  and  that 
even  the  highest  intellectual  achievements  are  but  as  nothing  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  for 
He  looketh  at  the  heart.  It  is  written:  When  I consider  the  Heavens,  the  work  of  Thy  fingers,  the  moon 
and  stars  which  Thou  hast  ordained,  what  is  man  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him,  or  the  son  of  man  that 
thou  visitest  him?  And  couldst  thou  even  attain  unto  the  height  of  a God  upon  this  earth,  how  small  and 
insignificant  yet  wouldst  thou  be  in  the  presence  of  God  the  Vast  One. 

2nd  Ad: 

Rise,  then,  O Aspirant  of  the  Rose  of  Ruby  and  the  Cross  of  Gold.  Rise,  glorified  by  suffering.  Rise, 
purified  by  humility. 

Aspirant  rises. 

2nd  Ad: 

Despise  not  sadness,  and  hate  not  suffering,  for  they  are  the  Initiators  of  the  heart;  and  the  black  robe  of 
mourning  which  thou  wearest  is  at  once  the  symbol  of  sorrow  and  of  strength.  Boast  not  thyself  above 
thy  brother  if  he  hath  fallen,  for  how  knowest  thou  that  thou  couldst  have  withstood  the  same  temptation. 
Slander  not,  and  revile  not.  If  thou  canst  not  praise,  do  not  condemn.  When  thou  seest  another  in  trouble 
and  humiliation,  even  though  he  be  thy  enemy,  remember  the  time  of  thine  own  humiliation  when  thou 
didst  kneel  before  the  door  of  the  Tomb,  clothed  in  the  Robe  of  Mourning,  with  the  Chain  of  Affliction 
about  thy  neck,  and  thy  hands  bound  behind  thy  back,  and  rejoice  not  at  his  fall.  And  in  thine  intercourse 
with  the  members  of  our  Order,  let  thy  hand  given  unto  another  be  a sincere  and  genuine  pledge  of 
fraternity.  Respect  his  or  her  secrets  and  feelings  as  thou  wouldst  respect  thine  own.  Bear  with  one 
another  and  forgive  one  another,  even  as  the  Master  hath  said.  Very  Honored  Frater  Hodos  Chamelionis, 
what  is  the  symbolic  age  of  the  Aspirant? 

Hodos: 

His  days  are  an  hundred  and  twenty  years. 

2nd  Ad: 

It  is  written:  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man,  seeing  that  he  also  is  flesh,  yet  his  days  shall  be 
an  hundred  and  twenty  years.  Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  unto  what  do  those  120  years  of  the  Aspirant's 
symbolic  age  correspond? 

3rd  Ad: 

To  the  Five  Grades  of  the  First  Order  through  which  it  is  necessary  for  the  Aspirant  to  have  passed 
before  he  can  enter  the  Tomb  of  the  Sacred  Mountain.  For  the  three  months  interval  between  the  Grades 
of  Practicus  and  Philosophus  are  the  Regimen  of  the  Elements;  and  the  seven  months  between  the 


40 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Philosophus  and  the  Portal  symbolize  the  Regimen  of  the  Planets;  while  the  Elements  and  the  Planets 
both  work  in  the  Zodiac;  so  that  three  plus  seven  multiplied  by  twelve  yieldeth  the  number  120. 

2nd  Ad: 

0 Aspirant,  ere  thou  canst  enter  the  Tomb  of  the  Adepti  of  the  Rose  of  Ruby  and  the  Cross  of  Gold,  it  is 
necessary  to  take  a solemn  Obligation  of  Secrecy,  Fidelity,  Fraternity,  and  Justice.  But  as  in  all  the 
previous  obligations,  there  is  nothing  contained  therein  contrary  to  thy  civil,  moral,  or  religious  duties. 
Art  thou  willing  to  take  such  a pledge? 

Aspirant: 

1 am. 

2nd  Ad: 

Fet  the  Aspirant  be  bound  to  the  Cross  of  Suffering. 

Aspirant  is  led  to  the  Cross,  and  his  hands  put  through  the  running  nooses  and  cords  are 
bound  about  his  waist  and  feet.  Two  Adepti  stand  on  either  side  to  support  him. 

Third  Adept  takes  his  place  ready  to  hand  Cup  and  Dagger  to  Second  Adept  who  stand  in 
front  of  and  facing  Aspirant. 

Second  Adept  holds  out  Rose  Crucifix  to  Aspirant. 

2nd  Ad: 

The  Symbol  of  Suffering  is  the  symbol  of  strength.  Wherefore  bound  as  thou  art,  strive  to  raise  this  holy 
symbol  in  thy  hands,  for  he  that  will  not  strive  shall  not  attain. 

Aspirant  takes  Crucifix  in  both  hands,  the  cords  being  allowed  to  run  out  long  enough  to 
allow  him  to  do  so. 

2nd  Ad: 

1 invoke  Thee,  the  great  avenging  Angel  HUA,  in  the  divine  name  LAO,  that  Thou  mayest  invisibly  place 
Thy  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  Aspirant  in  attestation  of  his  Obligation. 

2nd  Ad: 

Raises  his  hands  on  high  to  invoke  the  force;  then  lowers  them  and  takes  crucifix. 

3rd  Ad: 

Receives  crucifix  and  places  it  on  Altar. 

Aspirant  is  now  bound  more  firmly  to  the  cross. 

2nd  Ad: 

Repeat  after  me  your  sacramental  Name,  and  say: 

OBLIGATION 

Kether: 

I,  (Frater  XYZ),  a member  of  the  Body  of  Christ,  do  this  day  spiritually  bind  myself,  even  as  I am  now 
bound  physically  upon  the  Cross  of  Suffering. 

Chokmah: 

That  I will  to  the  utmost  lead  a pure  and  unselfish  life,  and  will  prove  myself  a faithful  and  devoted 
servant  of  this  Order. 

Binah: 

That  I will  keep  secret  all  things  connected  with  the  Order,  and  its  Secret  Knowledge,  from  the  whole 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


world,  equally  from  him  who  is  a member  of  the  First  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  as  from  an  uninitiated 
person,  and  that  I will  maintain  the  Veil  of  strict  secrecy  between  the  First  and  Second  Orders. 

Chesed: 

That  I will  uphold  to  the  utmost  the  authority  of  the  Chiefs  of  the  Order,  and  that  I will  not  initiate  or 
advance  any  person  in  the  First  Order,  either  secretly  or  in  open  Temple,  without  due  authorization  and 
permission;  that  I will  neither  recommend  a Candidate  for  admission  to  the  First  Order  without  due 
judgment  and  assurance  that  he  or  she  is  worthy  of  so  great  a confidence  and  honor,  nor  unduly  press 
any  person  to  become  a candidate;  and  that  I will  superintend  any  examination  of  Members  of  lower 
Grades  without  fear  or  favor  in  any  way,  so  that  our  high  standard  of  knowledge  be  not  lowered  by  my 
instrumentality;  and  I further  undertake  to  see  that  the  necessary  interval  of  time  between  the  Grades  of 
Practicus  and  Philosophus  and  between  the  latter  Grade  and  the  Portal,  be,  when  possible,  maintained. 
Geburah: 

Furthermore,  that  I will  perform  all  practical  work  connected  with  this  Order  in  a place  concealed  and 
apart  from  the  gaze  of  the  outer  and  uninitiated  world,  and  that  I will  not  display  our  Magical 
Implements,  nor  reveal  the  use  of  the  same,  but  will  keep  secret  this  Inner  Rosicrucian  Knowledge  even 
as  the  same  hath  been  kept  secret  through  the  ages;  that  I will  not  make  any  symbol  or  Talisman  in  the 
Flashing  Colors  for  any  uninitiated  person  without  a special  permission  from  the  Chiefs  of  the  Order. 
That  I will  only  perform  any  practical  magic  before  the  uninitiated  which  is  of  a simple  and  already  well 
known  nature;  and  that  I will  show  them  no  secret  mode  of  working  whatsoever,  keeping  strictly 
concealed  from  them  our  modes  of  Tarot  and  other  Divination,  of  Clairvoyance,  of  Astral  projection,  of 
the  Consecration  of  Talismans  and  Symbols,  and  the  Rituals  of  the  Pentagram  and  Flexagram,  and  most 
especially  of  the  use  and  attribution  of  the  Flashing  Colors,  and  the  Vibratory  mode  of  pronouncing  the 
Divine  Names. 

Tiphareth: 

I further  promise  and  swear  that  with  the  Divine  permission  I will,  from  this  day  forward,  apply  myself 
to  the  Great  Work,  which  is,  to  purify  and  exalt  my  Spiritual  Nature  so  that  with  the  Divine  Aid  I may  at 
length  attain  to  be  more  than  human,  and  thus  gradually  raise  and  unite  myself  to  my  higher  and  Divine 
Genius,  and  that  in  this  event  1 will  not  abuse  the  great  power  entrusted  to  me. 

Netzach: 

1 furthermore  solemnly  pledge  myself  never  to  work  at  any  important  symbol  without  first  invocating  the 
highest  Divine  Names  connected  therewith,  and  especially  not  to  debase  my  knowledge  of  Practical 
Magic  to  purposes  of  evil  and  self-seeking,  and  low  material  gain  or  pleasure,  and  if  I do  this, 
notwithstanding  this  my  oath,  I invoke  the  Avenging  Angel  HUA,  that  the  evil  and  material  may  react  on 
me. 

Hod: 

1 further  promise  to  support  the  admission  of  both  sexes  to  our  Order,  on  a perfect  equality,  and  that  1 
will  always  display  brotherly  love  and  forbearance  towards  the  members  of  the  whole  Order,  neither 
slandering  nor  evil-speaking,  nor  repeating  nor  tale-bearing,  whereby  strife  and  ill-feeling  may  be 
engendered. 

Yesod: 

1 also  undertake  to  work  unassisted  at  the  subjects  prescribed  to  study  in  the  various  practical  grades 


42 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


from  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor  to  Adept  Adeptus  Minor,  on  pain  of  being  degraded  to  that  of  Lord  of  the 
Paths  of  the  Portal  only. 

Malkuth: 

Finally,  if  in  my  travels  I should  meet  a stranger  who  professes  to  be  a member  of  the  Rosicrucian  Order, 
1 will  examine  him  with  care  before  acknowledging  him  to  be  such.  Such  are  the  words  of  this  my 
Obligation  as  an  Adeptus  Minor,  whereunto  I pledge  myself  in  the  Presence  of  the  Divine  One,  and  of 
the  Great  Avenging  Angel,  HUA,  and  if  I fail  herein,  may  my  Rose  be  disintegrated  and  my  power  in 
Magic  cease. 

3rd  Ad: 

Third  hands  Dagger  to  Second  Adept  and  holds  Cup  conveniently  for  him. 

2nd  Ad: 

Dips  point  of  Dagger  in  Wine  and  makes  Cross  on  Aspirant  — on  brow,  feet,  right  hand  and  left  hand, 
and  heart,,  saying: 

2nd  Ad: 

(For  brow.)  There  are  Three  that  bear  witness  in  Heaven;  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
these  Three  are  One. 

(For  feet.)  There  are  Three  that  bear  witness  on  Earth;  the  Spirit,  the  Water,  and  the  Blood,  and 
these  Three  agree  in  One. 

(Right  hand.)  Except  ye  be  born  of  Water  and  the  Spirit,  ye  cannot  enter  the  Kingdom  of 

Heaven. 

(Left  hand.)  If  ye  be  crucified  with  Christ,  ye  shall  also  reign  with  Him.  (He  marks  heart  in 
silence.  Then  says:) 

2nd  Ad: 

Let  the  Aspirant  be  released  from  the  Cross  of  Suffering.  It  is  written,  that  he  who  humbleth  himself 
shall  be  exalted.  Very  Honored  Frater  Hodos  Chamelionis,  remove  from  the  Aspirant  the  Chain  of 
Humility  and  the  Robe  of  Mourning,  and  re-invest  him  with  the  Crossed  Sashes. 

(Done) 

3rd  Ad: 

Know,  then,  O Aspirant,  that  the  Mysteries  of  the  Rose  and  the  Cross  have  existed  from  time 
immemorial,  and  that  the  Rites  were  practiced,  and  the  Wisdom  taught,  in  Egypt,  Eleusis,  Samothrace, 
Persia,  Chaldea  and  India,  and  in  far  more  ancient  lands.  The  story  of  the  introduction  of  these  mysteries 
into  mediaeval  Europe  has  thus  been  handed  down  to  us.  In  1378  was  born  the  Chief  and  originator  of 
our  Fraternity  in  Europe.  He  was  of  a noble  German  family,  but  poor,  and  in  the  fifth  year  of  his  age  was 
placed  in  a cloister  where  he  learned  both  Greek  and  Latin.  While  yet  a youth  he  accompanied  a certain 
brother  P.A.L.  on  a pilgrimage  to  the  Holy  Land,  but  the  latter,  dying  at  Cyprus,  he  himself  went  to 
Damascus.  There  was  then  in  Arabia  a Temple  of  the  Order  which  was  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue 
"Damkar",  that  is  The  Blood  of  the  Lamb.  There  he  was  duly  initiated  and  took  the  Mystic  title  Christian 
Rosenkreutz,  or  Christian  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  He  then  so  far  improved  his  knowledge  of  the  Arabian 
tongue  that  in  the  following  year  he  translated  the  book  "M"  into  Latin,  which  he  afterwards  brought 
back  with  him  to  Europe.  After  three  years  he  went  on  into  Egypt,  where  there  was  another  Temple  of 
the  Order.  There  he  remained  for  a time  still  studying  the  mysteries  of  Nature.  After  this,  he  traveled  by 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


sea  to  the  city  of  Fessa,  where  he  was  welcomed  at  the  Temple  there  established,  and  he  there  obtained 
the  knowledge  and  the  acquaintance  of  the  habitants  of  the  Elements,  who  revealed  unto  him  many  of 
their  secrets.  Of  the  Fraternity  he  confessed  that  they  had  not  retained  their  Wisdom  in  its  primal  purity, 
and  that  their  Kabala  was  to  a certain  extent  altered  to  their  religion.  Nevertheless,  he  learned  much 
there.  After  a stay  of  two  years  he  came  to  Spain,  where  he  endeavored  to  reform  the  errors  of  the 
learned  according  to  the  pure  knowledge  he  had  received.  But  it  was  to  them  a laughing  matter,  and  they 
reviled  and  rejected  him,  even  as  the  prophets  of  old  were  rejected.  Thus  also  was  he  treated  by  those  of 
his  own  and  other  nations  when  he  showed  them  the  errors  that  had  crept  into  their  religions.  So,  after 
five  years  residence  in  Germany,  he  initiated  three  of  his  former  monastic  brethren,  Fraters  G.W.,  I.  A., 
and  I.O.,  who  had  more  knowledge  than  many  others  at  that  time.  And  by  these  four  was  made  the 
foundation  of  the  Fraternity  in  Europe.  These  worked  and  studied  at  the  writings  and  other  knowledge 
which  C.R.C.  had  brought  with  him,  and  by  them  was  some  of  the  Magical  Fanguage  transcribed  (which 
is  that  of  the  Elemental  Tablets)  and  a Dictionary  thereof  made;  and  the  Rituals  and  part  of  the  Book 
"M"  were  transcribed.  For  the  True  Order  of  the  Rose  Cross  descendeth  into  the  depths,  and  ascendeth 
into  the  heights,  even  unto  the  Throne  of  God  Himself,  and  includeth  even  Archangels,  Angels  and 
Spirits.  These  four  Fraters  also  erected  a building  to  serve  for  the  Temple  and  Headquarters  of  their 
Order,  and  called  it  the  Collegium  ad  Spiritum  Sanctum,  or  the  College  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  being 
now  finished,  and  the  work  of  establishing  the  Order  extremely  heavy,  and  because  they  devoted  much 
time  to  the  healing  of  those  sick  and  possessed,  who  resorted  to  them,  they  initiated  four  others,  viz.: 
Fraters  R.C.  (the  son  of  the  deceased  father's  brother  of  C.R.C. ),  C.B.  a skilful  artist,  B.C.,  and  P.D.,  who 
was  to  be  Cancellarius;  all  being  Germans  except  I.A.,  and  now  eight  in  number.  Their  agreement  was: 

1.  That  none  of  them  should  profess  any  other  thing,  than  but  to  cure  the  sick, 
and  that  freely. 

2.  That  they  should  not  be  constrained  to  wear  any  distinctive  dress,  but  there 
in  follow  the  custom  of  the  country. 

3.  That  every  year  on  the  day  of  Corpus  Christi,  they  should  meet  at  the 
Collegium  ad  Spiritum  Sanctum,  or  write  the  cause  of  absence. 

4.  Every  one  should  look  for  some  worthy  person  of  either  sex,  who  after  his 
decease  might  succeed  him. 

5.  The  word  R.C.  to  be  their  mark,  seal,  and  character. 

The  Fraternity  to  remain  secret  for  one  hundred  years.  Five  of  the  Fraters  were  to  travel  in 
different  countries,  and  two  were  to  remain  with  Christian  Rosenkreutz. 

2nd  Ad: 

Frater  I.O.  was  the  first  to  die,  and  then  in  England  where  he  had  wrought  many  wonderful  cures.  He 
was  an  expert  Kabbalist  as  his  book  "H"  witnesseth.  His  death  had  been  previously  foretold  him  by 
C.R.C.  but  those  who  were  later  admitted  were  of  the  First  Order,  and  knew  not  when  C.R.  died,  and 
save  what  they  learned  from  Frater  A.,  the  successor  of  D.  of  the  Second  Order  and  from  their  library 
after  his  death,  knew  little  of  the  earlier  and  higher  Members,  and  of  the  Founder,  nor  yet  whether  those 
of  the  Second  Order  were  admitted  to  the  Wisdom  of  the  highest  members.  The  discovery  then  of  the 
Tomb  wherein  that  highly  illuminated  Man  of  God,  our  Father  C.R.C.,  was  buried  occurred  as  follows. 


44 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


After  Frater  A.  died  in  Gallia  Narbonensi,  there  succeeded  in  his  place  Frater  N.N.  He,  while  repairing  a 
part  of  the  building  of  the  College  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  endeavored  to  remove  a brass  memorial  tablet 
which  bore  the  names  of  certain  brethren,  and  some  other  things.  In  this  tablet  was  the  head  of  a strong 
nail  or  bolt,  so  that  when  the  tablet  was  forcibly  wrenched  away  it  pulled  with  it  a large  stone  which  thus 
partially  uncovered  a secret  door,  (he  draws  back  curtain,  revealing  door),  upon  which  was  inscribed  in 
large  letters  Post  CXX  Annos  Patebo  — After  an  hundred  and  twenty  years  I shall  open,  with  the  year  of 
our  Lord  under,  1484.  Frater  N.N.,  and  those  with  him  then  cleared  away  the  rest  of  the  brickwork,  but 
let  it  remain  that  night  unopened  as  they  wished  first  to  consult  the  ROTA. 

3rd  Ad: 

You  will  now  quit  the  Portal  for  a short  time,  and  on  your  return  the  Ceremony  of  Opening  the  Tomb 
will  be  proceeded  with.  Take  with  you  this  Wand  and  Crux  Ansata,  which  will  ensure  your  re-admission. 

Aspirant  goes  out,  carrying  the  Wand  and  Crux  of  Chief  Adept. 


45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


SECOND  POINT 


(Prepare  Tomb  as  in  diagram.  Chief  Adept  lies  in  Pastos  on  his  back  to  represent  C.  R.  C.  He  is 
clothed  in  full  Regalia.  On  his  breast  is  the  complete  Symbol  of  the  Rosy  Cross  suspended  from  the 
double  Phoenix  Collar.  His  arms  are  crossed  on  breast,  and  he  holds  Crook  and  Scourge.  Between  them 


46 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


lies  the  book  "T."  Lid  of  Pastos  closed  and  Circular  Altar  stands  over  it.  Other  Adepti  outside  Tomb  as 
before.  On  the  Altar  are  replaced  Rose  Cross,  Cup  of  Wine,  Chain  and  Dagger.) 

2nd  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  let  the  Aspirant  now  be  admitted. 

3rd  Ad: 

Opens  the  door,  and  admits  Aspirant,  who  carries  Wand  and  Crux  of  Chief.  He  is  placed  in  front  of 
and  facing  Vault  Door. 

2nd  Ad: 

Before  the  Door  of  the  Tomb,  as  symbolic  Guardians,  are  the  Elemental  Tablets,  and  the  Kerubic 
Emblems,  even  as  before  the  mystical  Gate  of  Eden  stood  the  watchful  Kerabim,  and  the  Sword  of 
Flame.  These  Kerubic  Emblems  be  the  powers  of  the  Angles  of  the  Tablets.  The  Circle  represents  the 
four  Angles  bound  together  in  each  Tablet  through  the  operation  of  the  all  pervading  Spirit,  while  the 
Cross  within  forms  with  its  spokes  the  Wheels  of  Ezekiel's  Vision;  and  therefore  are  the  Cross  and  the 
Circle  white  to  represent  the  purity  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  And  inasmuch  as  we  do  not  find  the  Elements 
unmixed,  but  each  bound  together  with  each  — so  that  in  the  Air  we  find  not  only  that  which  is  subtle 
and  tenuous,  but  also  the  qualities  of  heat,  moisture  and  dryness,  bound  together  in  that  all-wandering 
Element;  and  further  also  that  in  Fire,  Water  and  Earth  we  find  the  same  mixture  of  Nature  — therefore 
the  Four  Elements  are  bound  to  each  Kerubic  Emblem  counterchanged  with  the  color  of  the  Element 
wherein  they  operate;  even  as  in  the  Vision  of  Ezekiel  each  Kerub  had  four  faces  and  four  wings.  Forget 
not  therefore  that  the  Tablets  and  the  Kerubim  are  the  Guardians  of  the  Tomb  of  the  Adepti.  Let  thy 
tongue  keep  silence  on  our  mysteries.  Restrain  even  the  thought  of  thy  heart  lest  a bird  of  the  air  carry 
the  matter. 

3rd  Ad: 

Upon  more  closely  examining  the  Door  of  the  Tomb,  you  will  perceive,  even  as  Frater  N.N.,  and  those 
with  him  did  perceive,  that  beneath  the  CXX  in  the  inscription  were  placed  the  characters  IX  thus; 

POST  CXX  ANNOS  PATEBO 
IX 

This  being  equivalent  to  Post  Annos  Lux  Crucis  Patebo  - At  the  end  of  120  years,  I,  the  Light  of 
the  Cross,  will  disclose  myself.  For  the  letters  forming  LVX  are  made  from  the  dismembered  and 
conjoined  angles  of  the  Cross;  and  120  is  the  product  of  the  numbers  from  1 to  5,  multiplied  in  regular 
progression,  which  number  five  is  symbolized  in  the  Cross  with  four  extremities  and  one  center  point. 

2nd  Ad: 

On  the  following  morning,  Frater  N.N.  and  his  companions  forced  open  the  door  (he  opens  it  wide)  and 
there  appeared  to  their  sight  a Tomb  of  Seven  Sides  and  Seven  Corners.  Every  side  was  five  feet  broad, 
and  eight  feet  high,  even  as  the  same  is  faithfully  represented  before  you. 

2nd  Ad: 

Enters  and  passes  by  North  to  East  of  Vault,  and  turns  to  face  West. 

3rd  Ad: 

Places  Aspirant  on  North  facing  South,  and  takes  his  place  at  South  facing  North. 

2nd  Ad: 

Although  in  the  Tomb  the  Sun  does  not  shine,  it  is  lit  by  the  symbolic  Rose  of  our  Order  in  the  center  of 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  first  heptagonal  ceiling.  In  the  midst  of  the  Tomb  stands  a circular  Altar  with  these  devices  and 
descriptions  on  it:  A.G.  R.C.,  Ad  Gloriam  Roseae  Crucis.  A.C.R.G.,  Ad  Crucis  Rosae  Gloriam.  Hoc 
Universal  Compendium  Unius  Mihi  Sepulchrum  Feci.  Unto  the  Glory  of  the  Rose  Cross  1 have 
constructed  this  Tomb  for  myself  as  a Compendium  of  the  Universal  Unity.  Within  the  next  circle  is 
written:  Yeheshuah  Mihi  Omnia,  Yeheshuah  is  all  things  to  me.  In  the  center  are  four  figures  of  the 
Kerubim  enclosed  within  circles  surrounded  by  the  following  four  inscriptions  and  each  distinguished  by 
one  of  the  letters  of  the  Tetragrammaton:  Yod,  Lion  Nequaquam  Vacuum,  Nowhere  a Void.  Heh,  Eagle, 
Libertas  Evangelii,  Liberty  of  the  Gospel.  Vau,  Man,  Dei  Intacta  Gloria,  Unsullied  Glory  of  God.  Heh 
(f),  Ox,  Legis  Jugum,  Yoke  of  the  Law.  And  in  the  midst  of  all  is  Shin,  the  Letter  of  the  Spirit  forming 
thus  the  Divine  Name  Yeheshuah,  from  the  Tetragrammaton.  Therefore,  by  God's  Grace,  having  come 
thus  far,  let  us  kneel  down  together,  and  say: 

All  kneel,  joining  wands  above  Altar. 

2nd  Ad: 

Unto  Thee,  Sole  Wise,  Sole  Mighty  and  Sole  Eternal  One,  be  praise  and  Glory  forever,  Who  has 
permitted  this  Aspirant  who  now  kneeleth  before  Thee  to  penetrate  thus  far  into  the  Sanctuary  of  Thy 
Mysteries.  Not  unto  us,  but  unto  Thy  Name  be  the  Glory.  Let  the  influence  of  Thy  Divine  Ones  descend 
upon  his  head,  and  teach  him  the  value  of  self-sacrifice,  so  that  he  shrink  not  in  the  hour  of  trial,  but  that 
thus  his  name  may  be  written  on  high,  and  that  his  Genius  may  stand  in  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ones, 
in  that  hour  when  the  Son  of  Man  is  invoked  before  the  Lord  of  Spirits  and  His  Name  in  the  presence  of 
the  Ancient  of  Days.  It  is  written:  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  take  up  his  cross,  and  deny 
himself,  and  follow  Me. 

3rd  Ad: 

Hands  Chain  to  Aspirant,  and  takes  Wand  and  Cross  from  him. 

2nd  Ad: 

Take  therefore  this  Chain,  O Aspirant,  and  place  it  about  thy  neck  and  say:  I accept  the  Bonds  of 
Suffering  and  Self-Sacrifice. 

2nd  Ad: 

3rd  Ad: 

Rise. 

Aspirant: 

Repeats  words  as  directed. 

2nd  Ad: 

Rise,  then,  my  Lrater,  in  the  symbol  of  self-renunciation  and  extend  thine  arms  in  the  form  of  a cross. 

Aspirant: 

Rises,  feet  together,  and  arms  extended. 

2nd  Ad: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  take  from  the  Altar  the  Dagger  of  Penance  and  the  Cup  of  Tribulation,  that  I 
may  confirm  the  vow  of  the  Aspirant  forever  by  marking  him  afresh  with  the  Stigmata  of  the  Cross. 
(Second  takes  Dagger  from  Third  and  marks  Aspirant  anew  as  at  Obligation:  brow,  feet,  right  hand,  left 
hand,  and  heart.  Gives  Dagger  back  to  Third  who  replaces  it  on  Altar,  and  then  hands  Aspirant  the  Rose 
Crucifix.)  Take  that  symbol,  raise  it  with  both  hands  above  thy  head  and  say:  Thus  will  I uphold  the  Sign 


48 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


of  Suffering  and  of  Strength.  And  I heard  the  voice  of  the  King  of  Earth  cry  aloud  and  say:  He  that  aideth 
me  in  my  suffering,  the  same  shall  partake  with  me  in  my  rising.  Replace  then,  O Aspirant,  that  Cross 
upon  the  Altar,  and  say:  In  and  by  that  Sign,  I demand  that  the  Pastos  of  our  Founder  be  opened,  for  my 
victory  is  in  the  Cross  of  the  Rose.  For  it  is  written  If  ye  be  crucified  with  Christ,  ye  shall  also  reign  with 
Him. 

Aspirant: 

Replaces  Crucifix  and  repeats  words  as  directed. 

3rd  Ad: 

Gives  him  back  Wand  and  Crux  of  Chief  Adept. 

2nd  Ad: 

3rd  Ad: 

Move  away  Altar  revealing  upper  part  of  Pastos.  They  open  lid,  disclosing  Chief  Adept  within. 

3rd  Ad: 

And  the  Light  shineth  in  Darkness,  and  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not. 

2nd  Ad: 

Touch  with  the  head  of  thy  Wand  the  Rose  and  Cross  upon  the  breast  of  the  Form  before  thee,  and  say: 
Out  of  the  darkness,  let  the  light  arise. 

(Done) 

Ch.  Ad: 

Without  moving  or  opening  his  eyes,  says: 

Ch.  Ad: 

Buried  with  that  Light  in  a mystical  death,  rising  again  in  a mystical  resurrection,  cleansed  and  purified 
through  Him  our  Master,  0 Brother  of  the  Cross  and  the  Rose.  Like  Him,  O Adepts  of  all  ages,  have  ye 
toiled.  Like  Him  have  ye  suffered  tribulation.  Poverty,  torture  and  death  have  ye  passed  through.  They 
have  been  but  the  purification  of  the  Gold.  In  the  alembic  of  thine  heart,  through  the  athanor  of  affliction, 
seek  thou  the  true  stone  of  the  Wise. 

Aspirant: 

Gives  Wand  and  Crux  to  Chief  Adept. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Gives  in  exchange  the  Crook  and  Scourge. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Quit  then,  this  Tomb,  O Aspirant,  with  thine  arms  crossed  upon  thy  breast,  bearing  in  thy  right  hand  the 
Crook  of  Mercy  and  in  thy  left  the  Scourge  of  Severity,  the  emblems  of  those  Eternal  Forces  betwixt 
which  the  equilibrium  of  the  Universe  dependeth;  those  forces  whose  reconciliation  is  the  Key  of  Life, 
whose  separation  is  evil  and  death.  Therefore  thou  art  inexcusable,  whosoever  thou  art,  that  judgest 
another,  for  in  that  thou  condemnest  another,  thou  condemnest  but  thyself.  Be  thou  therefore  merciful, 
even  as  thy  Father  who  is  in  Heaven  is  merciful.  Remember  that  tremendous  Obligation  of  rectitude  and 
self-sacrifice  which  thou  hast  voluntarily  taken  upon  thyself,  and  tremble  thereat.  And  let  the  humble 
prayer  of  thy  heart  be:  God,  be  merciful  to  me  a sinner,  and  keep  me  in  the  pathway  of  Truth. 

3rd  Ad: 

Thus,  then,  did  Frater  N.  N.  and  his  companions,  having  moved  aside  the  Circular  Altar,  and  having 


49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


raised  the  brazen  plate  or  lid  of  the  Pastos,  discover  the  body  of  our  Founder,  with  all  the  ornaments  and 
insignia  as  here  shown  before  you.  Upon  his  breast  was  the  Book  "T,"  a scroll  explaining  in  full  the 
mystic  Tarot;  at  the  end  of  which  was  written  a brief  paragraph  concerning  Christian  Rosenkreutz, 
beneath  which  the  earlier  Fraters  had  inscribed  their  names.  Following  this  came  the  names  of  the  three 
Highest  Chiefs  of  the  Order,  viz:  Frater  Hugo  Alverda,  the  Phrisian,  in  the  576th  year  of  his  age.  Frater 
Franciscus  de  Bry,  the  Gaul,  in  the  495th  year  of  his  age.  Frater  Elman  Zata,  the  Arab,  in  the  463rd  year  of 
his  age.  Last  of  all  was  written:  Ex  Deo  Nascimur;  In  Yeheshuah  Morimur;  Per  Spiritum  Sanctum 
Reviviscimus.  In  God  are  we  born,  in  Yeheshuah  we  die,  through  the  Holy  Spirit  we  rise  again. 

They  re-close  the  Pastos,  and  replace  Altar. 

2nd  Ad: 

So,  then,  our  Frater  N.  N.  and  his  companions  re-closed  the  Pastos  for  a time,  set  the  Altar  over  it,  shut 
the  Door  of  the  Tomb,  and  placed  their  seals  upon  it. 

All  quit  the  Vault. 

Aspirant  carries  Crook  and  Scourge;  the  door  is  closed,  and  Aspirant  is  led  out  of  the  Portal. 
The  Tomb  is  then  re-opened  and  Chief  Adept  released. 

THIRD  POINT 

(Tomb  prepared  as  in  diagram.  Door  not  quite  closed.  In  South  East  angle  is  diagram  of 
Minutum  Mundum;  in  N.E.  that  of  Sword  and  Serpent.  Due  East,  the  Mountain.  Altar  as  before 
with  Crook  and  Scourge  added  later.  Chief  stands  at  East  with  arms  extended.  Pastos  outside  in 
Portal,  head  to  the  East.  Lid  laid  side  by  side  with  space  between.  Second  Adept  seated  at  head, 
Third  at  foot  of  Pastos.  Aspirant  is  admitted,  still  carrying  Crook  and  Scourge.  2nd  and  3rd 
Adepts  discard  cloaks.) 

2nd  Ad: 

And  lo,  two  Angels  in  White  apparel  sitting,  the  one  at  the  head  and  the  other  at  the  foot,  where  the  body 
of  the  Master  had  lain,  who  said:  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead? 

Ch.  Ad: 

I am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.  He  that  belie veth  in  Me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live.  And 
whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  Me,  shall  never  die. 

2nd  Ad: 

Behold  the  Image  (points  to  lower  half  of  lid)  of  the  Justified  One,  crucified  on  the  Infernal  Rivers  of 
DAATH,  and  thus  rescuing  Malkuth  from  the  folds  of  the  Red  Dragon.  (Third  points  to  upper  half  of 
lid.) 

3rd  Ad: 

And  being  turned,  I saw  Seven  Golden  Light-bearers,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Light-bearers,  One  like 
unto  the  Ben  Adam,  clothed  with  a garment  down  to  the  feet,  and  girt  with  a Golden  Girdle.  His  head 
and  his  hair  were  white  as  snow,  and  His  eyes  as  flaming  fire;  His  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they 
burned  in  a furnace.  And  His  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters.  And  He  had  in  His  right  hand  Seven 
Stars,  and  out  of  his  mouth  went  the  Sword  of  Llame,  and  his  countenance  was  as  the  Sun  in  His 
Strength. 


50 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Ch.  Ad: 

I am  the  First  and  I am  the  Last.  I am  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead,  and  behold!  I am  alive  for  evermore, 
and  hold  the  keys  of  Death  and  of  Hell. 

2nd  Ad: 

He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  Assemblies. 

2nd  Ad: 

3rd  Ad: 

Open  Door  of  Tomb,  and  lead  Aspirant  in.  They  kneel  down  West  of  Altar  with  heads  bent.  Chief 
stands  at  East  of  Altar  with  arms  extended. 

Ch.  Ad: 

For  I know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  He  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth.  I am  the 
Way,  the  Truth  and  the  Life.  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me.  I am  the  purified.  I have  passed 
through  the  Gates  of  Darkness  into  Light.  I have  fought  upon  earth  for  Good.  I have  finished  my  Work.  1 
have  entered  into  the  Invisible.  I am  the  Sun  in  his  rising.  I have  passed  through  the  hour  of  cloud  and  of 
night.  I am  Amoun,  the  Concealed  One,  the  Opener  of  the  Day.  I am  Osiris  Onnophris,  the  Justified  One. 
I am  the  Lord  of  Life  triumphant  over  Death.  There  is  no  part  of  me  which  is  not  of  the  Gods.  I am  the 
Preparer  of  the  Pathway,  the  Rescuer  unto  the  Light;  Out  of  the  Darkness,  let  that  Light  arise. 

Aspirant: 

Before  I was  blind,  but  now  I see. 

Ch.  Ad: 

I am  the  Reconciler  with  the  Ineffable.  I am  the  Dweller  of  the  Invisible.  Let  the  White  Brilliance  of  the 
Spirit  Divine  descend.  (Chief  raises  his  hands  invoking  the  Divine  White  Brilliance.  There  is  a pause.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

(To  Aspirant ) Arise  now  as  an  Adeptus  Minor  of  the  Rose  of  Ruby  and  the  Cross  of  Gold,  in  the  sign  of 
Osiris  slain. 

All  rise. 

2nd  Ad: 

3rd  Ad: 

Raise  Aspirant,  and  extend  his  arms  in  a cross.  They  then  re-cross  his  arms  on  his  breast  and  turn 
him  to  face  West. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Advances  within  reach  of  Aspirant. 

3rd  Ad: 

Stands  in  N.  W. 

Ch.  Ad: 

2nd  Ad: 

3rd  Ad: 

They  both  join  Wands  over  his  head  and  Cruces  a little  lower. 

All: 

We  receive  thee  as  an  Adeptus  Minor  in  the  Sign  of  Rectitude  and  Self-Sacrifice. 

Still  keeping  Wands  joined  over  the  lower  Cruces. 


51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Ch.  Ad: 

Chief  touching  base  of  brain  with  hand. 

2nd  Ad: 

Touches  left  temple  with  hand. 

3rd  Ad: 

Touches  right  temple  with  hand. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Be  thy  mind  opened  unto  the  higher. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Places  Crux  against  spine  between  shoulder  blades. 

2nd  Ad: 

Places  Crux  against  left  breast. 

3rd  Ad: 

Places  Crux  against  right  breast. 

2nd  Ad: 

Be  thy  heart  a center  of  Light. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Places  Crux  at  the  base  of  the  spine. 

2nd  Ad: 

Places  Crux  at  left  hip. 

3rd  Ad: 

Places  Crux  at  right  hip. 

3rd  Ad: 

Be  thy  body  the  Temple  of  the  Rosy  Cross. 

Aspirant  is  faced  to  East. 

Adepts  return  to  former  positions.  Crook  and  Scourge  are  laid  on  Altar  over  Dagger,  crossing 
at  yellow  bands. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Repeat  with  us  the  following  words  which  are  the  Signs  of  the  Hidden  Wisdom  of  our  Order. 

Aspirant  is  made  to  repeat  each  word  after  the  Officer. 

All  Cross  Wands 
Ch.  Ad: 

I. 

2nd  Ad: 

N. 

3rd  Ad: 

R. 

All: 

1. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Yod. 


52 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


2nd  Ad: 

Nun. 

3rd  Ad: 

Resh. 

All: 

Yod. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Virgo,  Isis,  Mighty  Mother. 

2nd  Ad: 

Scorpio,  Apophis,  Destroyer. 

3rd  Ad: 

Sol,  Osiris,  Slain  and  Risen. 

All: 

Isis,  Apophis,  Osiris,  I.A.O. 

All  separate  Wands  and  give  the  Sign  of  Osiris  Slain. 

All: 

The  Sign  of  Osiris  Slain. 

Ch.  Ad: 

L.  The  Sign  of  Mourning  of  Isis  (With  bowed  head.) 

2nd  Ad: 

V.  The  Sign  of  Typhon  and  Apophis  (Head  erect.) 

All: 

X.  Isis,  Apophis,  Osiris,  I.A.O.  (They  give  the  saluting  Sign  with  heads  bowed.  A pause.) 

Ch.  Ad: 

The  Mystic  number  of  this  Grade  is  21,  the  Heptad  multiplied  by  the  Triad;  and  from  it  is  derived  the 
Password  of  this  Grade  which  is  E HEI  EH,  which  should  be  lettered  separately  when  given  thus, 

Ch.  Ad: 

Aleph 

Aspirant: 

Heh. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Yod. 

Aspirant: 

Heh. 

Ch.  Ad: 

The  Keyword  is  I.  N.  R.  I.  which  is  inscribed  with  its  correspondences  upon  this  complete  symbol  of  the 
Rose  and  Cross  which  I bear  upon  my  breast.  'These  letters  have  been  occasionally  used  as  the  initials  of 
the  following  sentences:  JESUS  NAZARENUS  REX  JUDECORUM,  whence  it  symbolizes  the  Grand 
Word  of  this  Grade  which  is  YEHESHUAH  or  the  Hebrew  Name  of  Jesus,  formed  of  the  Holy  letter 
Shin,  representing  the  Ruach  Elohim,  placed  within  the  Center  of  the  Name  Tetragrammaton.  Also  it  has 


53 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


been  interpreted  as:  Igne  Natura  Renovatur  Integra,  Igne  Natura  Reliovando  Integrat,  Igne  Nitrum  Roris 
Invenitur;  Intra  Nobis  Regnum  dei. 

Ch.  Ad: 

(Indicating  Diagram  of  the  Minutum  Mundum.)  Behold  the  diagram  Minutum  Mundum  sive 
Fundamental  Coloris  — the  Small  Universe  or  Foundation  Of  Color.  Treasure  it  in  thy  heart,  and  mark  it 
well,  seeing  that  herein  is  the  Key  of  Nature.  It  is,  as  thou  seest,  the  diagram  of  the  Sephiroth  and  the 
Paths,  with  the  colors  appropriately  attributed  thereto.  See  that  thou  reveal  it  not  to  the  profane,  for  man, 
and  great  are  its  mysteries.  Kether  is  the  highest  of  all,  and  herein  scintillates  the  Divine  White 
Brilliance,  concerning  which  it  is  not  fitting  that  I should  speak  more  fully.  Chokmah  is  Grey,  the 
mixture  of  colors.  Binah  is  darkness,  the  absorption  of  colors.  And  thus  is  the  Supernal  Triad  completed. 
In  Kether  is  the  root  of  the  Golden  Glory,,  and  thence  is  the  yellow  reflected  into  Tiphareth.  In  Chokmah 
is  the  root  of  Blue,  and  this  is  reflected  into  Chesed;  in  Binah  is  the  root  of  Red,  and  this  is  reflected  into 
Geburah.  And  thus  is  the  first  reflected  Triad  completed.  The  beams  of  Chesed  and  Tiphareth  meet  in 
Netzach  and  yield  Green.  The  beams  of  Geburah  and  Tiphareth  meet  in  Hod  and  yield  a tawny  Orange. 
The  beams  of  Chesed  and  Geburah  fall  in  Yesod  and  yield  Purple.  And  thus  is  the  Third  Triad 
completed.  And  from  the  rays  of  the  Third  Triad  are  these  three  colors  shown  in  Malkuth,  together  with  a 
fourth  which  is  the  synthesis.  For  from  the  Orange  Tawny  of  Hod  and  the  Greening  Nature  of  Netzach  is 
reflected  a certain  Greenish  Citrine,  Citron,  from  the  Orange  Tawny  mixed  with  the  Puce  of  Yesod 
proccedeth  a red  russet  Brown.  Russet;  and  from  the  Green  and  the  Puce  cometh  a certain  other 
darkening  green.  Olive.  The  synthesis  of  all  these  is  blackness  and  bordereth  on  the  Qlippoth.  But  the 
colors  of  the  22  Paths  are  derived  from  and  find  their  roots  in  those  of  the  First  Reflected  Triad  of  the 
Sephiroth,  the  Three  Supemals  not  otherwise  entering  into  their  composition,  and  thus  are  their  positive 
colors  found.  Unto  the  Air  is  ascribed  the  Yellow  color  of  Tiphareth.  Unto  the  Water  is  ascribed  the  Blue 
Color  of  Chesed.  Unto  the  Fire  is  ascribed  the  Red  Color  of  Geburah.  The  colors  are  to  be  found  in 
Malkuth.  Those  of  the  Planets  are  in  the  Rainbow  scale-,  thus:  Saturn,  Indigo;  lupiter,  Violet;  Mars,  Red; 
Sol,  Orange;  Mercury,  Yellow;  Venus,  Green;  Luna,  Blue.  Unto  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  are  ascribed  the 
following:  Aries,  Scarlet;  Taurus,  Red-Orange;  Gemini,  Orange;  Cancer,  Amber;  Leo,  Greenish-Yellow; 
Virgo,  Yellowish-Green;  Libra,  Emerald;  Scorpio,  Greenish-Blue;  Sagittarius,  Blue;  Capricornus, 

Indigo;  Aquarius,  Purple;  Pisces,  Crimson.  Further,  thou  wilt  observe  that  the  colors  of  the  Paths  and  the 
Sephiroth  form  a mutual  balance  and  harmony  on  the  Tree.  Colors  are  Forces,  the  Signatures  of  the 
Forces;  and  the  Child  of  the  children  of  the  Forces  art  thou.  And  therefore  about  the  Throne  of  the 
Mighty  One  is  a Rainbow  of  Glory,  and  at  His  Feet  is  the  Crystal  Sea.  But  there  are  many  other 
attributions  of  color  also,  seeing  that  the  respective  rays  meet  and  blend  with  each  other.  And  therefore 
do  I greet  thee  with  the  Mystic  Title  of  Hodos  Chamelionis,  the  Path  of  the  Chameleon,  the  Path  of 
Mixed  Colors,  and  I greet  thee  the  Symbol  of  Hiddekel,  the  third  River  which  floweth  towards  the  East 
of  Assiah. 

They  return  to  Altar,  and  2nd  Adept  indicates  Crook  and  Scourge  thereon. 

2nd  Ad: 

The  colors  of  the  Crook  and  Scourge  are  taken  from  those  of  the  Minutum  Mundum  Diagram,  and  they 
thus  represent  the  just  equilibrium  between  Mercy  and  Severity  on  the  Tree  of  Life.  The  Crook  therefore 
is  divided  into  the  colors  Symbolic  of:  Kether,  Aleph,  Chokmah,  Taurus,  Chesed,  Leo,  Tiphareth,  Aries, 


54 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Hod,  Capricornus.  And  the  Scourge  into  those  symbolizing:  Netzach,  Scorpio,  Tiphareth,  Gemini,  Binah, 
Cancer,  Geburah,  Mem. 

3rd  Ad: 

(Indicates  Sword  and  Serpent .)  The  colors  of  the  Minutum  Mundum  are  also  the  key  to  those  which 
compose  the  Admission  Badge  of  the  Sword  and  Serpent;  and  thus  by  their  aid  it  may  be  the  better 
examined  and  comprehended.  The  one  is  ascending,  the  other  is  descending;  the  one  is  fixed,  the  other  is 
volatile;  the  one  unites  the  Sephiroth,  the  other  the  Paths.  Furthermore,  in  the  Serpent  of  Wisdom  is 
shown  the  ascending  Spiral,  and  in  the  Sword  the  rush  of  the  descending  White  Brilliance  from  beyond 
Kether,  differentiated  into  various  shades  and  colors,  darkening  more  and  more  as  they  near  Malkuth. 

Ch.  Ad: 

( Indicates  Diagram  of  Mountain.)  This  is  the  symbolic  Mountain  of  God  in  the  center  of  the  Universe, 
the  sacred  Rosicrucian  Mountain  of  Initiation,  the  Mystic  Mountain  of  Abiegnus.  Below  and  around  it 
are  darkness  and  silence,  and  it  is  crowned  with  the  Light  ineffable.  At  its  base  is  the  Wall  of  Enclosure 
and  Secrecy,  whose  sole  Gateway,  invisible  to  the  profane,  is  formed  of  the  Two  Pillars  of  Hermes.  The 
ascent  of  the  Mountain  is  by  the  Spiral  path  of  the  Serpent  of  Wisdom.  Stumbling  on  between  the  Pillars 
is  a blindfolded  figure,  representing  the  Neophyte,  whose  ignorance  and  worthlessness  while  only  in  that 
Grade  is  shown  by  the  0 = 0,  and  whose  sole  future  claim  to  notice  and  recognition  by  the  Order  is  the 
fact  of  his  having  entered  the  Pathway  to  the  other  Grades,  until  at  length  he  attains  to  the  summit.  I now 
proceed  to  instruct  you  in  the  mystic  symbolism  of  the  tomb  itself.  Let  the  Altar  be  moved  aside.  (Done.) 
It  is  divided  into  three  parts,  the  Ceiling  which  is  White;  the  Heptagonal  Walls  of  seven  Rainbow  colors, 
and  the  Floor  whose  prevailing  hue  is  black;  thus  showing  the  powers  of  the  Heptad  between  the  Light 
and  the  Darkness.  On  the  ceiling  is  a Triangle  enclosing  a Rose  of  22  petals,  within  a Heptangle  formed 
of  a Heptagram  reflected  from  the  Seven  Angles  of  the  Wall.  The  Triangle  represents  the  Three  Supernal 
Sephiroth;  the  Heptagram,  the  Lower  Seven;  the  Rose  represents  the  22  paths  of  the  Serpent  of  Wisdom. 
The  Floor  has  upon  it  also  the  Symbol  of  a Triangle  enclosed  within  a Heptagram.  bearing  the  titles  of 
the  Averse  and  Evil  Sephiroth  of  the  Qlippoth,  the  Great  Red  Dragon  of  Seven  Heads,  and  the  inverted 
and  evil  triangle.  And  thus  in  the  Tomb  of  the  Adepti  do  we  tread  down  the  Evil  Powers  of  the  Red 
Dragon  (Chief  Adept  stamps  thrice  on  diagram)  and  so  tread  thou  upon  the  evil  powers  of  thy  nature. 
For  there  is  traced  within  the  evil  Triangle  the  Rescuing  Symbol  of  the  Golden  Cross  united  to  the  Red 
Rose  of  Seven  times  Seven  Petals.  As  it  is  written  He  descendeth  into 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hell.  But  the  whiteness  above  shines  the  brighter  for  the  Blackness  which  is  beneath,  and  I helpeth 
forward  the  Good.  And  between  the  thus  mayest  thou  comprehend  that  the  evil  Light  and  that  Darkness 
vibrate  the  Colors  of  the  Rainbow,  whose  crossed  and  reflected  rays,  under  the  Planetary  presidency  are 
shewn  forth  in  these  Seven  Walls. 

Remember  that  thou  hast  entered  by  the  door  of  the  Planet  Venus,  whose  symbol  includes  the 
whole  Ten  Sephiroth  of  the  Tree  of  Life.  Each  Wall  of  the  Tomb  is  said  mystically  to  be  in  breadth  five 
feet  and  in  height  eight  feet,  thus  yielding  forty  squares,  of  which  ten  are  marked  and  salient, 
representing  the  Ten  Sephiroth  in  the  form  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  acting  throughout  the  Planet.  The 
remaining  squares  represent  the  Kerubim  and  the  Eternal  Spirit,  the  Three  Alchemical  Principles,  the 
Three  Elements,  the  Seven  Planets,  and  the  Twelve  Signs,  all  operating  in  and  differentiating  the  rays  of 
each  planet.  Note  that  in  all,  the  Central  Upper  square  alone  remains  white  and  unchanged,  representing 
the  changeless  Essence  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  thus  developing  all  from  the  One,  through  the  Many  under 
the  government  of  One.  The  colors  of  the  varying  squares  may  be  either  represented  by  the  color  of  the 
Planet  and  the  color  of  the  Force  therein  mixed  together,  or  by  these  colors  being  placed  in  juxtaposition, 
or  in  any  other  convenient  manner;  but  the  foundation  of  them  all  is  the  Minutum  Mundum  Diagram. 

The  symbolism  of  the  Altar  was  briefly  explained  to  you  in  the  Second  point.  Upon  the  Altar  stands  a 
black  Calvary  cross,  charged  with  a Rose  of  Five  times  Five  petals,  representing  the  interchanging 
energies  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Elements. 


56 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


<1 

Ft* 

Of 

c 

c 

* 

G 

r. 

G 

a 

ii 

n 

0) 


<0 


* 


' fj 


the  \MHUOFThE  V/HlLT 


Q 

LU 

PC 


Z 

o 


£ 

oc 

LU 

> 


O 


Ld 

—i 

GO 


UJ 

Li) 

2 

a 

Z 

Ui 

o 

Ui 

Z _J 

Ld 

c£  LU 

UJ 

rC 

—I 

5 

Ol 

a! 

o 

S — i — 

>- 

“I 1 — 

O 

T r- 

CO 

z 

k— » 

:3 

o_ 

UJ 

oc 

<c 

o 

lO 


lU 

ci> 

Z 

< 

oc 

0 

1 

Q 

LU 

OC 


L5 

z 

< 

oc 

o 


a: 

LU 

CO 

r 


o 


u] 

z 

ui 

LU 

QC 

e> 


■z 

Ul 

LU 

OC 

O 

X 

oO 

5 

o 

£ 


cC 

oc 

ui 

E 

LU 


Ul 

_l 

03 

l 

Z 

Ui 

Ui 

a 

O 


UJ 

-U 

CO 


O 

l5 

Q 

Z 

H 


f* 

Ul 

_l 

o 

> 


z 

o 

J) 

E 

a: 

O 


THE  SIDE  OF  THE FftSTOS 


58 


BLACK 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Ch.  Ad: 

Leads  Aspirant  out  of  Tomb.  Two  Adepti  replace  Altar,  and  all  resume  their  places  as  at  beginning  of 
Third  Point. 

Ch.  Ad: 

The  head  of  the  Pastos  is  white,  charged  with  a golden  Greek  Cross  and  Red  Rose  of  49  Petals.  The  foot 
is  black  with  a white  Calvary  Cross  and  Circle  placed  upon  a pedestal  of  Two  steps.  On  the  sides  are 
depicted  the  22  Colors  of  the  Paths,  between  Light  and  Darkness. 

Aspirant  is  placed  between  Lid  and  Pastos. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Stands  facing  him  on  opposite  side  of  the  Pastos. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Frater  (Soror)  I now  greet  you  with  the  grip  of  this  Grade  which  is  given  thus.  (Shows  it.)  The  fingers  of 
the  right  hand  are  held  so  as  to  form  the  letters  L.V.X.  The  thumb  and  first  fingers  are  stretched  to  form 
the  letter  L.  The  first  and  middle  fingers  are  extended  to  suggest  the  V.  The  little  finger  is  crossed  over 
the  third  finger  to  make  X.  This  may  be  done  with  both  hands,  and  is  always  exchanged  by  placing  the 
hands,  with  fingers  thus  arranged,  over  the  wrist  of  the  Frater  or  Soror  being  greeted.  You  will  note  that 
this  grip  must  never  be  exchanged  except  across  the  Pastos.  You  will  also  remember  that  you  must 
observe  strict  silence  in  regard  to  the  place  where  you  received  this  rite.  It  is  well  for  you  to  understand 
that  you  are  expected  to  promise  that  you  will  never  tell  anyone  when,  at  what  time,  or  where,  or  from 
whom  you  received  this  grip,  or  who  was  present  at  your  initiation  into  this  Order.  The  Signs  and 
Passwords  you  have  already  received.  Finally,  you  must  understand  that  you  are  never  permitted  to  say 
to  anyone  not  a member  of  this  Order  that  you  are  a Rosicrucian.  Let  the  Pastos  be  replaced  within  the 
Vault. 

The  Adepti  replace  Pastos  as  before,  and  all  resume  places  as  at  opening  of  Ceremony. 


Ch.  Ad: 

( Knocks ) 

All  rise. 
Ch.  Ad: 
(Knocks) 

2nd  Ad: 

(Knocks) 

3rd  Ad: 
(Knocks) 

Ch.  Ad: 

(Knocks) 


CLOSING 


60 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


3rd  Ad: 

( Knocks ) 

2nd  Ad: 

(Knocks) 

2nd  Ad: 

Roseae  Rubeae. 

3rd  Ad: 

Et  Aureae  Cracis. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Very  Honored  Fraters  and  Sorors,  assist  me  to  close  the  Tomb  of  the  Adepti.  Associate  Adeptus  Minor, 
how  many  Princes  did  Darius  set  over  his  Kingdom? 

3rd  Ad: 

It  is  written  in  the  Book  of  Daniel  that  there  were  One  Hundred  and  Twenty. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  how  is  that  number  formed? 

2nd  Ad: 

By  the  continued  multiplication  of  the  first  five  numbers  of  the  decimal  scale. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Post  Centum  Viginti  Annos  Patebo.  Thus  have  I closed  the  Tomb  of  the  Adepti  in  the  Mystic  Mountain 
of  Abiegnus.  (Chief  Adept  closes  Door  of  Vault  and  draws  Curtains.) 

3rd  Ad: 

Ex  Deo  Nascimur. 

2nd  Ad: 

In  Yeheshuah  Morimur. 

Ch.  Ad: 

Per  Spiritum  Sanctum  Reviviscimus. 

All  present  make  LVX  signs  in  silence. 

Aspirant  signs  Inner  Roll  and  is  directed  to  make  Saluting  Sign  of  5-6  on  leaving  and  is  led 

out. 

All  disrobe  and  disperse. 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  ROSY  CROSS 

At  this  juncture,  I would  like  very  much  to  present  three  rituals  written  by  Arthur 
Edward  Waite  for  his  own  Order  which  he  called  The  Fellowship  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  As 
might  he  expected  the  text  is  Christian  and  biblical.  Waite  was  raised  a Roman  Catholic.  It 
is  alsc  classical  Waite  in  that  he  was  compelled  to  insert  quite  frequently  Latin  phrases 
which,  from  the  ritualistic  viewpoint,  is  not  a bad  idea  since  a strange  tongue  may  excite  the 
inner  sense  of  wonder  and  worship.  In  ritual  it  is  excusable.  In  prose  it  is  unforgivable  - at 
least  to  the  extent  that  it  is  used  by  Waite  in  his  various  writings. 

It  is  also  typical  Waite  in  that  it  is  ponderous,  turgid  and  repetitive.  I am  no  great 
advocate  or  admirer  of  Waite's  literary  output.  He  had  so  much  to  say  in  reality,  but  his 
literary  style  got  in  the  way  to  obscure  his  message. 

Yet,  in  these  rituals  of  the  Neophyte,  Adeptus  Minor  and  Major  grades,  given  me 
through  the  courtesy  of  Robert  W.  Gilbert  of  Bristol  who  is  writing  a biography  of  Waite,  I 
have  found  myself  strangely  moved.  It  is  rather  like  being  escorted  through  the  Adeptus 
Minor  ritual  again,  though  this  time  to  the  tune  of  another  melody,  in  the  language  of 
another  day,  in  the  spirit  of  another  religion.  In  spite  of  my  own  resistance  to  Waite,  I find 
myself  choked  a little,  tearful  of  eye,  exalted  in  spirit  as  I was  fifty  years  ago.  This  is  a 
remarkable  admission  of  the  efficacy  not  merely  of  ritual  per  se  but  of  what  I would 
otherwise  have  stamped  as  pompous,  flatulent,  turgid  bible  - thumping  which  I dislike 
heartily. 

There  are  some  magnificent  lines  in  here.  In  the  event  that  some  of  my  readers  may 
wish  to  institute  a new  Golden  Dawn  temple,  many  of  these  lines  could  well  be  incorporated 
into  the  ancient  rituals. 

In  the  event  that  some  already  initiated  members  of  the  Order  are  desirous  of  so- 
called  higher  grades,  Waite's  Adeptus  Major  Ritualmight  provide  some  basic  features 
which  could  be  incorporated  into  what  they  know  of  the  conventional  Order  Rituals. 

THE  CEREMONY  OF  RECEPTION  IN  THE  GRADE  OF  NEOPHYTE 

Newly  constructed  from  the  Cipher  Manuscripts,  and  issued  by  the  authority  of 
the  concealed  superiors  of  the  second  order,  to  members  of  recognised  temples.  Certified 
in  Conformity  with  the  Secret  Doctrine  and  Knowledge  of  the  ROSY  CROSS. 

SACRAMENTUM  REGIS, 

KEEPER  OF  THE  SACRED  MYSTERY. 

THE  OFFICERS  OF  THE  GRADE 

1.  THE  HONOURABLE  FRATER  PHILOSOPHICUS,  id  est,  Propositum 
Conscium  Dei  - Master  of  the  Temple. 

2.  THE  HONOURABLE  FRATER  PRACTICUS,  id  est,  Desiderium 
Conscium  Dei  Warden  of  the  Temple. 


62 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


3.  THE  HONOURABLE  FRATER  THEORETICUS,  id  est,  Mens  Conscia 
Sponsi  Guide  of  the  Paths  and  Grades. 

4.  THE  AUXILIARY  FRATER  ZELATOR,  id  est,  Terra  Illuminata  - 
Proclamator  et  Lucifer. 

5.  THE  FRATER  THURIFICANS,  id  est,  Thuribulum  Ferens  - Thurifer. 

6.  THE  FRATER  AQUARIUS,  id  est,  Aquam  Benedictam  Ferens  - i'  quarius. 

7.  THE  FRATER  OSTIARIUS,  id  est,  Custos  Liminis,  a Novice  of  the  Rosy 
Cross  Guard. 

8.  The  Imperator,  or  Chief  of  the  Rite,  presides  ex  officio  in  all  Grades  of  the 
Fellowship,  either  personally  or  by  his  appointed  Substitute. 

In  those  cases  where  certain  Offices  are  taken  by  Sorores  of  the  Fellowship,  the 
necessary  alterations  are  made  in  the  modes  of  address. 

THE  CLOTHING  OF  CELEBRANTS  AND  OFFICERS 

1.  The  Honourable  Frater  Philosophicus  wears  a green  robe  over  his  black 
habit  and  a collar  of  red  silk,  from  which  depends  a circular  lamina,  inscribed  with  the  letter 
YOD.  The  green  colour  of  the  Master's  robe  represents  the  growth  in  life  which  is  of  GOD. 
The  symbol  of  the  Lion  is  embroidered  thereon,  upon  the  left  side,  with  the  inscription: 
FACIES  TERTIA,  FACIES  LEONIS.  The  Master  bears  a Wand,  surmounted  by  a Calvary 
Cross,  having  four  circles  at  the  end  of  the  four  arms  and  one  circle  toward  the  centre  of 
the  lowermost  arm. 

2.  The  Honourable  Frater  Practicus  wears  a yellow  robe  over  his  black  habit, 
symbolising  the  beginning  of  transmutation  in  GOD.  The  symbol  of  the  Eagle  is 
embroidered  thereon,  upon  the  left  side,  with  the  inscription:  FACIES  QUARTA, 
FACIES  AQUILAE.  His  collar  is  of  violet  silk,  from  which  depends  a circular  lamina, 
inscribed  with  the  letter  HE,  being  the  first  HE  of  the  Divine  Name.  He  bears  a Wand 
surmounted  by  a flaming  heart. 

3.  The  Honourable  Frater  Theoreticus  wears  a blue  robe  over  his  black  habit, 
symbolising  the  aspiration  and  desire  which  initiate  the  great  quest  and  reflect  things 
unrealised.  It  bears  the  symbol  of  the  Man  embroidered  thereon,  upon  the  left  side,  with  the 
inscription:  FACIES  SECUNDA,  FACIES  HOMINIS.  His  collar  is  of  orange  silk,  from 
which  depends  a circular  lamina,  inscribed  with  the  letter  VAU.  He  bears  a Wand, 
surmounted  by  an  open  eye,  signifying  the  eye  of  mind. 


63 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


4.  The  Auxiliary  Frater  Zelator  wears  a cloak  of  reddish  brown, 
corresponding  to  the  Adamic  earth  and  symbolising  the  first  movement  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  toward  the  making  of  a living  soul.  The  symbol  of  the  Ox  is  embroidered 
thereon,  with  the  inscription:  FACIES  UNA,  FACIES  CHERUB.  His  collar  is  of  blue- 
green  silk,  from  which  depends  a circular  lamina,  inscribed  with  the  letter  HE,  being 
the  HE  final  of  the  Divine  Name.  He  bears  a Wand,  surmounted  by  a Calvary  Cross, 
having  a crown  upon  the  upper  arms.  The  Frater  Zelator  is  in  symbolical 
correspondence  with  the  Guide  of  the  Paths  and  Grades. 

5.  The  Frater  Thurificans  wears  a red  surplice  and  a collar  of  green  silk, 
from  which  depends  a circular  lamina,  inscribed  with  an  equilateral  triangle,  having  the 
apex  upward,  as  a symbol  of  Fire.  He  is  in  symbolical  correspondence  with  the 
Master. 

Certified  a correct  copy  of  the  Autograph  MS.  SACRAMENTUM  REGIS,  5- 

6.  THE  HOLY  ORDER  OF  THE  GOLDEN  DAWN 

THE  SOLEMN  CEREMONY  OF  OPENING  THE  TEMPLE  IN  THE  LIGHT 

(The  arrangement  of  the  Temple  is  shown  in  the  Official  Diagram. 

The  Officers  and  Members  being  assembled  within  and  the  door  of  the  Sacred 
Precincts  being  closed  and  guarded  by  the  Sentinel,  who  is  seated  with  drawn  sword  on 
the  hither  side,  the  permanent  Director  of  Ceremonies  comes  before  the  vacant 
Throne  of  the  Hierophant,  and  says:) 

Director  of  Ceremonies. 

Fratres  et  Sorores,  the  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  help.  In  the  Name  of  Him  Who 
rescues  us  from  the  darkness  and  the  unredeemed  places,  and  by  command  of  the 
Honourable  Wardens,  I direct  the  Officers  and  Brethren  to  assume  the  clothing  of 
their  rank  and  Grades.  Invest  our  portals,  0 Lord,  and  guard  our  thresholds.  Do 
Thou  clothe  us  in  Thy  grace  and  truth. 

(The  Members  assume  the  insignia  of  their  proper  ribbons  and  collars.  The 
Director  of  Ceremonies  assists  in  the  vesting  of  the  Superior  Officers.  This  being 
accomplished  in  solemn  order  and  in  the  reverence  of  holy  silence,  the  Hierophant  of 
the  Temple  or  one  of  the  Honourable  Wardens  proceeds  to  the  clearing  of  the  Temple 
as  follows:  With  the  first  and  second  fingers  and  the  thumb  of  his  right  hand  he 
seals  his  forehead  and  says:) 

Hierophant. 

ATEH.  (He  seals  his  breast  and  says:) 

Hierophant. 

MALKUTH.  (He  seals  his  right  shoulder  and  says:) 


64 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Hierophant. 

VE  GEBURAH.  (He  seals  his  left  shoulder  and  says:) 

Hierophant. 

VE  GEDULAH.  (He  clasps  his  hands  and  says:) 

Hierophant. 

LE  OLAHM.  AMEN.  (The  operation  hereof  is  more  especially  for  his  own 
cleansing,  that  he  may  be  worthy  to  purify  without.  It  is  done  facing  the  due  East.  All  stand 
and  turn  eastward.) 

THE  BANISHING 

(He  traces  the  Banishing  Pentagram  in  the  East  with  reversed  Sceptre  or  Wand.  He 
carries  his  Wand  to  the  middle  place  of  the  Pentagram  and  pronounces  slowly  and 
distinctly  the  Sacred  Name.) 

Hierophant. 

YOD,  HE,  VAU,  HE.  (He  moves  to  the  South,  carrying  the  Wand  upraised  and 
pointed  at  the  same  angle.  He  traces  the  Pentagram  in  the  South,  carries  Wand  to  the  middle 
place  and  utters  the  Sacred  Name:) 

Hierophant. 

ADNI.  (He  moves  in  the  same  manner  to  the  West,  performs  the  same  working 
and  utters  the  Sacred  name:) 

Hierophant. 

EH-YEH.  (He  moves  in  the  same  manner  to  the  North,  performs  the  same  working 
and  utters  the  Sacred  Word:) 

Hierophant. 

AGLA.  (He  returns  in  the  same  manner  to  the  East,  having  thus  circumambulated 
the  Temple  and  traced  a complete  circle  in  the  air  with  his  Wand.  This  is  the  clearing  of  the 
Temple.  Members  face  each  quarter  with  Hierophant,  who  now  faces  East,  extends  his 
arms  crosswise  and  says:) 

Hierophant. 

Before  me  RAPHAEL. 

Behind  me  GABRIEL. 

At  my  right  hand  MICHAEL. 

At  my  left  hand  AURIEL. 

For  before  me  flames  the  Pentagram  and  behind  me  shines  the  Six-Rayed  Star. 


65 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


(This  is  the  Angelical  Formula,  which  brings  the  holy  hills  about  the 
Jerusalem  of  the  Temple  and  makes  the  Temple  itself  as  a ring  of  holy  hills  about  his 
own  Jerusalem  within.  He  finishes  as  he  began,  namely,  with  the  SEALING  PRAYER, 
which  signifies  the  closing  of  the  gates  within  and  without  against  the  images  of  evil. 
He  goes  before  the  Throne  of  the  Hierophant,  which  he  faces,  and  recites  the 
following  prayer.) 

PRAYER  BEFORE  THE  THRONE 

Hierophant. 

Creator  of  the  Universe,  Lord  of  the  Visible  Worlds,  Who  hast  by  Thy 
Supreme  Power  set  up  Thy  Holy  Signs  in  all  the  quarters  of  the  Heavens  and  dost 
speak  to  us  by  day  and  by  night  in  Thy  greater  and  lesser  luminaries,  Thy  suns  and 
stars  and  constellations:  Grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  that  the  hidden  grace  which  abides 
in  the  Radiant  East,  the  Dayspring  of  Light  and  the  Font  of  Life,  may  in  answer  to 
this  our  prayer  - be  here  and  now  communicated  to  the  1 hrone  of  the  Hierophant. 
Make  him  in  Thy  benignity  the  efficacious  emblem  of  that  Dawning  Golden  Light 
which  illuminates  the  Path  of  Thy  Mysteries,  and  may  that  light  lead  us  to  the 
attainment  of  the  Quintessence,  the  tingeing  Stone  of  the  Wise,  the  Wisdom  which  has 
its  source  in  hheeand  the  Beatitude  which  is  found  in  Thy  Presence. 

((he  Officers  and  the  Temple  are  in  this  manner  dedicated  to  the  work 
about  to  be  performed,  and  the  clearing  is  done  invariably  with  a solemn 
recollection  of  the  intention  belonging  to  its  several  points.  If  the  Temple  is  opened  to 
communicate  a higher  Grade  than  that  of  Neophyte,  it  must  he  preceded  by  this 
clearing  in  the  same  manner.  In  such  case,  the  communication  of  the  Neophyte  Grade 
subsequently  on  the  same  day  does  not  carry  with  it  the  necessity  of  another  clearing. 
The  Prayer  being  finished,  the  Hierophant  takes  his  place  on  the  Throne  rn  the  East, 
approaching  it  by  the  northern  side  of  the  pedestal  before  the  Throne.  He  assumes 
his  sceptre.  Members  are  seated:  a pause.  All  rise.  The  Sentinel  leaves  the  Temple. 
The  Kerux  passes  by  the  North  to  the  North-East  side  of  the  Temple,  and  so 
standing  at  the  right  hand  but  to  the  front  of  the  Hierophant,  and  facing  West,  he 
raises  his  Lamp  and  Wand.) 

Hierophant. 

Lratres  et  Sorores  of  the  Isis  Urania  Temple,  duly  assembled  under  warrant 
for  the  Mysteries  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  assist  me  to  open  the  Temple  of  our  Holy 
Order  in  the  Grade  of  Neophyte. 

Kerux. 

Hekas,  Hekas.  este  heheloi. 

He  return:,  to  his  place  by  the  South  and  West,  giving  the  Signs  of  the  Grade  as 
he  passes  the  Throne  of  the  Hierophant.  Except  in  the  reverse  circumambulation  at 
the  close  of  this  Grade,  the  course  of  the  sun  must  be  followed  in  the  movements  of 
all  Officers  and 


66 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Members.  The  salute  of  the  Grade  must  be  given  when  passing  the  Hierophant  and 
on  entering  or  leaving  the  Temple.) 

Hierophant. 

Frater  Kerux,  see  that  the  Temple  is  guarded  on  the  further  side  of  the  Portal,  as  an 
outward  sign  of  the  mysteries  of  prudence  that  are  within.  (The  Kerux  gives  one  knock  on  the 
hither  side  of  the  door.  The  Sentinel  responds  in  the  same  manner  on  the  outer  side,  using 
the  hilt  of  his  sword.) 

Kerux. 

(Raising  his  Wand)  - Truly  Honoured  Hierophant,  the  Temple  is  guarded  without, 
the  door  is  secured  within,  and  I stand  on  the  hither  side  as  the  witness  of  vigilance  and  the 
gate  of  prudence. 

Hierophant. 

(With  raised  eyes  and  uplifted  Sceptre).  - Fratres  et  Sorores,  let  us  put  away  the 
thoughts  of  the  outer  world.  The  Temple  is  guarded  without:  let  the  heart  be  guarded 
within.  (A  momentary  pause.) 

Hierophant. 

Honourable  Frater  Hiereus,  lift  up  the  sword  of  judgment,  and  standing  by  the  hither 
side  of  the  Portal,  assure  yourself  that  all  present  have  seen  the  Light  in  the  East.  (The 
Hiereus  leaves  his  Throne,  passes  to  the  door  of  the  Temple,  where  he  draws  his  Sword  and 
raises  it.) 

Hiereus 

Fratres  et  Sorores  of  the  Holy  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  give  the  signs  of  a Seeker 
for  the  Light.  (This  is  done  accordingly,  and  the  Hiereus  sheathes  his  Sword.  He  gives  the 
Signs  of  a Neophyte.) 

Hiereus. 

Truly  Honoured  Hierophant,  the  Orient  from  on  High  hath  visited  us.  (The  Signs  are 
repeated  by  the  Hierophant.  The  Hiereus  returns  to  his  place.) 

Hierophant. 

Those  who  are  present  among  us  are  more  especially  the  watchers  from  within. 
Stand  about  us  in  Thy  Holy  Place,  0 Lord,  and  keep  us  pure  in  Thy  precincts.  (This  is  said 
with  raised  eyes  and  uplifted  Sceptre.  There  is  a momentary  pause.) 

Hierophant. 

Let  the  number  of  officers  in  this  Grade  and  the  symbolism  of  their  offices  be 
proclaimed  once  again,  that  the  graces  whereof  they  are  images  may  be  quickened  in  the 
spheres  of 


67 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


those  who  are  here  and  now  present  and  in  the  perfect  sphere  of  the  Order. 
Honourable  Frater  Hiereus,  how  many  are  the  principal  officers  of  the  Neophyte  Grade? 

Hiereus. 

As  in  all  Grades  and  Degrees  of  the  Outer  Order,  they  reflect  by  their  triplicity  below 
the  Eternal  Triad  which  is  above:  they  are  the  Hierophant,  the  Hiereus  and  the  Hegemon. 

Hierophant. 

What  have  these  titles  in  common? 

Hiereus. 

The  letter  H,  symbol  of  breath  and  life. 

Hierophant. 

( Raising  his  Sceptre)  - But  I testify,  Fratres  et  Sorores,  that  our  common  heritage  is  life 
in  the  Holy  Spirit.  (He  lowers  his  Sceptre.)  Honourable  Frater  Hiereus,  how  many  are  the 
officers? 

Hiereus. 

These  also  are  three  - the  Stolistes,  the  Dadouchos  and  the  Kerux,  besides  the 
Sentinel,  who  stands  armed  on  the  further  side  of  the  Portal,  who  guards  that  side, 
receiving  communications  from  without,  admitting  members  and  taking  charge  of  the 
Candidate  when  he  comes  to  the  vestibule  of  the  Holy  Temple.  (The  Dadouchos,  standing  in 
his  place,  raises  the  Thurible,  and  as  incense  issues  therefrom:) 

Dadouchos. 

My  place  is  in  the  South  of  the  Temple  and  1 bear  the  thurible  of  my  office.  1 
represent  material  heat  manifesting  in  the  outer  world  and  the  fire  that  is  communicated 
within.  In  respect  of  that  fire  it  is  said:  My  soul  hath  thirsted  for  the  Lord,  in  the  pathless  and 
waterless  desert  of  this  world.  I symbolise  the  desire  of  God  which  has  burnt  up  all  earthly 
roses  and  has  wasted  all  the  false  gardens  of  delight,  so  that  the  soul  can  find  neither  food 
nor  wine  therein.  I am  the  heat  of  that  supernatural  fire  which  consumes  all  lusts  of  the  flesh, 
lusts  of  the  eye  and  pride  of  life.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  I consecrate  the  Candidate  with 
fire.  (The  Thurible  is  lowered.  The  Stolistes,  standing  in  his  place,  raises  the  cup  of  water.) 

Stolistes. 

My  place  is  in  the  North  of  the  Temple  and  I bear  the  water  of  my  office.  I 
represent  material  cold  and  moisture  manifesting  in  the  outer  world  and  the  waters  of  the 
fountain  of  salvation  that  pour  upon  the  world  within.  1 am  the  other  side  of  the  Divine 
desire,  for  even  as  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water-brooks  so  doth  the  soul  of  man  desire 
after  Thee,  0 God.  It  is  in  this  sense  the  ! purify  the  Candidate  with  water.  (The  Cup  of 
water  is  lowered.  The  Kerux,  standing  in  his  place  at  the  northern  side  of  the  Hiereus, 
raises  his  Lamp.) 


68 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Kerux. 

My  place  is  on  the  hither  side  of  the  Portal.  I carry  the  Lamp  of  my  office,  which 
symbolises  material  light  shining  in  the  outer  world  but  more  especially  the  secret  light 
which  dawns  in  the  world  of  grace.  I make  all  official  announcements;  I report  to  the 
Hierophant  of  the  Temple;  I lead  circumambulations;  and  I see  that  the  Temple  is  prepared 
in  piety  and  reverence  for  the  mysteries  that  are  about  to  be  performed.  I go  before  the 
Candidate,  as  God  goes  before  the  elect  on  the  path  of  their  return  to  Him.  (The  Lamp  is 
lowered.  The  Hegemon  uplifts  his  Sceptre.) 

Hegemon. 

I am  the  Mediator  and  Reconciler,  the  preparer  of  the  pathway  to  the  Divine.  My  seat 
is  between  the  Pillars  and  I preside  over  the  Gate  of  the  Mysteries.  I am  the  condition  of  the 
ascent  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  purity  symbolised  by  my  white  robe.  I am  the  peace  of  the 
equilibrium  which  reconciles  light  and  darkness.  1 direct  in  virtue  of  purity  the  higher 
aspirations  of  the  soul.  I am  religion,  which  manifests  in  benignity,  and  the  middle  way  by 
which  ascent  is  possible  to  the  light.  I carry  a mitre-headed  Sceptre,  which  represents  the 
sacramental  side  of  holy  churches  and  creeds.  In  virtue  of  this  my  office  and  of  its  high 
symbolism,  I am  the  leader  of  the  Candidate  in  all  Grades  of  the  Order  and  I direct  him  in 
the  true  way.  (The  Sceptre  of  the  Hegemon  is  lowered.  The  Hiereus  draws  and  raises  his 
Sword.  He  raises  the  Banner  of  the  West.) 

Hiereus. 

I am  set  upon  the  Throne  of  the  West.  I symbolise  external  darkness.  I cast  out  the 
images  of  matter.  I am  the  spirit  which  clears  the  obsessions.  I am  called  Fortitude  in  the 
Mysteries,  but  my  fortitude  and  refuge  are  Thee,  0 God.  I am  the  protection  from  the  evil 
within  the  Candidate.  I carry  the  Sword  of  Judgment  and  the  Banner  of  the  Evening 
Twilight.  I announce  that  which  I represent  at  the  gate  of  entrance  to  the  heights.  (The 
Hiereus  replaces  his  Banner.  He  sheathes  his  Sword.  The  Hierophant  raises  his  own 
Sceptre  and  Banner.) 

Hierophant. 

I am  seated  on  the  Throne  of  the  East  and  I symbolise  the  Rising  Sun  in  the  world  of 
the  Macrocosm.  Behold  He  hath  placed  His  tabernacle  in  the  sun.  I rule  and  govern  the 
Temple  and  Members  of  all  Grades.  My  robe  is  red  because  of  the  fire  within.  1 bear  the 
Sceptre  and  the  Banner  of  the  East.  I am  the  Expounder  of  Mysteries.  I am  he  who  is 
authorised  from  beyond  to  give  expression  in  eternal  symbolism  to  the  things  that  are  behind 
the  Veil.  I am  the  point  at  which  Faith  dissolves  into  experience.  I am  power,  light,  mercy 
and  wisdom.  (He  replaces  his  Banner.) 

Hierophant. 

Frater  Stolistes,  in  the  Sign  of  Understanding,  and  remembering  the  Great  Sea,  I 
direct  you  to  purify  the  Temple  and  the  Brethren  with  water. 


69 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


(The  Stolistes  follows  the  course  of  the  sun,  coming  eastward  from  his  place  in  the 
North.  He  faces  the  Hierophant  and  offers  him  his  vessel  for  consecration.  The  Hierophant 
blesses  with  the  Cross  and  says:) 

Hierophant. 

Bless  us,  0 Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  and  this  Thy  gift  of  water,  which  we  are  about  to 
use  in  Thy  service  as  a sign  without  of  graces  that  are  communicated  within. 

(The  Stolistes  makes  a Cross  with  his  Cup  and  sprinkles  thrice  in  the  East.  He 
proceeds  in  succession  to  South,  West  and  North,  facing  each  point,  where  he  repeats  the 
Cross  sign  and  sprinkles.  He  completes  the  circle  by  returning  to  the  East.  He  again  faces 
the  Hierophant,  lifts  up  the  Cup  of  Water  and  says:) 

Stolistes. 

Waters  of  Understanding,  Waters  of  the  Great  Sea:  I purify  with  water.  (He  salutes 
the  Throne  and  returns  to  his  place  by  South  and  West.) 

Hierophant. 

Frater  Dadouchos,  in  all  symbols  of  the  Divine  desire,  and  by  the  sparks  of  aspiration 
flying  upward,  1 direct  you  to  consecrate  the  Temple  and  the  Brethren  with  fire. 

(The  Dadouchos  passes  by  West  and  North  to  the  East,  coming  from  his  place  in  the 
South.  He  faces  the  Hierophant  and  offers  his  Thurible  for  consecration.  The  Hierophant 
blesses  with  the  Cross  and  says:) 

Hierophant. 

Bless  us,  0 Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  and  this  Thy  gift  of  fire,  which  we  are  about  to  use 
in  Thy  service  as  a sign  without  of  graces  that  are  communicated  within. 

( fhe  Dadouchos  makes  cross  with  his  Thurible  and  censes  thrice  in  the  East.  He 
proceeds  South,  West  and  North,  facing  each  point,  making  a Cross  as  before  and  censing 
three  times.  He  returns  to  the  East,  uplifts  his  Thurible  and  says:) 

Dadouchos. 

The  desire  of  the  House  of  the  Lord  hath  eaten  me  up.  I have  consecrated  with  fire. 
(He  again  salutes  the  Throne  and  returns  to  his  place  direct.) 

Hierophant. 

To  him  who  has  fulfilled  election,  there  is  given  a Robe  of  Glory.  Let  the  mystical 
procession  take  place  in  the  way  of  the  light. 

(The  Kerux  passes  to  the  North  and  halts.  The  Hegemon  passes  by  South  and  West, 
where  he  is  joined  by  the  Hiereus  and  they  proceed,  the  Hegemon  being  in  front,  to  their 


70 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


places  behind  the  Kerux.  The  Dadouchos  follows  the  Hegemon  from  South  to  West, 
where  he  allows  the  Hiereus  to  step  between,  and  so  passes  to  the  North,  where  he  takes  his 
place  on  the  right  of  the  Stolistes.  The  Kerux,  Hegemon,  Hiereus,  Stolistes  and 
Dadouchos  circumambulate  the  Temple  with  the  Sun.  The  Hiereus  passes  the  Hierophant 
once,  the  Hegemon  twice,  and  the  other  officers  three  times,  making  the  Sign  of  the  Grade 
on  each  occasion.  They  return  in  fine  to  their  places.) 

Hierophant. 

The  mystical  procession  is  accomplished  in  commemoration  of  the  path  of  our 
return.  Let  us  declare  the  sanctity  of  God  in  the  reverence  of  holy  prayer,  that  the  light 
and  darkness  of  humanity  may  unite  to  bless  the  Lord.  (All  present  face  East,  giving  the 
Grade  Sign,  which  is  maintained  throughout  the  adoration.) 

Hierophant. 

Holy  art  Thou,  0 Lord  of  the  universe:  establish  us  Thy  servants  in  the  health  of 
Thy  great  sanctity.  Holy  art  Thou  Whom  Nature  bath  not  formed:  transmute  our  human 
nature  and  let  our  souls  be  reformed  in  Thee.  Holy  art  Thou,  the  Nast  one  and  the  mighty: 
enlarge  us  in  the  way  of  our  research,  that  we  may  attain  in  fine  to  Thy  presence. 
Enlighten  our  darkness,  increase  our  light,  0 Lord  of  light  and  darkness.  (Then  facing  the 
West:) 

Hierophant. 

Frater  Kerux,  in  the  Name  of  Him  who  is  our  strength,  our  refuge  and  our  term 
from  everlasting,  I command  you  to  proclaim  that  the  Temple  is  open  in  the  world  of  grace, 
(the  Kerux  passes  as  before  to  the  place  of  annunciation  by  the  Throne  of  the  Hierophant 
and  says  clearly  and  loudly,  as  he  raises  his  Lamp  and  Wand:) 

Kerux. 

Fratres  et  Sorores,  1 testify  that  the  sun  has  risen  in  the  soul  and  that  the  light  of  grace 
is  extended. 

Hierophant.  K HABS 
Hiereus.  AM 

Hegemon.  PEKHT 

Hiereus.  KONX 


71 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hegemon.  OM 


Hier 

ophant. 

PAX 


He 

gemon. 

LIGHT 

Hier 

ophant.  IN 

Hiereus. 

EXTENSION 

(The  Kerux  returns  to  his  place.  The  Sentinel  re-enters  the  Temple.  Officers 
and  Members  are  seated.  Here  ends  the  Solemn  Ceremony  of  Opening  the  Temple  in 
the  Light.) 

THE  CEREMONIAL  ADMISSION  OF  A NEOPHYTE 
IN  THE  PORTAL  OF  THE  GOLDEN  DAWN 

he  Kerux  removes  the  Rose,  Lamp,  Chalice  and  Paten  from  the  Altar.) 

Hierophant. 

Fratres  et  Sorores,  I beseech  you  to  lift  up  your  hearts  to  pray  that  the  Divine 
Assistance  may  he  with  us  efficiently  in  the  work  which  I am  delegated  to  perform  as 
an  authorised  Expounder  of  the  Mysteries.  I have  received  a Dispensation  from  the 
Concealed  Superiors  of  the  Order  to  admit  A.  B.  to  the  first  circle  of  initiation  in  the 
Portal  of  the  Golden  Dawn.  I command  therefore  the  Honourable  Frater  Hegemon  to 
take  in  charge  the  preparation  of  the  Postulant  and  to  see  that  the  things  within  are 
symbolised  by  the  things  without. 

{lire  Hegemon  rises,  removes  his  seat  from  the  middle  place  of  the  Pillars  to  a 
convenient  point  left  free  for  this  purpose,  and  having  reached  the  hither  side  of  the 
door,  he  turns  eastward,  makes  with  recollection  the  Sign  of  a Neophyte  and  then 
passes  without  the  Portal.  He  prepares  the  Candidate  by  placing  a hoodwink  over  his 
eyes  and  a threefold  cord  about  his  body.  While  this  is  being  done:) 

Hierophant. 

fhe  things  that  are  without  are  in  analogy  with  the  things  that  are  within.  The 
eyes  of  our  Postulant  at  the  Gate  of  the  Mysteries  are  darkened  for  a period,  to 
symbolise  the  cloud  that  rests  upon  the  sanctuary  of  his  soul.  The  body  of  our 
Postulant  is  bound,  to  typify  the  material  chain  with  which  he  has  been  loaded  in  his 
exile,  far  from  the  home  of  the  heart.  He  cannot  walk  alone  and  hence  he  so  depends 
upon  our  guidance.  He  will  not  be  deserted  in 


72 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


his  need.  He  will  be  brought  safely  and  surely  into  the  secret  place  of  our  light.  There  is 
faith  and  there  is  hope  in  his  heart,  and  that  which  leads  him  in  the  narrow  way  is  the  hand 
of  love.  (The  preparation  being  over,  the  Hegemon  gives  an  alarm  of  a knock  at  the  outer 
side  of  the  Portal.  The  Kerux  replies  with  a knock.) 

Kerux. 

Truly  Honoured  Hierophant,  the  Mediator  between  light  and  darkness,  the  Lord  of 
Reconciliation  and  Peace,  stands  at  the  door  without. 

Hierophant. 

Do  you  certify,  Frater  Kerux,  that  he  returns  in  the  name  of  his  mission,  for  the 
fulfilment  of  a work  of  redemption? 

Kerux. 

He  wills  only  that  it  should  be  accomplished. 

Hierophant. 

God  made  the  world  without,  as  He  made  that  which  is  within.  May  the  Peace  of 
the  Lord  fill  those  who  are  seeking  His  light.  I give  you  permission  to  admit  A.B.,  who  puts 
aside  henceforth  in  these  precincts  his  earthly  titles  and  dignities  and  receives  at  our  hands 
that  name  which  represents  his  aspiration  on  entering  here  among  us.  He  will  be  known 
hereafter  as  Frater  Adveniat  Regnurn  (vel  aliud),  and  may  he  that  enters  the  Kingdom 
receive  the  crown  of  all.  Fratres  Dadouchos  et  Stolistes,  in  the  purifying  sign  of  fire  and  the 
holy  water  of  regeneration,  be  ready  to  receive  the  Candidate. 

The  Stolistes,  moving  by  North  and  East,  joins  Dadouchos  in  the  South,  and  they 
proceed  together  to  the  door.  The  lights  are  turned  down.  The  Kerux  opens  the  door,  and 
taking  up  his  place  about  five  feet  within,  he  bars  the  further  progress  of  the  Candidate 
when  he  has  entered  the  Portal.  Behind  him  stand  the  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos.  As  he  leads 
the  Candidate:) 

Hegemon. 

The  darkness  is  also  God's  minister.  The  darkness  shall  lead  His  servant. 

Dadouchos. 

The  Treasure  of  the  Hidden  Fire  shall  shine  therein. 

Stolistes. 

It  is  over  the  Great  Sea  and  in  the  deeps  thereof. 

Hierophant. 

The  night  shall  be  enlightened  with  the  day.  (The  Hegemon  again  advances,  leading 
the  Candidate.  1 he  Kerux  bars  the  way.) 


73 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Kerux. 

The  things  that  are  holy  are  reserved  for  those  that  are  holy  and  the  sanctuary  of 
initiation  for  conserated  and  initiated  men.  Son  (and  Daughter)  of  the  Night  and  Time,  and 
child  of  Earth,  you  cannot  enter  the  Temple  of  Sacred  Mystery.  (The  Stolistes  comes 
forward,  cross-marks  the  Candidate  on  the  forehead  and  sprinkles  three  times  before  him.) 

Stolistes. 

In  the  Name  of  the  Fountain  of  Living  Water,  which  cleanses  the  Children  of  Earth, 

I purify  you  with  water. 

(He  falls  back.  The  Dadouchos  comes  forward,  raises  his  Thurible  before  the  face  of 
the  Candidate,  makes  the  Sign  of  the  Cross  therewith  and  censes  him  three  times.) 

Dadouchos. 

In  the  Name  of  the  Divine  Desire  which  transmutes  the  life  of  earth,  I consecrate 
you  with  fire. 

He  also  falls  back  with  the  Kerux,  who  lifts  up  his  Lamp  as  the  Hegemon  goes 
forward  leading  the  Candidate.  If  there  are  several  Candidates,  they  must  all  be  purified 
and  consecrated  separately.  The  Kerux,  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  resume  their  places  but 
remain  standing.) 

Hierophant. 

Inheritor  of  night  and  time,  child  of  the  material  world,  what  seek  you  in  the  places  of 
the  soul? 

Hegemon. 

(Replying  for  Candidate).  Through  the  darkness  of  time  and  night,  I have  come  to 
the  Gate  of  the  Temple,  looking  for  the  tight  within. 

Hierophant. 

Place  thethe  Postulant  at  the  estern  side  of  the  altar  with  his  face  to  the  East, 
symbolizing  the  desire  after  that  light  which  God  shall  grant  to  the  seeker  who  is  well  and 
properly  prepared.  (This  is  done  by  the  Hegemon,  who  leads  the  Candidate  helpfully  and 
carefully  throughout  the  Ceremony.  He  is  not  allowed  to  kneel,  to  rise,  or  to  move  of  his 
own  accord.  ) 

Hierophant. 

We  hold  your  signed  application  for  admission  to  this  Order,  which  exists  for  the 
communication  of  spiritual  knowledge  to  those  who  have  awakened  in  the  spirit.  We  hold 
also  your  solemn  testimony  to  a desire  conceived  in  your  heart  for  the  grace  of  Eternal  Life 
and  Divine  Union.  We  are  taught  that  the  things  which  are  Caesar's  must  be  rendered  duly  to 
Caesar  but  to  God  the  things  that  are  God's,  and  the  secrets  of  the  Sanctuary  are  reserved 


74 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


to  the  Sanctuary  alone.  Before  your  reception  can  proceed,  it  is  necessary  for  you  to 
take  a solemn  Obligation  to  maintain  the  Veils  of  the  Order,  and  as  in  the  world  without 
you  are  hound  by  the  canons  of  morality  and  the  code  of  society  to  keep  the  laws  of  both, 
so  you  must  be  covenanted  herein  to  keep  the  rule  of  the  Temple  and  never  to  disclose 
without  that  which  you  learn  within.  But  it  is  just,  on  our  part,  to  assure  you,  as  1 now  do  in 
God's  Name,  that  the  pledge  which  we  exact  does  in  no  wise  derogate  from  the  laws  of  man 
but  leads  to  their  better  fulfilment  in  the  light  of  Divine  law.  Are  you  willing  to  take  this 
meet  and  salutary  Obligation?  (The  Candidate  is  prompted  by  the  Hegemon.) 

Candidate. 

I desire  the  light  of  the  House,  and  I take  its  laws  upon  me.  (The  Hierophant,  in 
conformity  with  the  symbolism,  comes  down  from  his  Throne  and  goes  to  the  East  of  the 
Altar,  saying:) 

Hierophant. 

It  is  written  that  I will  visit  the  hearts  of  men,  for  my  delight  is  in  the  way  of 

justice. 

(He  stands  facing  to  the  West.  The  Hiereus  comes  to  the  North  side  of  the  Altar  and 
the  Hegemon  to  the  South  side.  The  three  Officers  thus  form  a triangle,  and  the  Candidate, 
who  is  close  to  the  Altar  on  the  western  side,  is  joined  therein  at  the  middle  point  of  the  base. 
The  Members  of  all  Grades  rise  and  remain  standing  while  the  Obligation  is  taken.) 

Hierophant. 

Postulant  in  the  Home  of  the  Spirit,  looking  for  grace  to  come,  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  of  Grace,  Who  is  the  Fountain  of  all  our  light,  I bid  you  kneel  down  as  a sign  of 
your  humility  and  obedience.  (The  Candidate  is  assisted  to  kneel.)  Give  me  your  right 
hand,  which  1 impose  on  this  holy  sign  of  light  shining  in  the  darkness;  place  your  left 
hand  in  mine,  as  a pledge  of  the  sacred  and  sincere  intention  which  your  heart  brings  into 
this  Order,  that  it  may  be  married  to  the  sincerity  and  holiness  which  abide  in  its  own 
heart.  Bow  your  head,  as  one  who  has  come  out  of  the  world  looking  for  those  gifts  that  do 
not  belong  to  the  world.  For  the  first  and  last  time  in  the  presence  of  this  Assembly,  recite 
your  earthly  name  and  say  after  me: 

Hierophant. 

(Followed  by  Candidate)  I,  A.B.,  in  the  presence  of  the  Eternal  Father  of  Light, 
Who  recompenses  those  who  seek  Him  out,  in  the  presence  of  the  Brethren  who  are 
gathered  here  together  in  the  grace  of  His  Divine  Name,  do  of  my  own  will  and  in  the 
consciousness  of  my  proper  act  and  deed,  submitted  in  conformity  with  the  act  and  will  of 
God,  most  solemnly  pledge  the  honour  of  my  soul  to  keep  inviolable  the  secrets  of  this 
Temple  and  of  the  Mysteries  which  are  worked  within  it.  I will  not  speak  of  them  in  the 
world  without,  when  I go  forth  therein.  I will  not  disclose  the  name  of  this  Temple  or  Order, 
or  the  name  of  any  of  its  members.  I will  not  reveal  the  knowledge  communicated  to  me 
therein.  I will  keep 


75 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  secrets  of  the  Sanctuary  as  I would  keep  those  of  my  King  and  God,  speaking  to 
me  in  the  inmost  places  of  the  soul.  1 will  conform  to  the  Laws  of  the  Order  and  to  the  By- 
Laws  of  this  Temple.  I will  have  no  part  or  dealing  in  respect  of  this  Order,  its  Rites, 
Proceedings,  or  its  Knowlege,  with  any  member  who  has  been  cast  out  therefrom,  nor  will  I 
recognise  the  living  membership  of  any  person  who  is  not  in  possession  of  the  temporal 
Password  communicated  at  each  Equinox  to  the  recognised  Temples.  I hereby  include 
within  the  category  of  this  sacred  pledge  whatever  information  I may  have  received 
concerning  the  Order  prior  to  my  admission  therein.  1 lift  up  my  heart  to  God  Who  is  my 
Judge,  and  seeing  that  I have  come  hither  actuated  by  the  most  solemn  motives  which  are 
conceived  by  the  soul  of  man,  I promise  solemnly  from  this  moment  that  I will  persevere 
with  courage  and  devotion  in  the  path  of  Divine  Science,  even  as  I shall  persevere 
undaunted  through  this  ceremony  which  is  its  image,  and  whatsoever  1 may  learn  or  attain  in 
this  Temple  and  in  the  Order,  I will  receive  as  from  the  hands  of  God  and  to  His  hands  will 
return  it  in  purity.  I certify  hereby  and  hereon  that  1 desire  above  all  things  the  grace  of  the 
secret  knowledge,  but  since  that  knowledge  is  also  power,  I convenant  that  at  no  time  and 
under  no  temptation  will  I apply  it  to  the  works  of  evil.  1 will  hold  myself  dedicated 
henceforth,  so  far  as  in  me  lies,  to  the  consecration  of  my  outward  and  inward  nature,  that  I 
may  deserve  to  leave  the  darkness  and  to  dwell  in  the  world  of  light.  I will  abide  with  my 
brethren  in  union,  rectitude  and  purity,  remembering  that  peace  is  in  God.  Bending  over  this 
holy  symbol  of  light  dawning  in  the  soul,  I swear  to  observe  all  parts  and  points  of  this 
pledge  without  evasion,  equivocation,  or  mental  reservation  of  any  kind,  praying  as  1 deal 
herein  in  all  high  faith  and  honour  that  my  secret  name  may  be  written  in  the  Book  of  Life, 
even  as  its  symbol  will  be  registered  this  day  in  the  Books  of  the  Order.  1 invoke  upon  my 
own  head  the  penalty  of  expulsion  from  the  Order  if  ever  I am  wilfully  guilty  of  perjury  herein. 
May  1 go  in  fear  of  the  second  death,  the  change  of  the  Infinite  Benignity  into  Divine  wrath 
and  of  the  Divine  Will  into  a hostile  current  which  shall  paralyse  the  life  of  the  soul.  Deal 
with  me,  0 Lord,  in  Thy  mercy;  strengthen  my  heart  and  my  reins;  for  even  as  I bow  my 
neck  under  the  Sword  of  the  Hiereus  (it  is  placed  on  the  neck  of  the  Candidate),  so  do  1 
commit  myself  into  Thy  hands  for  judgment  or  reward.  So  help  me  my  mighty  and  secret 
soul;  so  help  me  the  sun  of  my  soul;  enlighten  me  in  the  dark  places  and  bring  me  at  last  to 
Thee.  (A  pause.) 

Hierophant. 

Rise,  Novice  of  the  Portal  Grade  in  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn.  (The  Novice  is 
assisted  accordingly.  The  Hierophant  and  Hiereus  return  to  their  places.  All  Members  are 
seated.) 

Hierophant. 

Being  mindful,  0 Honourable  Hegemon,  that  all  things  are  within  - all  joys,  all 
dangers,  all  hopes,  all  fears,  with  the  ways  of  the  height  and  deep  - let  the  Novice  be  placed 
in  the  northern  part  of  the  Temple,  to  symbolise  the  state  of  spiritual  coldness,  the  night  of 
the  human  mind  and  of  grace  inhibited.  (This  is  done  accordingly,  but  the  Novice  is  faced  to 
the  East.) 


76 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Hierophant. 

I asked  to  be  taken  from  the  darkness  and  holy  hands  led  me  in  the  covert  of  holy 
wings.  I asked  to  be  brought  into  the  light,  and  the  loving  wings  were  closed  about  the  face 
of  me,  lest  I should  see  God  and  die.  1 asked  to  kneel  at  the  steps  of  the  Throne  of  God  and 
they  set  me  in  the  Holy  Place,  even  by  the  Tabernacle.  0 God,  how  wonderfully  is  Thy 
work  declared  in  the  heart  of  man:  I will  walk  in  Thy  ways  forever.  (A  pause.) 

Hierophant. 

Let  the  Novice  be  led  from  the  darkness  and  through  the  darkness  toward  the  Light  by 
a symbolical  advancement  on  the  faith  of  his  intention.  Let  the  outward  symbol  of  the  inward 
light  go  before  him,  like  the  destiny  of  attainment  before  those  who  are  born  for  the  light. 

(The  Dadouchos  passes  by  West  to  North,  and  when  he  has  paused  on  the  right  of 
the  Stolistes,  the  Kerux  takes  his  place  in  front  of  the  Hegemon  and  Novice  and  goes  before 
the  procession.  The  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  occupy  the  third  line.  The  procession  moves 
slowly,  with  great  reverence  and  in  the  utmost  silence,  except  at  the  stated  points  of  the 
liturgy.  The  Hierophant  knocks  once  as  it  passes  the  East.  The  Kerux  halts  in  the  South,  the 
Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  divide,  passing  one  on  each  side  of  the  Hegemon  and  Novice,  till 
they  are  in  front  of  the  Kerux.  All  turn  and  the  Kerux  bars  the  way  with  his  Wand.  The 
Cipher  MSS.  from  which  this  Ritual  depends  indicate  only  one  circumambulation  of  the 
Temple  at  this  point;  it  has  been  customary  to  triple  it  in  practice.  The  first  circumambulation 
was  in  silence,  except  for  one  battery  of  the  Hiereus;  at  the  second  the  Hierophant  knocked 
once,  the  consecration  took  place  in  the  South,  and  the  Novice  was  taken  to  the  Hiereus; 
the  third  completed  the  procedure  at  the  North  and  East  as  above.  The  innovation  has  no 
authority,  but  is  justified  by  convenience  in  a small  Temple.) 

Kerux. 

The  thoughts  of  the  natural  mind  are  unpurified  and  unconsecrated;  their  place  is 
not  found  by  the  Throne  of  the  West.  (The  Stolistes  cross-marks  the  Novice  on  the  forehead 
and  sprinkles  three  times.) 

Stolistes. 

In  the  Name  of  the  Fountain  of  Living  Water  which  cleanses  the  thought  of  man,  I 
purify  you  with  Water.  (The  Dadouchos  makes  a Cross  with  Thurible  and  censes  three 
times.) 

Dadouchos. 

In  the  Name  of  the  Divine  Desire  which  transmutes  the  thought  of  man,  I consecrate 
you  with  fire.  (The  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  fall  back  to  their  places  in  the  rear.) 

Hegemon. 

Son  of  the  night  and  time,  twice  washed  with  holy  water  and  purged  by  consecrated 
fire,  your  way  is  free  in  the  West. 


77 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


(The  procession  pauses  at  the  Throne  of  the  Hiereus,  who  knocks  once.  The 
Kerux  faces  him  on  the  right  hand.  The  Hegemon  leads  up  the  Novice  and  raises  his 
hoodwink.  The  Hiereus  stands  with  drawn  Sword  holding  the  Banner  of  the  West.) 

Hiereus. 

You  cannot  pass  by  me,  says  the  Guardian  of  the  West,  until  you  have 
learned  my  Name. 

Hegemon. 

(On  the  part  of  the  Novice).  You  are  darkness  in  the  place  of  darkness, 
questioning  the  Seekers  of  the  Light. 

Hiereus. 

The  Mystery  of  the  Presence  in  the  West  is  declared  at  the  Gate  of  the  Temple 
for  the  encouragement  of  reconciled  souls.  I am  the  protection  from  the  evil  that  is 
within  you.  I am  Divine  Fortitude.  I am  Judgment,  by  which  the  good  is  set  apart 
from  the  evil.  I am  the  Providence  which  works  in  darkness.  Go  forward  and  fear  not, 
for  he  who  is  established  in  God  does  not  tremble  at  the  flame  or  at  the  flood,  or  at 
the  inconstant  shadows  of  the  air. 

(The  Hegemon  replaces  the  hoodwink;  the  procession  moves  forward  till  it 
arrives  again  at  the  North.  The  Kerux,  turning,  bars  the  way  for  the  second  time. 
The  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos  come  forward  as  before.) 

Kerux. 

The  desires  and  emotions  of  the  natural  man  are  a sea  in  torment: 
unpurified  and  unconsecrated,  their  place  is  not  found  by  the  Throne  of  the  Temple 
in  the  East.  (The  Stolistes  cross-marks  as  before.) 

Stolistes. 

In  the  Name  of  the  Fountain  of  Living  Water  which  cleanses  the  heart  of 
man,  I purify  you  with  Water.  (The  Dadouchos  censes  as  before.) 

Dadouchos. 

In  the  Name  of  the  Divine  Desire  which  converts  the  heart  of  man,  1 
consecrate  you  with  fire. 

Hegemon. 

Son  of  the  night  and  time,  thrice  washed  with  Holy  Water  and  purged  by 
consecrated  Fire,  your  way  is  free  in  the  East. 

(The  Kerux  leads  the  procession  to  the  Throne  of  the  Hierophant.  The 
Hegemon  leads  up  the  Novice  and  raises  his  hoodwink,  so  that  he  sees  the 
Hierophant,  standing  with  uplifted  Sceptre,  holding  the  Banner  of  the  East.) 


78 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Hierophant. 

You  cannot  pass  by  me,  says  the  Guardian  of  the  East,  until  you  have  learned  my 

Name. 

Hegemon. 

(On  the  part  of  the  Novice.)  You  are  Light  in  the  place  of  Light,  Light  dawning  in 
Darkness  for  the  liberation  and  salvation  of  those  who  dwell  in  the  House  of  Bondage  and  in 
the  Shadow  of  Death. 

Hierophant. 

The  Mystery  of  Eternal  Light  dawning  in  the  darkness  of  material  things,  and 
communicated  to  the  soul  of  man,  is  declared  in  the  East  of  the  Temple.  1 am  the  Light 
enkindled,  the  Morning  Light,  the  desire  of  the  eyes  of  the  world.  I am  the  Expounder  of 
Mysteries.  I am  love  and  immortality  and  the  hope  of  the  Kingdom  in  its  coming.  1 am  the 
Guardian  of  the  Veil  and  I speak  in  the  opening  of  the  eyes,  proclaiming  the  path  of  wisdom 
and  the  secret  law  of  equilibrium. 

(The  hoodwink  is  again  replaced  over  the  eyes  of  the  Novice  and  the  procession  passes 
to  the  Altar.  The  Hierophant  leaves  his  Throne,  bearing  his  Sceptre.  He  stops  (a)  between 
the  Pillars,  (b)  half-way  between  these  and  the  Altar,  or  (c)  close  to  the  eastern  side  of  the 
Altar.  The  Hiereus  comes  forward  to  his  place  on  the  North  side  in  the  angle  towards  the 
West.  The  Hegemon  places  the  Novice  in  the  West  and  moves  to  the  South  side  in  the  angle 
towards  the  West.  The  Kerux  stands  at  a little  distance  behind  the  Novice.  The  Stolistes  and 
Dadouchos  stand  due  East  of  the  Hiereus  and  Hegemon  respectively.  Wherever  the 
Hierophant  pauses,  he  says  slowly  and  clearly:) 

Hierophant. 

I come  in  the  power  of  the  light:  1 come  in  the  Light  of  Wisdom;  I come  in  the  mercy  of 
the  light.  The  light  has  healing  in  its  wings.  (And  afterwards  at  the  East  of  the  Altar:) 

Hierophant. 

Behold,  I stand  at  all  thy  doors  and  knock.  Open  thy  heart,  0 Novice  of  this  Order. 
Take  in  thy  hand  the  desires  and  aspirations  which  have  brought  thee  to  our  Holy  Temple, 
and  kneeling  with  bowed  head  (the  Hegemon  and  Kerux  here  assist  the  Novice),  place  them 
in  humility  and  reverence  on  our  Altar  of  Sacrifice.  (The  Novice  is  directed  to  clasp  his 
hands  over  the  Altar.) 

Hierophant. 

O "Thou  Who  sanctifiest  the  heart  of  man,  Who  leadest  our  desires  into  attainment 
and  our  aspirations  to  the  steps  of  Thy  House,  sanctify,  Eternal  God,  this  Novice  of  our 
Order.  Lead  him  to  the  perfection  which  is  in  Thee,  into  the  splendour  of  Thy  great  White 
Throne.  May  that  which  here  and  now  1 restore  to  him  in  the  outward  signs  of  Thy  most 
blessed  sacraments  and  Thine  all-sacred  symbols  be  ratified  above  in  Thy  presence  and 
realised 


79 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


essentially  within  him,  to  the  glory  of  Thy  Name,  world  without  end,  Amen,  and  to 
the  joy  of  Thy  redeemed  Hierarchies. 

(The  Novice  is  assisted  to  rise.  The  Hierophant  comes  close  to  the  Altar  and  lifts 
his  Sceptre  above  the  head  of  the  Novice.  The  Hiereus  and  Hegemon  raise  the  Sword  and 
Sceptre  respectively  to  touch  the  Sceptre  of  the  Hierophant.) 

Hegemon. 

Thou  who  wouldst  be  saved  and  hast  come  out  of  the  ways  of  darkness,  enter  into 
thy  holy  inheritance. 

Hiereus. 

Thou  in  whom  the  world  has  not  anything  from  henceforth  and  forever,  come  into 
the  Holy  Light.  (At  the  word  Light  the  Kerux  finally  removes  the  hoodwink  and  the  Sentinel 
turns  up  the  lights.) 

Hierophant. 

We  receive  thee  into  the  place  of  our  sacraments,  among  the  signs  without  of  the 
things  that  are  realised  within,  into  the  pure  and  shining  mystery,  into  the  Order  of  the 
Golden  Dawn. 

Hierophant. 

The  emblems  of  High  Light  are  restored  to  the  Novice. 

Hierophant.  KHABS. 

Hiereus.  AM 

Hegemon.  PEKHT 
Hiereus.  KONX 

Hegemon.  OM 

Hierophant.  PAX 

Hegemon.  Light 


80 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Hierophant.  In 
Hiereus.  Extension. 

(The  three  Chief  Officers  remove  their  Sceptres  and  Sword  from  above  the  head  of 
the  Candidate.  The  Kerux  passes  to  North-East  of  the  Altar  and  raises  his  Lamp.  The 
Hierophant  points  thereto.) 

Hierophant. 

When  the  guiding  hands  led  you  in  the  dark  circle  of  your  wanderings,  the  Light  of 
the  Hidden  Wisdom  went  before  you,  symbolised  by  the  Lamp  of  the  Kerux.  Know  and 
remember  henceforward  that  this  wisdom,  which  begins  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  ends  at  his 
Palace  at  the  centre.  (All  officers  return  to  their  stations  except  the  Hegernon.) 

Hierophant. 

Let  the  Neophyte  be  led  to  the  eastern  side  of  the  Altar;  let  him  stand  with  his  face  to 
the  East.  (The  Hegemon  leads  accordingly  by  North  to  East  and  places  the  Neophyte  in  the 
middle  way  between  the  Altar  and  the  Pillars.) 

Hierophant. 

Honourable  Prater  Hiereus,  you  will  now  impart  to  the  Neophyte  the  Secret  Signs, 
Tokens  and  Word  which  are  allocated  to  the  0-0  Grade  in  the  Portal  of  the  Golden  Dawn. 

You  will  also  communicate  the  temporal  password  which  is  common  to  the  whole  Order. 

(The  Hiereus  passes  from  his  Throne  by  North  to  the  Black  Pillar  and  stands  on  its 
Eastern  side,  facing  South.  The  Hegemon  leaves  the  Neophyte,  and  passing  by  North  takes  up 
a similar  position  before  the  White  Pillar,  but  facing  towards  the  North.  The  Sword  of  the 
Hiereus  is  sheathed.  The  Hiereus  turns  West  and  faces  the  Neophyte.  He  stands  between  the 
Pillars.) 

Hiereus. 

Prater  Adveniat  Regnurn  (vel  aliud),  by  the  decree  of  the  Truly  Honoured 
Hierophant,  receive  at  my  hands  the  Secret  Signs,  Token  and  Word  of  the  Portal.  The  step  is 
given  by  advancing  your  (he  is  given  instruction),  as  I advance  my  own.  The  signs  are 
called  respectively  those  of  (again  instruction  is  given)  and  of  (again  instruction  is  given), 
and  the  second  is  the  answer  to  the  first.  The  Sign  of  (again  instruction  is  given)  is  given  by 
putting  out  the  (again  instruction  is  given),  the  (again  instruction  is  given)  being  also 
inclined.  In  this  position  you  are  as  one  (again  instruction  is  given)  and  it  is  intended  to 
remind  you  of  that  state  in  which  you  came  among  us  but  recently,  seeking  and  asking  for  the 
light.  The  Sign  of  Silence  refers  to  your  solemn  covenant.  The  Token  or  Grip  is  given 
(again 


81 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


instruction  is  given.  The  Hiereus  maintains  the  Grip.)  It  recalls  your  search  for 
guidance  in  the  darkness.  In  this  position  the  syllables  of  the  Word  are  exchanged  in  an 
undertone.  It  is  (again  instruction  is  given),  the  Egyptian  name  of  the  God  of  Silence.  The 
temporal  Password  of  the  Order  is  changed  at  each  Equinox;  at  the  present  time  it  is  (again 
instruction  is  given).  I now  place  you  between  the  Symbolic  Pillars  at  the  Gateway  of 
Hidden  Wisdom. 

(He  draws  the  Neophyte  forward  by  the  Grip  of  the  Grade,  taking  care  that  he  does 
not  cross  the  threshold  represented  by  the  two  Pillars.  He  resumes  his  station  by  the  Black 
Pillar.) 


Hierophant. 

Honourable  Frater  Hiereus,  1 bid  you  remember  that  behind  the  will  of  man  is  the 
Portal  of  the  Supreme  Mystery. 

Hiereus. 

Truly  Honoured  Hierophant,  in  commemoration  of  that  Mystery,  and  in  obedience 
to  your  ordinance,  I demand  the  final  and  perfect  consecration. 

(The  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos,  following  the  course  of  the  sun,  come  forward 
successively  from  their  places,  [hey  raise  their  vessels  of  consecration  before  the 
Hierophant,  then  turn  and  consecrate  the  Neophyte,  saying:) 

Stolistes. 

In  the  Name  of  the  Fountain  of  Living  Water  which  purifies  the  will  of  man,  I 
consecrate  you  with  Water. 

Dadouchos. 

I n the  name  of  the  Divine  Desire  which  redirects  the  will  of  man,  I consecrate  you 
with  Fire.  (Again  saluting  the  Throne,  they  return  to  their  places.) 

Hierophant. 

Honourable  Frater  Hegemon,  let  the  Neophyte  be  unbound  between  the  Pillars,  to 
symbolise  the  transmutation  of  the  lower  parts  of  the  personality,  so  that  they  may  concur  in 
the  work  of  the  will  when  the  will  has  been  turned  to  the  light.  (This  is  done  accordingly,  the 
Sceptre  of  the  Hegemon  being  taken  in  charge  by  the  Hiereus.) 

Hierophant. 

Let  our  Frater  be  also  invested  with  the  Mystic  Badge  of  this  Grade.  ("I  he  Neophyte 
is  invested  with  the  Ribbon,  and  this  completes  the  ceremonial  part  of  his  reception.  The 
silent  circumambulation  in  the  light  which  used  to  take  place  at  this  point  has  no  authority 
in  the  Cipher  MSS.  It  was  preceded  by  a simple  direction  on  the  part  of  the  Eierophant.) 


82 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Hegemon. 

By  command  of  the  Truly  Honoured  Hierophant,  receive  the  Badge  of  this  Grade: 
the  prevailing  colour  is  black,  representing  darkness,  but  the  Light  of  the  Eternal  Triad  is 
dawning  therein. 

Hierophant. 

You  will  now  take  your  seat  as  an  approved  and  received  Neophyte  on  the  northern 
side  of  the  Temple  and  toward  the  West. 

(The  Hiereus  restores  the  Sceptre  to  the  Hegemon.  The  Hegemon  passes  round  the 
White  Pillar,  leads  the  Neophyte  with  the  sun  to  his  assigned  place,  and  returns  to  his  own 
between  the  Pillars,  where  his  seat  is  restored.  This  completes  the  ceremonial  part  of  the 
reception.  The  Kerux  replaces  the  Rose,  Lamp,  Chalice  and  Paten  on  the  Altar.  All 
Officers  are  seated.) 

Hierophant. 

Prater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  alius),  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  extends  to  you 
its  loving  welcome  on  your  admission  as  a Neophyte  of  this  Temple.  May  there  be  joy  in 
the  blessed  Hierarchies  at  your  coming  out  of  earthly  into  spiritual  life,  and  may  that  joy  in 
its  reflection  fall  like  the  rain  of  love  into  your  heart  of  hearts.  Your  preparation  as  a 
Candidate  was  in  the  body,  to  symbolise  that  greater  preparation  which  you  had  already 
made  in  your  heart  before  you  could  be  accepted  as  a Postulant.  The  triple  cord  which  was 
placed  about  you  represented  the  threefold  bondage  of  your  mortality,  and  when  it  was  in 
fine  loosed  this  signified  the  liberation  of  your  higher  part.  The  sacramental  title  which  you 
have  assumed  in  place  of  your  earthly  designation  is  a token  of  our  Secret  Name  in  the 
Temple  that  is  above:  it  is  the  nearest  that  you  can  reach  in  your  aspiration  to  that  which  in 
this  life  is  hidden  even  from  yourself.  The  hoodwink  imaged  the  darkness  of  the  material 
mind.  The  censing  in  your  several  consecrations  prefigured  the  cleansing  with  fire  from  the 
Supernal  Altar  of  Incense.  May  your  heart  and  your  reins  be  purified  thereby  as  if  with  a 
burning  coal.  The  cross-marking  with  lustral  water  and  the  mystic  sprinkling  showed  forth 
sacramentally  the  condition  on  which  your  name  is  registered  in  the  Book  of  Life.  The  Altar 
at  which  you  knelt  is  in  the  form  of  a double  cube,  with  its  base  of  necessity  concealed,  the 
surfaces  exposed  to  sight,  while  on  the  summit  are  the  sacred  emblems  whereon  you  were 
pledged  and  whereby  you  are  bound  in  the  sight  of  God  henceforth  and  forever.  The  Altar 
is  black  to  portray  the  state  of  our  natural  humanity  and  the  darkness  of  the  unformed 
world  before  the  Word  of  creative  light  went  forth  therein.  That  Word  is  typified  by  the 
white  Triangle  which  is  placed  on  the  Altar;  it  is  the  sign  of  Divine  Immanence  in  Nature; 
and  also  of  that  which  must  be  declared  in  your  soul,  my  brother,  for  the  manifestation  of 
the  Divine  therein.  At  the  apex  of  the  White  Triangle,  there  is  placed  a Red  Cross,  which  is 
the  sign  of  Him  who  is  unfolded  in  light  through  the  universe  and  through  the  soul  in  grace. 
(The  Hierophant  rises  and  extends  his  arms  in  the  form  of  a cross.) 


83 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hierophant. 

Thanks  be  to  Thee,  0 Lord  and  Father  Almighty,  for  the  Secret  Word  which  is 
conceived  and  born  in  the  heart.  We  have  accepted  Thy  Cross  and  Thy  Calvary  because  of 
the  glorious  resurrection  that  is  to  come.  May  Thy  Word  also  be  born  in  the  heart  of  this 
Neophyte.  May  it  grow  in  grace  and  truth.  May  the  power  and  perfection  of  its  fulness  be  as 
the  glory  of  the  King  of  all.  (The  Hierophant  resumes  his  seat.) 

Hierophant. 

To  the  East  of  the  Cubical  Altar  are  the  Pillars  which  are  analogically  referred  to 
Seth,  Hermes  and  Solomon  as  allusions  to  the  secret  tradition  and  its  perpetuation  by  the 
guardians  of  the  Mysteries.  They  bear  certain  hieroglyphical  texts  from  the  Ritual  of  the 
Dead.  They  are  symbols  of  eternal  equilibrium,  active  and  passive,  fixed  and  volatile, 
severity  and  mercy.  The  solid  triangles  on  their  summits  bear  each  a veiled  lamp,  signifying 
the  triad  of  life.  Between  them  lies  the  narrow  path  of  the  Hidden  Wisdom.  It  was  down  this 
path,  my  brother,  that  I passed  for  your  reintegration  in  the  light;  on  the  threshold  thereof, 
and  between  the  Iwo  Pillars,  you  received  the  secrets  of  the  Grade,  the  distinguishing 
badge  and  the  final  and  perfect  consecration. 

You  should  now  learn  that  the  Hierophant  on  his  Throne  in  the  East  personifies  the 
substance  and  the  evidence  and  the  experience  which  are  represented  by  faith  in  the  eternal. 
He  is  the  Rising  Sun  in  Nature  and  power,  light,  mercy  and  wisdom  in  the  providential 
world.  It  is  said:  Ex  oriente  Lux,  and  that  light  is  for  the  illumination  of  the  peoples  of  the 
earth.  Behold  He  hath  placed  His  Tabernacle  in  the  sun,  and  the  purpose  is  that  our  feet 
may  be  directed  in  the  way  of  peace.  This  is  how  the  Orient  from  on  high  visits  us.  The 
intention  is  furthermore  that  the  knowledge  of  salvation  may  be  granted  to  His  people.  This 
is  the  import  of  the  power  of  the  Hierophant  and  the  correspondence  thereof  is  His  mercy, 
for  mercy  is  on  all  sides.  But  the  correspondence  of  his  light  is  his  wisdom,  and  this  wisdom 
symbolises  that  which  proceeds  from  the  mouth  of  the  Most  High,  reaching  from  end  to 
end  and  strongly  and  sweetly  overruling  all  things.  The  Hierophant  is  also  the  teaching 
spirit  at  the  place  of  the  Rending  of  the  Veil. 

The  Hiereus  on  the  Throne  of  the  West  is  the  Setting  Sun  in  Nature  and  Divine 
Fortitude  in  the  world  of  Providence.  But  the  Fortitude  of  God  on  the  threshold  of  initiation 
is  the  power  and  will  to  save  the  soul  alive  when  it  has  gone  forth  seeking  the  true  light.  That 
is  the  kind  of  Fortitude.  The  Hiereus  is  also  a correspondence  of  that  Divine  Darkness  which 
is  behind  all  manifested  Divine  Light. 

The  Hegemon  represents  religion,  the  foundation  of  which  is  in  faith,  but  it  is  also 
holy  hope.  He  is  the  Mediator,  the  Reconciler,  the  Preparer  for  the  Path  to  the  Divine.  He 
represents  in  an  especial  manner  the  condition  of  the  ascent  of  the  soul,  and  that  is  purity, 
which  is  symbolised  by  his  white  robe.  It  is  in  and  by  this  quality  that  he  directs  the  higher 
aspirations  of  the  spirit.  Purity  is  not  only  the  condition,  but  in  a sense  it  is  also  the  term;  it 


84 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


is  not  only  the  first  link  in  the  chain  which  leads  from  earth  to  heaven,  but  it  is  the 
chain  itself.  It  is  the  Ladder  of  Jacob,  by  which  the  aspirations  ascend  and  the  great 
influences  come  down.  It  is  said  that  Religion  pure  and  undefiled  before  God  and  the  Father 
is  this:  To  visit  the  fatherless  and  the  widowed  in  their  affliction  and  to  keep  oneself 
unspotted  from  the  world.  The  Hegemon  coming  forth  from  between  the  Pillars,  and  going 
even  outside  the  door  of  the  Temple  into  the  place  of  the  uninitiated,  is  sent  to  save  that 
which  is  in  dereliction.  His  ministry  is  to  those  who  are  widowed  of  the  Divine  Spouse  and 
to  those  who  are  fatherless,  being  without  God  in  the  world.  When  he  goes  out  therefore,  it  is 
as  if  a voice  said:  And  God  so  loved  the  world. 

But  the  qualities  and  graces  and  virtues  which  are  represented  by  the  chief  officers  are  in 
a state  of  superincession.  There  is  also  a sense  in  which  the  Hierophant  and  Hiereus  both 
represent  the  love  that  is  behind  the  universe,  in  virtue  of  the  correspondences  of  which  it  is 
possible  for  God  to  he  so  near  the  heart  of  man  that  it  is  more  easy  to  attain  than  to  miss 
Him.  This  is  why  the  path  upward  is  natural  and  straight  in  comparison  with  the  path 
downward. 

In  respect  of  the  lesser  officers,  you  have  heard  what  is  symbolised  by  the  Lamp 
and  Function  of  the  Kerux.  He  is  the  light  of  the  end  which  goes  before  the  cohorts  of 
salvation.  The  Stolistes  and  Dadouchos,  who  are  seated  in  the  South  and  North,  carry  the 
outward  signs  of  the  things  which  purify  within.  It  is  in  virtue  of  such  lustrations  and 
such  consecrations  that  the  Candidate  comes  at  length  to  the  East,  as  the  quest  to  its  term 
and  desire  to  its  proper  attainment.  (A  pause.) 

Hierophant. 

Frater  Kerux,  you  have  my  command  to  proclaim  that  the  Neophyte  has  entered  the 
Portal  and  has  been  admitted  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Neophyte  Grade  in  the  Holy  Order  of 
the  Golden  Dawn.  (The  Kerux  passes  by  West  to  North,  and  standing  at  the  right  hand  but 
to  the  front  of  the  Hierophant,  and  facing  West,  he  raises  his  Lamp  and  Wand.) 

Kerux. 

In  the  Name  of  God  who  is  our  Light,  and  by  the  ordinance  of  the  Truly  Honoured 
Hierophant,  hear  ye  all:  I proclaim  and  testify  that  A.B.,  who  will  be  known  hence  forth 
among  us  by  the  sacramental  title  of  Frater  (vel  Soror)  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  alius),  has 
passed  the  Portal  of  the  Golden  Dawn  and  has  been  admitted  to  the  Mysteries  of  the 
Neophyte  Grade.  (He  returns  to  his  place  with  the  Sun.) 

Hiereus. 

Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  alius),  I exhort  you  to  keep  in  everlasting  memory 
the  obligation  to  secrecy  which  you  have  taken  on  your  entrance  into  this  Order.  Regard  it  as 
a test  of  merit,  and  its  faithful  observance  as  a title  of  salvation,  a warrant  for  your 
advancement  in  the  soul.  There  is  strength  in  silence,  the  seed  of  Wisdom  is  sown  therein 
and  it  grows  in  darkenss  and  mystery.  Remember  the  Mystery  which  you  have  received;  it  is 
the  shadow  of  a greater  Mystery,  whereof  tongue  cannot  speak.  Honour  God  Who  is  our 


85 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


light.  From  Him  proceed  all  things  and  unto  Him  all  things  return.  Continue  to 
desire  that  Divine  Vision  which  you  are  pledged  to  seek.  Remember  that  those  who  go  before 
you  may  place  you  in  the  path  of  its  attainment,  but  the  soul  must  ascend  of  itself  till  the 
grace  and  the  power  come  down  and  abide  in  its  secret  sanctuary.  Remember  that  things 
Divine  are  not  for  those  who  understand  the  body  alone.  Remember  that  many  burdens  are 
cast  aside  on  the  path  upward,  and  that  only  those  who  are  lightly  clothed  will  attain  to  the 
summit.  Remember  the  charity  of  the  wise  and  respect  the  religions  which  are  sacred  to 
those  about  you,  for  there  are  many  paths  to  the  centre.  Remember  the  law  of  equilibrium 
and  learn  by  its  help  to  distinguish  between  the  good  and  evil,  to  choose  the  one  and  put 
aside  the  other,  until  that  time  comes  when  goodness  shall  fill  the  heart  entirely.  Remember 
lastly  that  steadfastness  prevails  over  all  difficulties,  and  do  not  be  daunted  by  those  which 
await  you  in  the  pursuit  of  that  Hidden  Knowledge  of  which  God  is  the  motive  and  the  end. 

Hierophant. 

The  titles  of  your  advancement  to  the  next  Grade  of  the  Order  depend  in  part  on 
yourself  and  in  part  on  us.  Ponder  over  that  which  is  communicated  in  the  Portal  of  the 
Secret  Light.  In  such  reflection  and  in  the  examination  of  your  own  conscience  you  will 
find  a further  light,  and  that  light  is  your  warrant.  The  instruction  which  we  offer  for  your 
guidance  may  be  obtained  on  application  to  the  Cancellarius,  but  your  advancement  itself 
can  take  place  only  by  the  dispensation  of  the  Second  Order.  (The  Allocution  of  the 
Neophyte  Grade  then  follows,  and  may  be  delivered  by  the  Hierophant  or  one  of  the 
Wardens  of  the  Temple.) 


THE  ALLOCUTION 

Hierophant. 

Fratres  et  Sorores,  holding  all  Grades  of  the  Order,  by  the  power  to  me  transmitted 
from  the  Wardens  of  this  Temple,  I invite  you  to  hear  with  recollected  hearts  the  Allocution 
belonging  to  the  Grade  of  Neophyte.  And  you,  our  Brother,  who  have  been  received  this 
day  among  us,  to  you  we  address  more  especially  these  few  words,  which,  we  trust,  will 
abide  in  your  memory  and  will  perform  their  office  within  you  to  your  own  and  to  our 
advantage.  We  have  invoked  upon  you  the  Morning  Redness,  Gold  of  Morning,  even  the 
Extended  Light,  and  we  feel  that  within  the  peaceful  abode  of  this  Order  you  may  find  not 
only  an  abode  of  spiritual  contemplation  apart  from  the  outer  world  of  our  daily  solicitude, 
but  a sanctuary  where  the  symbols  of  the  secret  knowledge  may  bring  to  you  some  radiance 
or  reflection  of  the  direct  Light  which  shines  in  the  Temple  of  the  Light  - that  Temple  which 
is  not  entered  with  earthly  feet  or  seen  with  the  veiled  eyes  of  this  body  of  our  mortality.  We 
trust  also  that  the  Order  may  become  to  you  one  of  those  hearths  and  homes  around  which 
the  love  of  brotherhood  is  gathered  - that  love  which  does  not  fail  us  in  the  hour  of  inward 
need.  In  this  respect  we  are  pledged  to  you  whom  we  have  admitted,  as  you  are  pledged  to 
us:  we  ask  you  to  remember  this,  as  we  also  remember,  and  among  the  last  things  which  we 


86 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


can  offer  to  you  at  this  time  is  the  maxim  in  chief  of  fraternity  founded  on 
consanguinity  of  spirit;  Brother,  the  keys  of  all  the  greater  mysteries  are  committed  to  the 
hands  of  love. 

And  now  as  regards  the  experience  through  which  you  have  just  passed,  we  have  no 
occasion  to  remind  you  that  in  the  physical  order  we  come  forth  from  darkness  into  light,  and 
that  in  the  intellectual  order  most  comparisons  between  light  and  darkness  are  an  ecomony 
of  our  real  meaning.  The  progress  of  the  Candidate  from  the  one  to  the  other  state  in  the 
Grade  of  Neophyte  is  understood  among  us  in  a particular  sense,  which  at  the  same  time  has 
a certain  natural  analogy  with  the  more  usual  meaning.  The  birth  of  the  soul  in  our 
consciousness  is  like  birth  into  physical  life.  As  the  life  of  the  Candidate  anteceded  his 
reception  into  the  Order,  so  the  soul  which  is  within  us  antecedes  that  moment  when  it 
issues,  as  it  were,  from  its  concealment  within  us  and  begins  to  manifest  by  its  operation. 

This  is  the  beginning  of  the  supernatural  life,  of  the  life  of  grace,  and  hereof  is  the  whole 
Grade  a symbol.  When  the  desire  of  the  House  of  the  Lord  awakens  within  us,  our  passage 
from  darkness  has  already  begun;  we  have  been  called  to  the  Living  Beauty;  that  which  is 
termed  among  us  the  Lamp  of  the  Hidden  Knowledge  has  been  uplifted  and  proceeds  before 
us  on  the  way;  it  is  the  experience  of  those  who  are  our  precursors  in  the  ascent  of  the  Holy 
Mountain.  Through  the  keen  air  of  high  aspiration,  as  in  the  uplifted  region  of  the  mind, 
may  we  pass  into  that  world  of  flame,  wherein  are  the  Sons  and  Daughters  of  Desire!  When 
desire  and  aspiration  have  attained  their  term  in  us,  may  there  be  communicated  at  length 
that  bread  and  even  that  salt  which  are  types  of  the  earth  no  longer  but  the  food  of  souls! 

May  we  drink  of  that  wine  reserved  for  those  who  are  athirst  in  the  Kingdom  of  our  Father! 
The  lustrations  are  many,  and  the  consecrations  also  are  many,  looking  for  that  time  when 
God  shall  cleanse  us  from  our  sins  with  living  water,  pouring  through  the  chambers  of  the 
mind,  and  our  hearts  with  that  fire  which  being  enkindled  on  earth  shall  in  the  end  carry  us 
to  heaven. 

We  are  dealing,  Brethren,  and  shall  continue  to  deal  henceforward,  not  alone  with 
the  question  of  religion,  but  with  its  heart  and  centre  behind  all  the  external  differences  of 
systems  and  churches  and  sects.  The  Grades  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  are  the 
grades  of  our  progression  in  God,  and  in  these  - as  in  those  which  we  take  in  that  other  and 
not  less  symbolical  progression  of  daily  life  - it  rests  with  us  whether  they  shall  remain 
symbolism  or  whether  we  shall  pass  in  them,  and  they  shall  pass  in  us.  into  the  actual  region 
of  experience.  It  is  because  of  that  infinite  realm  which  lies  behind  the  woven  circle  of  of 
ficial  religion  that  you  are  counselled  in  this  Grade  to  respect  the  forms  thereof.  The 
external  churches  are  doors  which  open  for  many  if  not  indeed  for  you,  and  there  is 
perchance  one  of  them  which  for  you  also  may  open,  into  the  places  of  peace,  into  the  light 
which  in  fine  will  enlighten  every  man  who  comes  into  this  world.  Looking  unto  which 
region,  and  remembering  the  term  of  our  desire,  let  us  pray  that  we  all  who  are  inheritors  of  a 
dying  world  may  enter  into  another  heritage  in  the  world  without  end.  (The  Minutes  of  the 
previous  Meeting  and  the  other  official  business,  if  any,  are  taken  at  this  point.) 


87 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  SOLEMN  CEREMONY  OF  CLOSING  THE  TEMPLE 
IN  THE  NEOPHYTE  GRADE 

(The  Sentinel  having  left  the  Temple:  Without  any  other  admonition  on  the  part  of 
the  Hierophant,  the  Kerux  proceeds  to  the  place  of  proclamation  in  the  usual  manner  and 
raises  his  Lamp  and  Wand.) 

Kerux. 

Hekas,  Hekas,  este  bebeloi.  (He  returns  to  his  place  with  the  Sun.) 

Hierophant. 

Fratres  et  Sorores,  in  the  banishment  of  all  earthly  thoughts  and  in  the  recollection  of 
the  heart,  assist  me  to  close  the  Temple  in  the  Grade  of  Neophyte.  (All  rise.) 

Hierophant. 

I et  the  keeper  of  the  Holy  Place  on  the  hither  side  of  the  Portal  ascertain  that  the 
Temple  is  guarded. 

'"The  Kerux  gives  one  knock  on  the  hither  side  of  the  door.  The  Sentinel  responds  in 
the  same  manner  on  the  outer  side,  using  the  hilt  of  his  sword.) 

Kerux. 

I rule  Honoured  Hierophant,  on  the  hither  and  further  side  it  is  firmly  guarded. 

Hierophant. 

I'ratres  et  Sorores.  lift  up  your  hearts.  I testify  on  my  part  that  the  world  is  still 
without  and  the  prince  thereof.  Honourable  Frater  Hiereus.  assure  ;ourself  that  all  present 
have  ecn  the  Golden  Dawn,  which  is  a light  in  the  inmost  heart. 

Hiereus. 

I'ratres  et  Sorores,  give  me  the  outward  signs  which  are  attributed  to  the  Frist  Grade 
of  the  light  within.  (This  being  done.)  Truly  Honoured  Hierophant,  they  have  seen  His  star 
in  the  Last  and  have  come  to  adore  Him.  (The  first  Sign  is  here  given  by  the  Hiereus  and  the 
second  by  the  Hierophant.) 

Hierophant. 

May  the  Angel  of  Great  Counsel  and  the  prince  of  Peace  and  the  Light  which 
enlighteneth  every  man  who  cometh  into  this  world,  give  us  grace  and  illumination  in  our 
day.  Let  the  Temple  be  cleansed  with  water  and  consecrated  by  fire,  to  symbolise  the 
purification  that  is  within. 

(The  Stolistes  follows  the  course  ofthe  sun,  coming  eastward  from  his  place  in  the 
North.  lie  makes  a Cross  with  his  cup  and  sprinkles  thrice  in  the  East.  He  performs  the 
same 


88 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


ceremony  in  the  other  quarters  and  returns  to  the  East,  where  he  again  faces  the 
Hierophant,  raises  the  Cup  of  Water,  and  says:) 

Stolistes. 

Waters  of  Understanding,  Waters  of  the  Great  Sea:  I have  purified  with  water. 

(He  salutes  the  Throne  and  returns  to  his  place  by  South  and  West.  The  Dadouchos 
follows,  observing  the  same  procedure  with  his  Vessel  of  Incense.  Having  returned  to  the 
East,  he  says,  raising  the  Thurible:) 

Dadouchos. 

The  desire  of  the  House  of  the  Lord  hath  eaten  me  up:  1 have  consecrated  with  fire. 
(He  salutes  the  Throne  and  returns.) 

Hierophant. 

Let  the  mystical  reverse  procession  take  place  in  the  pathway  of  the  light. 

The  Kerux  passes  from  West  to  South.  The  Hegemon  passes  by  North  to  West  and 

South.  The  Iliereus  passes  direct  to  South.  The  Stolistes  passes  by  West  to 

South.  1-he 

Dadouchos  takes  his  place  on  the  right  of  the  Stolistes.  When  the  procession  is  thus 
formed,  the  Kerux  leads  from  South  to  East  and  all  salute  in  passing  the  Throne  of  the 
Hierophant.  When  it  reaches  the  Throne  of  the  Hiereus  he  returns  thereto.  As  it  passes  the 
Throne  of  the  Hierophant  for  the  second  time  the  Hegemon  retires  to  his  seat.  The  others 
circumambulate  and  salute  for  the  third  time,  each  dropping  out  as  he  reaches  his  own 
place.) 


Hierophant. 

The  mystical  reverse  procession  is  accomplished  in  commemoration  of  the  waning 
light  of  Nature  and  to  signify  the  return  of  the  soul  to  the  material  world  carrying  the 
symbols  of  the  light,  l.et  us  adore  the  Holy  and  Eternal  God,  Who  is  the  Father  and  the 
Term  of  our  desires. 

(The  Hierophant  descends  from  his  Throne  and  faces  the  East  thereat.  All  turn  East, 
maintaining  the  Sign  of  the  Grade  until  the  adoration  is  over.) 

Hierophant. 

U 'hhou  who  hast  called  Thy  servants  in  all  generations  and  bast  set  apart  thine  elect 
to  thy  service,  who  hast  filled  our  hearts  with  the  aspiration  towards  Thy  union,  and  all  Thy 
channels  of  grace  with  the  means  of  its  attainment:  Give  us  this  day  and  forever  our  daily 
desire  for  Thee,  and  grant,  we  beseech  Thee,  at  the  close  of  this  solemn  office,  which  we 
have  performed  to  "thy  Glory,  that  the  fulness  of  Thine  efficacious  grace  may  be  with  us  on 
our  going  forth  into  the  world,  even  as  on  our  coming  into  Thy  sanctuary.  (He  puts  down  his 
Sceptre  and  faces  West.  All  face  as  before.) 


89 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hierophant. 

Fratres  et  Sorores  of  all  Grades  in  the  Order,  let  us  in  the  bodily  communion  of 
sacramental  food  in  common  remember  that  Divine  Substance  can  also  be  partaken  of  by 
the  soul.  (He  goes  to  the  West  of  the  Altar  and  faces  East.) 

Hierophant. 

(Communicating  in  the  bread  and  salt).  Partake  with  me  therefore,  I pray  you,  of 
this  bread  ensavoured  with  salt,  as  a type  of  earth.  Remember  our  part  of  earth  and  the  salt  of 
sanctity  which  ensavours  it.  (Raising  the  Mystical  Rose)  In  breathe  with  me  the  fragrance  of 
this  Rose,  a type  of  air.  Let  the  images  of  our  understanding  and  the  thoughts  of  our  mind 
rise  as  a sweet  incense  in  the  sight  of  God.  (Raising  the  Cup)  Drink  with  me  now  of  this 
chalice,  the  consecrated  sign  of  elemental  water.  (He  drinks.)  So  may  our  emotions  and 
desires  be  consecrated  and  transmuted  in  God.  (Then  placing  his  hands  over  the  fire)  And, 
lastly,  let  your  hands  be  touched,  like  my  own,  by  the  warmth  of  this  sacred  fire,  and 
remember  the  fire  of  aspiration  which  consecrates  and  changes  the  will  till  it  is  raised  from 
the  body  of  its  corruption  into  living  conformity  with  the  Eternal  Will. 

He  raises  the  Lamp  to  his  forehead,  carries  it  round  with  him  to  the  eastern  side  of  the 
Altar,  deposits  it  in  its  former  place  and  serves  the  Imperator  of  the  Temple,  raising  and 
handing  him  each  of  the  elements  in  turn.  This  is  repeated  by  each  communicant  in  turn, 
[he  order  of  communion  is  as  follows:  The  Hierophant,  the  Wardens  of  the  Temple,  the 
Officers  of  the  Temple,  excepting  the  Kerux,  who  stands  at  the  South  of  the  Altar  with  the 
flagon  of  wine;  the  Members  of  the  Second  Order;  outer  Members,  according  to  Grade, 
including  the  Sentinel:  lastly,  the  Neophyte  of  the  day,  who  is  assisted  by  the  Kerux.  When 
the  Neophyte  is  at  the  East  of  the  Altar,  the  Kerux  comes  to  the  West  and  communicates. 
When  handed  the  Chalice  he  consumes  the  wine,  and  holding  the  vessel  on  high  he  reverses 
it,  and  cries  with  a loud  voice.) 

Kerux. 

It  is  finished.  (He  replaces  the  Chalice,  raises  the  Lamp  above  his  head,  passes  to  the 
East  of  the  Altar,  faces  East,  bends  ins  head  before  the  Hierophant  and  says:) 

Kerux. 

In  the  worship  of  holy  conformity  and  obedience  to  the  Divine  Will. 

Hierophant. 

(Knocks  twice.)  I'etelestai. 

Iliereus. 

(Knocks  twice.  All  give  the  Signs  of  the  Grade.  The  Kerux  then  turns  to  the  West,  and 
having  deposited  the  Lamp,  he  returns  to  his  place.) 


90 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Hierophant. 

May  that  which  we  have  received  in  the  body  represent  in  its  symbolism  to  our  souls 
the  eternal  communication  of  that  life  which  is  above  Nature  and  comes  down,  0 God,  from 
Thee  for  the  transmutation  of  our  personality  as  into  a great  Quintessence,  for  the 
attainment  of  the  summum  bonum,  the  true  Wisdom,  the  ineffable  Beatitude  and  the  term  of 
our  quest  in  Thee.  (All  officers  below  give  two  knocks.) 

Hierophant.  KHABS 

Hiereus.AM 

Hegemon.  PEKH'T 

Hiereus.  KONX 

Hegemon.  OM 

Hierophant.  PAX 

Hegemon. Light 

Hierophant.  In 

Hiereus.  Extension 

(Here  ends  the  Ritual  of  the  Neophyte  Grade.  Glory  be  to  God  in  the  highest  for  the 
mercy  he  has  graciously  bestowed  upon  us.) 


91 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ADEPTUS  MINOR 

THE  CELEBRANTS  OF  THE  GRADE 

The  Chief  Adept,  holding  by  Investiture  the  August  Grade  of  7-4,  being  that  of 
an  Authorised  Teacher.  He  is  the  living  Symbol  of  the  SEPHIRA  CHESED  and  is  the 
Spokesman  of  the  Highest  Grade  in  the  Third  Order.  His  title  of  nobility  is  Merciful 
Exempt  Adept. 

The  Second  Adept,  holding  by  Institution  the  most  Secret  Grade  of  6-5.  He 
represents  the  SEPHIRA  GEBURAH  and  is  the  Spokesman  of  the  Mystery  therein.  His 
title  of  honour  is  Mighty  Adeptus  Major. 

The  Third  Adept,  who  is  preferably  a Senior  Member  in  the  Grade  of  5-6,  he  is  a 
Living  Symbol  of  the  SEPHIRA  TIPHERETH  and  is  the  Spokesman  of  Adepti  Minores. 
His  official  title  is  Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

In  addition  to  the  Celebrants  there  is  a Servient  Frater  who  acts  as  Keeper  of  the 
Threshold  and  Usher  of  the  Grade.  He  is  the  last  admitted  therein,  and  the  Postulant  is 
more  especially  in  his  charge.  His  proper  title  is  Honourable  Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

Unofficial  Members  are  addressed  as  Honourable  Fratres  et  Sorores. 

THE  ROBES  AND  JEWELS  OF  CELEBRANTS  AND  MEMBERS 

1.  THE  MERCIFUL  EXEMPT  ADEPT  wears  a cassock  and  robe  of  violet.  He 
is  girt  about  the  waist  with  a citrine  girdle,  with  which  colour  the  hood  of  his  robe  is 
lined.  His  biretta  is  of  violet,  having  the  square  of  CHESED  on  the  front,  emblazoned  in 
Gold.  The  symbol  of  Salt  is  embroidered  on  the  left  side  of  his  robe.  His  collar  is  of  citrine 
silk,  from  which  depends  the  Symbolum  Magnum  of  the  Rose-Cross,  which  he  alone  is 
entitled  to  wear  - in  virtue  of  his  Office.  He  carries  a Wand  surmounted  by  the  figure  of 
the  Risen  Christ. 

2.  THE  MIGHTY  ADEPTUS  MAJOR  wears  a cassock  and  robe  of  red.  He  is 
girt  about  the  waist  with  a green  girdle,  with  which  colour  the  hood  of  his  robe  is  lined.  His 
biretta  is  of  red,  having  the  pentagram  of  GEBURAH  on  the  front,  emblazoned  in  gold.  The 
symbol  of  Sulphur  is  embroidered  on  the  left  side  of  his  robe.  His  collar  is  of  green  silk, 
from  which  depends  a golden  pentagram,  having  a red  rose  of  five  petals  in  the  centre.  He 
bears  a Wand  surmounted  by  a white  double  cube,  inscribed  on  the  four  sides  with  the 
letters  YOD,  HE,  VAU,  HE,  and  on  the  summit  a SHIN,  all  in  pure  gold. 

3.  THE  AUXILIARY  FRATER  ADEPTUS  wears  a cassock  and  robe  of 
orange  colour.  He  is  girt  about  the  waist  with  a blue  girdle,  with  which  colour  the  hood  of 
his  robe  is  lined.  His  biretta  is  of  orange,  having  the  hexagram  of  TIPHERETH  in  the  front, 
emblazoned  in  gold.  The  symbol  of  Mercury  is  embroidered  on  the  left  side  of  his  robe.  His 
collar  is  of  blue  silk,  from  which  depends  the  particular  symbol  of  the  Rose-Cross 
belonging  to  the  Grade  of  Adeptus  Minor.  He  bears  a Wand  surmounted  by  a crucifix. 


92 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


4.  THE  HONOURABLE  FRATER  CUSTOS  LIMINIS  wears  the  ordinary  clothing  of 
the  Adepti  Minores,  which  is  a white  cassock  with  an  orange  scarf  or  girdle  and  a collar  of  blue 
silk,  from  which  depends  a gold  Calvary  cross,  having  a red  rose  of  five  petals  at  the  meeting- 
point  of  the  arms.  He  carries  a Wand  surmounted  by  a Dove  of  Peace,  similar  to  that  of  an 
Ostiarius  in  the  Worlds  below  TIPHERETH. 

The  colours  of  the  robes  worn  by  the  Three  Celebrants  represent:  Solar  Orange  - the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  in  Christ,  the  splendour  of  mind,  when  illuminated  by  a certain  grade  of 
consciousness  in  GOD;  Red  - the  victory  of  the  soul,  which  overcomes  death  in  love;  Violet 
royalty  of  the  risen  life  and  the  will  perfected  in  GOD. 

The  unofficial  clothing  worn  by  the  Imperator  of  the  Fellowship  in  the  Grades  of  the 
Third  Order  is  the  ordinary  white  cassock  and  orange  girdle,  with  the  addition  of  a collar  of  white 
silk,  from  which  depends  a gold  lamina  having  the  Sacred  Ogdoad  emblazoned  within  its  circle 
also  in  gold.  The  crown  of  the  biretta  is  cruciform,  with  a rose  of  five  petals  at  the  meeting-point 
of  the  arms,  but  this  rose  is  of  the  same  colour  as  the  biretta  itself. 

THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  ROSY  CROSS 
THE  OPENING  THE  HOUSE  AND  SANCTUARY  OF  ADEPTS 

The  arrangement  of  the  House  and  Sanctuary  follows  the  unwritten  precedents.  The 
Veil  is  before  the  Sanctuary.  The  Brethren  of  the  House  have  assembled,  wearing  their  white 
robes,  the  scarf  or  girdle  of  the  Grade  to  which  they  belong  and  the  Rose-Cross  of 
TIPHERETH.  The  Three  Celebrants  have  assumed  their  vestments  and  insignia.  They  take  up 
the  Wands  of  the  Rite  and  repair  to  their  invariable  stations,  as  Guardians  of  the  Veil.  The 
proper  seat  of  the  Servient  Frater  Adeptus  is  by  the  Door  of  the  Holy  House,  as  Keeper  of  the 
Threshold.  All  Brethren  are  seated  in  silence  and  recollection. 

Adeptus 

Exemptus.  Adeptus 
Major.  Adeptus  Minor. 

(All  three  officers  knock  twice.  All  rise.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Salvete,  Fratres  et  Sorores  Roseae  et  Aureae  Crucis. 

Adeptus  Major. 

Health  and  benediction  in  the  Lord. 

Auxiliary  Frater 
Adeptus.  Vigilate,  Fratres  et 
Sorores. 


93 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Honourable  and  Adept  Brethren,  assist  me  to  open  the  House  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the 
heart  and  the  inmost  heart,  in  the  manifest  life  of  Nature  and  in  spiritual  consciousness  as  the 
Sun  of  the  Life  of  life.  (There  is  here  the  pause  of  a moment.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Honourable  Frater  Custos  Liminis,  see  that  the  Door  of  the  House  is  sealed  against  all 
intrusion  with  the  watchword:  GOD  is  within.  (This  is  done  accordingly,  and  thereafter  the 
Keeper  of  the  Threshold  bends  in  salute,  with  arms  crossed  upon  his  breast.) 

Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  the  Seal  is  on  the  Threshold  of  the  House,  and  I testify  that 
the  Sacred  Watchword  is  held  in  everlasting  remembrance. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  by  what  Sign  do  we  open  the  House  of  the  Spirit  and  its 
Holy  Sanctuary? 

Adeptus  Major. 

By  the  Sign  of  Messias  extended  on  the  Sephirotic  Cross.  (He  has  given  the  Opening 

Sign.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  what  is  its  inward  meaning? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

It  is  the  Sign  of  Dividing  the  Veil,  signifying  the  dissolution  of  the  veils  of  matter  for 
the  revelation  of  the  Life  of  the  Spirit  and  the  opening  of  the  Holy  Sanctuary  for  the 
admission  of  the  Postulant  therein. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Might  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  deeper  meaning? 

Adeptus  Major. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  the  Symbolic  Veil  is  that  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  I testify 
that  the  Veil  is  Christ,  manifest  to  eyes  of  flesh. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  by  what  Sign  do  we  close  the  House  of  the  Spirit  and  its 
Holy  Sanctuary? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

By  the  Sign  of  the  Spirit  received  and  abiding  in  the  heart  of  the  Brotherhood.  (He  has 
given  the  Closing  Sign.) 


94 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  its  inward  meaning? 

Adeptus  Major. 

This  also  is  twofold.  It  signifies  the  closing  of  the  veils  of  matter  behind  the  Postulant 
when  he  has  entered  and  gone  in.  But  according  to  the  deeper  sense,  it  testifies  to  the 
necessity  and  perpetuity  of  Christ  manifest  as  the  tabernacle  of  Christ  mystical.  The  Veil  of 
this  Temple  opens,  hut  the  Veil  is  not  rent.  It  dissolves,  and  again  is  fixed.  It  is  neither 
changed  nor  removed. 

Adeptus 
Exemptus.  YOD 

Adeptus 
Major.  HE. 

Auxiliary  Frater 
Adeptus.  SHIN. 

Adeptus 
Major.  VAU 

Auxiliary  Frater 
Adeptus.  HE. 

Adeptus  Exemptus.  YEHESHUAH. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Holy.  Holy.  Holy  - the  Veil  of  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  that  Sacred  Word  which  keeps  the  threshold  of  the 
House  on  the  hither  side  of  the  Portal'? 

Adeptus  Major. 

It  is  the  affirmation  of  absolute  being  - ALEPH,  HE,  YOD,  HE  - reflected  from  the  ( 
gown  of  the  free.  It  signifies  I A M,  and  every  Brother  of  the  Rosy  Cross  who  can  utter  it  in 
the  true  sense,  or  in  GOD  who  is  All  in  all,  has  attained  the  term  of  our  research. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  [rater  Adeptus,  what  is  the  Mystical  Number  of  this  Grade,  derived  from  that 
Sacred  Word? 


95 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

In  the  sequence  of  Orders  and  of  Rites,  the  number  is  twenty-one. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  House  of  the  Holy  Spirit? 

Adeptus  Major. 

A ghostly  palace,  a Secret  Church  of  the  Elect,  a School  of  Mystical  Love. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  where  is  the  Holy  House  symbolically  situated,  and  on  what 
is  it  built? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

On  the  place  of  Holy  Mysteries,  the  Invisible  Mountain  of  the  Wise.  Its  foundation  is 
the  corner-stone,  and  that  Stone  is  Christ  Mystical. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  how  was  this  Secret  Mountain  designated  by  the  Elder 
Stewards  of  the  Mysteries? 

Adeptus  Major. 

As  Mons  Abiegnus,  the  Mount  of  Firs,  but  the  reference  is  more  especially  to  the 
Sacred  Fir-Cone,  the  symbolical  cone  of  the  Ancient  Mysteries.  It  is  the  place  of  reception, 
progression  and  final  attainment.  In  its  most  withdrawn  sense,  the  cone  signifies  the 
enfolded  meanings  and  symbols  of  the  written  word,  the  manifold  interpretation  of  things 
signified  without.  And  the  mountain  is  the  place  of  ascent,  the  scale  of  perfection  and  the 
journey  of  the  soul  in  GOD.  On  the  summit  thereof  we  look  to  greet  in  peace  at  the  term  of 
quest,  when  the  desire  of  the  eyes  and  the  heart  is  at  length  attained  by  the  soul. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  how  is  the  Mountain  designated  in  the  tradition  of  the 
Rosy  Cross? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

It  is  the  true  Horeb  and  Calvary,  whereon  is  the  true  Zion,  a House  of  Living 

Bread. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  Sanctuary  of  the  House? 

Adeptus  Major. 

It  is  the  most  sacred  place  of  the  Mystery,  revealed  in  the  Third  Order  and  attained  by 
the  soul  in  Christ. 


96 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

What  are  the  modes  of  this  Mystery,  as  shewn  forth  in  the  Holy  Grade  of  Adeptus 

Minor? 


Adeptus  Major. 

Life,  Death  and  Resurrection  - the  Life  which  follows  Rebirth,  Mystical  and  Divine 
Death,  and  the  Glory  of  those  who  come  forth  from  the  great  darkness,  restored  in  union. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Lrater  Adeptus,  how  is  the  Sanctuary  of  the  House  delineated  on  the 
external  side  of  our  tradition? 

Auxiliary  Lrater  Adeptus. 

It  is  the  sepulchre  of  our  beloved  Lounder,  Christian  Rosy  Cross,  which  he  made  in 
the  likeness  of  the  universe,  as  a door  that  is  entered  at  birth  and  a temple  opening  from 
earthly  into  spiritual  life.  It  is  said  that  he  reposed  at  the  centre,  because  this  is  the  point  of 
perfect  rest  at  the  seat  of'  activity. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  implied  by  the  Name  of  our  mystical  Lounder? 

Adeptus  Major. 

I he  Rose  of  Christ  manifested  on  the  Cross  of  Human  Personality. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Lrater  Adeptus,  of  what  configuration  is  the  Sanctuary? 

Auxiliary  Lrater  Adeptus. 

It  is  a figure  of  seven  equal  sides,  signifying  the  life  of  Nature  and  the  grace  which 
is  behind  Nature. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  to  what  are  these  seven  sides  referred  in  their  deepest  sense 
by  the  law  of  correspondence  between  things  above  and  below? 

Adeptus  Major. 

"lo  the  seven  operations  of  grace  in  the  holy  spirit  of  man;  to  the  seven  days  of  our 
creation  in  the  likeness  of  GOD,  Who  is  our  end;  to  the  lower  SEPHIROTH,  which  are 
seven;  to  the  planets,  which  are  also  seven;  and  to  the  seven  maxims  of  the  golden  rule  by 
which  they  are  spiritualised  in  the  Grades  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  Lor  the  great  mystical  number 
prevails  in  the  height  above,  even  as  in  the  depth  beneath,  and  in  the  lesser  as  in  the  greater 
world. 


97 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  by  what  Gate  do  we  enter  the  Holy  Sanctuary? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

EST  O M N I S ANIMA  VENUE.  It  is  entered  through  the  Gate  of  the  mystical 
planet  Venus,  and  a spouse  is  promised  to  the  soul. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  Presence  in  the  Sanctuary? 

Adeptus  Major. 

It  is  the  Eternal  Love,  in  virtue  of  which  GOD  is  immanent  in  Nature,  the  Lamb  is 
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  and  Christ  abides  within  us. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  what  is  the  office  of  the  Postulant? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

1 o pass  within  the  Veil  and  by  his  own  love  and  desire  to  awaken  that  which  is 

within. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  outward  sign  which  I wear  here  on  my  heart,  and 
what  is  its  inward  meaning? 

Adeptus  Major. 

It  is  the  SACRAM  EN  I UM  MAGNUM  of  the  Rose-Cross,  typifying  the  Eternal 
Word  which  is  hidden  in  Nature  and  the  manifestation  of  the  expounded  Word.  It  is  the 
harmony  and  development  of  all  Rose-Cross  symbolism,  and  it  has  many  meanings  belonging 
to  the  Greater  Mysteries. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus.  what  is  the  Wand  of  Office  which  you  bear  in  your  right 

hand? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

The  Sign  of  the  Word  made  flesh  and  manifested  in  human  life.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  man  is  the  key  of  all  things  and  the  Cross  is  the  Sign  of  Glory.  The  letters  emblazoned 
thereon  are  1 N R I,  containing  the  Mystery  of  the  Key.  It  is  a great  mystery  of  being. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  message  implied  by  your  Wand  of  Office? 

Adeptus  Major. 

It  is  that  which  goes  before  and  comes  after,  life  in  the  hidden  state,  the  unspoken 

Word 


98 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


and  the  silence  of  the  Word  withdrawn.  The  Cubic  Altar  of  Incense  unfolds  as  a 
Cross  of  Life.  The  Christ-Life  is  a sacrifice,  as  an  incense  offered  on  the  Altar  of  GOD.  But 
after  the  perfect  ohlation,  the  cross  of  life  folds  up  its  arms  in  sanctity,  and  life  is  withdrawn 
in  GOD.  The  Cross  returns  into  the  Cube,  and  the  Word  made  flesh  is  hidden  in  the  rock- 
hewn  sepulchre.  The  letters  emblazoned  hereon  are  YOD,  HE,  SHIN,  VAU,  HE,  and  I 
testify  that  there  is  no  other  Name  given  unto  man  whereby  he  shall  be  saved.  It  is  therefore 
the  Grand  Word  of  the  Grade. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

The  Sign  of  Resurrection  is  uplifted  on  my  Wand  of  Office.  I am  He  who  testifies 
thereto  from  the  height  of  the  Third  Order,  and  I bear  faithful  witness,  in  the  Mystery  of  the 
Risen  Word,  Which  overcomes  death  and  is  clothed  with  power  and  glory.  The  letters  of  this 
Mystery  are  LVX,  and  this  is  the  Light  of  the  World.  (There  is  here  the  pause  of  a moment.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  what  are  the  words  inscribed  on  the  door  of  the  Holy 
Sanctuary,  and  how  is  it  guarded? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

The  words  are:  POS’T  C ENTU  M VIGINTI  ANNOS  PATEBO.  The  Door  is  guarded 
by  the  Sacred  Letter  SHIN,  which  is  that  of  the  Christ-Spirit.  It  is  written:  His  days  shall  be 
120  years.  And  it  is  during  this  symbolical  period  that  the  spirit  of  Christ  strives  with  the 
spirit  of  man.  When  man  has  completed  his  age,  the  number  120  is  reduced  to  the  mystical 
ogdoad  by  an  operation  of  three  and  five,  producing  the  Christ  number  and  the  number  of 
rebirth.  The  triad  rules  in  all  things,  and  the  grace  of  the  pentad  is  declared  in  the  spirit  of 
man,  that  Christ  may  be  all  in  all. 

(The  Honourable  Frater  Custos  Liminis,  as  Usher  of  the  Grade,  gives  a Battery  of  one 
knock.  The  Veil  is  parted  by  the  Second  and  Third  Celebrants.  The  Celebrant  in  Chief 
opens  the  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  to  its  full  extent.  He  passes  between  the  other  Celebrants, 
who  face  inward  with  uplifted  Wands.  He  enters  the  Sanctuary  and  proceeds  with  the  Sun  to 
the  due  East,  where  he  turns  and  faces  West.  The  Second  Celebrant  proceeds  to  the  South 
of  the  Altar  and  the  Third  Celebrant  to  the  North.  They  face  inwards.  The  Three  Celebrants 
are  standing  erect,  with  Wands  uplifted  in  their  right  hands,  and  with  their  left  hands  placed 
upon  the  heart.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus.  ALEPH,  HE. 

Adeptus  Major.  YOD,  HE. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus.  EHYEH. 


99 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

It  is  written:  Before  Abraham  was,  I AM. 

Adeptus  Major. 

Whom  say  ye  that  1 the  Son  of  Man  am? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Christ  the  Power  of  GOD  and  the  Wisdom  of  GOD. 

Adeptus 
Exemptus.  1.  N. 

Adeptus 
Major.  R. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 


Adeptus  Exemptus.  YEHFSHUA. 

Adeptus 

Major. 

NAZARAEUS. 

Auxiliary  Frater 

Adeptus.  Rex  Judaeorum. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

LVX,  the  Light  of  the  World.  (The  Second  and  Third  Celebrants  proceed  direct  to 
the  Door  and  stand  on  either  side,  facing  inward.  The  Celebrant  in  Chief  comes  round  with 
the  Sun  and  passes  through,  saying:) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

May  we  who  are  many  be  one  body  in  Christ,  one  mind  and  a soul  that  is  one  in  His 
union.  (The  Door  being  now  ajar  and  the  Celebrants  standing  in  their  places:) 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Fratres  et  Sorores,  in  the  Name  of  our  Great  Master  and  by  the  titles  of  the 
Christhood,  I open  this  House  of  the  Spirit  (Knocks  2 times). 

Adeptus  Major,  ((lives  2 Knocks) 


100 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

I have  opened  its  Holy  Sanctuary  (Gives  2 Knocks.  The  Opening  Sign  of  the  Grade 
is  given  by  all  present.  Here  ends  the  Solemn  Office  of  Opening  the  House  and  Sanctuary  of 
the  Adepts.) 

THE  FIRST  POINT 

(The  Altar  is  removed  from  the  Sanctuary  and  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  Temple. 
The  Rose-Crucifix,  Lamp,  Cup,  Poniard  and  Chain  are  left  upon  the  Sacred  Symbols  to 
which  they  appertain.  The  Holy  Cross  of  Obligation  has  been  erected  in  the  centre  of  the 
Sanctuary.  The  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  is  shut  and  the  Veil  is  drawn  across  it.  The 
Celebrants  take  their  seats  and  also  the  Honourable  Frater  Custos  Liminis.  The  Candidate  is 
alone  on  a prie-Dieu  in  the  Vestibule,  in  full  light,  with  a scroll  in  his  hands  containing 
versicles  on  crucified  life.  The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  gives  a Battery  of  one  knock.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Honourable  Fratres  et  Sorores,  blessed  is  he  who  cometh  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord, 
looking  for  the  Light  of  His  Glory.  (The  Keeper  of  the  Threshold  rises,  with  the  Opening 
Sign  of  the  Grade.) 

Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

I testify  concerning  our  Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  who  stands  on 
the  threshold  of  TIPHERETH.  He  has  been  prepared  in  the  outer  ways  and  the  Temple  of 
inward  grace  has  been  made  ready  to  receive  him. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Honourable  Frater  Custos  Liminis,  go  forth  and  admonish  the  Aspirant  that  now  is 
the  accepted  time  and  that  the  Sun  of  Salvation  shines  in  the  House  of  Beauty.  As 
Procurator  of  the  Temple,  prepare  him  on  your  part  and  bring  him  to  the  holy  precincts. 
(The  Keeper  of  the  Threshold  gives  the  Closing  Sign  of  the  Grade  and  leaves  the  Temple, 
securing  the  Door  behind  him.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  guard  the  hither  side  of  the  Portal.  By  the  power  to  me 
committed,  and  in  accordance  with  faithful  testimony,  open  to  those  who  knock.  (The 
Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus  rises  with  the  Signs  of  the  Grade  and  takes  his  place  by  the  Door, 
where  he  remains  standing.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Fratres  et  Sorores,  the  Holy  Mysteries  do  ever  recall  us  to  that  one  way  which  has 
been  known  and  declared  from  of  old. 


101 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Adeptus  Major. 

Many  lights  shew  forth  the  Father  of  Lights,  and  the  darkness  testifies  concerning 

Him. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

We  confess  that  we  have  aspired  to  the  Crown,  seeing  that  we  are  Children  of  the 
King,  and  we  look  for  the  Glory  of  GOD,  praying  that  it  shall  be  made  manifest. 

Adeptus  Major. 

From  the  natural  life  of  man  there  extends  a certain  narrow  path,  even  unto  the  Crown 
of  all,  and  this  path  is  called  Magnanimity. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

The  middle  place  therein  is  adorned  by  the  title  of  Beauty,  and  the  Sun  of  Beauty 
shines  in  the  renal)  thereof. 

Adeptus  Major. 

It  is  made  known  that  the  Light  of  the  Soul  is  even  as  the  Light  of  the  Sun.  Let  us 
therefore  look  up,  because  salvation  is  near.  (These  versicles  should  be  recited  clearly  and 
somewhat  slowly,  with  certain  pauses  between,  as  they  are  designed  to  occupy  the  time 
during  which  the  Candidate  is  prepared.  While  this  takes  place  in  the  Temple,  the  Usher  of 
the  Grade  has  greeted  the  Postulant  in  the  Vestibule,  saying:) 

Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

Man  enters  into  his  true  self  as  a priest  into  the  Holy  Place.  (The  Usher  of  the  Grade 
prepares  the  Postulant,  who  should  already  have  assumed  his  cassock,  by  clothing  him  with 
the  robe  and  collar  belonging  to  a Master  of  the  Temple  in  the  Grades  below  the  Portal  of  the 
Third  Order.  While  so  doing:) 

Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

We  desire  to  put  off  imperfection  and  to  be  clothed  in  GOD.  (Thereafter  the  Usher  of 
the  Grade  leads  the  Postulant  to  the  Door  of  the  Temple  and  sounds  the  Battery  of  the 
Grade  with  a certain  force  and  distinction,  thus:  Knocks  twice.  The  Auxiliary  Frater 
Adeptus  opens  the  Door,  saying:) 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Blessed  and  holy  is  he  who  shall  enter  into  real  knowledge.  Wisdom  and 
understanding  meet  to  pour  their  influx  upon  him. 

(The  Usher  of  the  Grade  has  entered  leading  the  Postulant.  The  Door  is  secured 
behind  them.  1 he  Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus  returns  to  his  seat.  The  Usher  of  the  Grade 
conducts  the  Postulant  to  an  open  space  on  the  Eastern  side  of  the  Altar,  and  faces  him 
toward  the  East.) 


102 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  I present  to  you  our  Beloved  Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel 
nomen  aliud),  who  places  his  perfect  trust  in  GOD  Who  is  our  end,  desiring  the  life  of 
TIPHERETFI  and  the  Grace  of  Christ  Who  is  within.  He  has  traversed  the  Paths  and  Grades 
of  the  inferior  Orders.  He  has  been  purified  and  consecrated  therein,  even  in  the  four  parts 
of  his  natural  personality.  He  has  turned  his  will  to  GOD,  as  one  who  in  the  darkness  of 
night-time  has  set  his  face  toward  Jerusalem.  He  has  seen  the  darkness  kindle  beyond  the 
eternal  hill,  the  light  breaking  in  the  East.  The  remembrance  of  that  light  is  within  him.  It 
has  shewn  him  the  straight  and  narrow  way  by  which  the  spirit  of  the  Aspirant  ascends  to 
TIPHERETH.  At  the  Portal  thereof,  at  the  point  where  the  Veil  divides,  he  has  passed 
through  the  Second  Birth  in  the  symbolism  of  our  Holy  Fellowship.  He  has  been  told  that  the 
Door  shall  open;  it  has  opened  already  in  his  heart.  He  has  offered  up  his  whole  nature  on  the 
Supernal  Altar  of  Burnt  Offerings,  in  the  presence  of  the  Divine  Will.  It  has  been  said  that  by 
such  an  oblation  those  who  have  been  called  are  chosen  for  the  knowledge  of  the  Life  of  life. 
It  has  been  said  also  that  he  shall  enter  and  go  in.  Born  in  the  spiritual  Bethlehem,  presented 
in  the  Temple  under  the  aegis  of  the  old  Law  in  the  Second  Point  of  the  Portal,  give  unto  him 
the  desire  of  his  heart  on  the  quest  of  the  Divine  within  him,  in  the  place  of  purified  life,  the 
life  which  follows  rebirth.  In  virtue  of  my  faithful  testimony  he  prays  to  be  received  among 
you.  (The  Usher  of  the  Grade  now  returns  to  his  seat.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Blessed  are  those  who  in  the  Paths  and  SEPHIROTH  of  the  Fellowship  of  the  Rosv 
Cross  have  come  to  be  reborn  in  heart  and  have  dedicated  all  life  therein.  Frater  Adveniat 
Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  we  acknowledge  your  titles  and  the  claims  embodied  by  these. 
The  covenants  of  our  authorised  Messenger,  speaking  on  the  threshold  of  TIPHERETH,  are 
also  faithful  and  true,  Amen,  for  ever  and  evermore.  But  you  who  have  been  initiated  and 
advanced  from  Grade  to  Grade  amidst  the  lights  and  shadows  of  our  more  external 
sodalities  have  yet  another  lesson  to  learn.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  The  Cubical 
Altar  on  which  you  were  pledged  in  the  First  Grade  of  our  Fellowship  is  that  of  your  own 
personality,  and  this  cube  must  open  as  a Cross  to  Divine  Life. 

Adeptus  Major. 

He  who  has  been  made  pure  and  has  been  consecrated;  he  who  in  will  and 
understanding  has  turned  to  GOD  as  to  his  end;  he  who  has  offered  up  his  entire  nature, 
that  it  may  he  brought  into  conformity  with  Divine  purpose  in  the  universe,  and  henceforth 
and  forever  may  be  part  of  the  Will  of  GOD,  is  thereby  on  the  threshold  of  TIPHERETH 
but  the  regenerated  life  of  that  Grade,  wherein  you  have  asked  to  enter,  is  a life  of 
crucifixion  in  respect  of  all  that  is  below. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

The  Cross  is  the  Sign  of  Sacrifice  and  therefore  also  of  victory,  the  realisation  of 

self  in 


103 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


sanctity.  That  suffering  of  which  it  is  a symbol  according  to  the  Law  of  Nature  is 
replaced  or  transmuted  by  the  glory  of  which  it  is  an  image  according  to  the  Law  of  Grace. 
Its  inward  meaning  contains  the  secret  of  liberation. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

May  yours  be  the  Mystic  Rose  and  yours  the  Golden  Cross.  May  this  our 
symbolical  convention  bring  you  to  the  life  of  light,  even  the  Light  of  the  Cross  and  the  Life  in 
the  Rose  thereon.  (The  Usher  of  the  Grade  rises  in  his  place,  passes  to  the  circular  Altar, 
removes  the  Silver  Chain  and  stands  by  the  side  of  the  Postulant.) 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Take  therefore  this  Chain,  0 Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud).  Raise  it  in 
your  right  hand,  saying:  I accept  the  bonds  of  service  in  the  Faw  of  Light.  (The  Usher  of 
the  Grade  has  laid  the  Chain  in  the  hand  of  the  Postulant,  who  repeats  the  formula,  suiting 
the  action  to  the  words.  The  Usher  replaces  the  Chain  and  again  returns  to  his  seat.) 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

When  the  Chain  is  placed  upon  the  Altar  it  reposes  on  the  Bull  of  earth,  and  this  is 
in  correspondence  with  the  material  part  of  your  personality,  which  has  been  purified  by  the 
rites  of  our  Order.  Once  it  was  lead,  my  Brother,  and  once  a burden  of  grief.  Now  it  has 
suffered  conversion,  and  the  chain  is  therefore  of  silver,  a bond  of  spiritual  obedience,  of 
holy  devotion  and  ministry  imposed  by  love.  The  yoke  is  therefore  light.  You  have  raised  it 
in  testimony  to  the  great  law  of  attainment  ruling  in  the  body  of  the  Adept.  (There  is  here 
the  pause  of  a moment.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  symbolical  age  of  our  beloved  Postulant? 

Adeptus  Major. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  his  days  are  120  years. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

It  is  written:  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man,  seeing  that  he  also  is  flesh:  yet 
his  days  shall  be  120  years.  Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  to  what  does  this  age  refer  which  we 
ascribed  symbolically  to  the  Postulant? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

It  is  the  period  of  his  life  in  Nature  before  GOD  is  declared  in  the  heart.  It  ends  in 
stillness  of  heart,  when  that  which  has  been  purified  and  consecrated  enters  into  rebirth  in 
GOD. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  may  you  know  the  peace  of  that  stillness 
and  receive  the  gift  of  understanding  in  the  holy  light.  This  is  the  House  of  the  Spirit,  built 
upon 


104 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


the  Secret  Mountain,  which  - seeing  that  all  things  are  within  - is  said  mystically 
to  be  situated  at  the  centre  of  the  earth.  Here  also  is  the  Sanctuary  of  the  Adepts,  where 
the  pledges  of  your  perfect  dedication  must  be  uttered  upon  the  Cross  of  our  Mystery.  Are 
you  willing  in  this  manner  to  ratify  your  election  by  the  Order?  (The  Usher  of  the  Grade 
has  come  up  to  the  Altar  and  taking  the  Altar  Lamp  places  it  in  the  hands  of  the  Postulant. 
The  Postulant  having  signified  assent  in  his  own  language:) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Raise  therefore  that  Lamp  to  your  forehead,  holding  it  in  your  two  hands,  and  say 
after  me:  In  the  Name  of  GOD  Who  is  my  help,  and  looking  on  the  Cross  of  Life  for  the 
Light  of  the  Cross. 

(This  is  done  accordingly,  and  the  Postulant  remains  holding  the  Lamp  upraised. 
The  Second  and  Third  Celebrants  rise  in  their  places  and  silently  remove  the  Veil  from  the 
Door  of  the  Sanctuary.  The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  gives  a Battery  of  one  knock  and  rises 
with  all  present.  The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  sets  open  the  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  to  its 
full  extent.  The  Rose-Light  in  the  ceiling  is  veiled  with  red  crepe,  and  the  Cross  in  the  centre 
of  the  Sanctuary  looms  dimly.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

The  glorious  Sun  of  TIPHERETH  shall  shine  on  the  summit  of  Calvary.  (The 
Merciful  Exempt  Adept  stands  at  the  Threshold  of  the  Sanctuary,  facing  West.  The 
Second  and  Third  Celebrants  kneel  on  either  side  of  him,  looking  toward  the  East.  The 
unofficial  Brethren  kneel  down,  the  Usher  of  the  Grade  directing  the  Postulant.  The 
Merciful  Exempt  Adept  extends  his  arms  in  the  form  of  a Cross.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Fratres  et  Sorores,  let  us  offer  up  our  solemn  worship  to  the  Lord  of  Goodness,  Who 
has  sent  the  Secret  Light  into  the  world  and  desires  only  that  it  shall  be  made  manifest. 
(The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  folds  his  arms  upon  his  breast,  making  thus  the  Second  Sign  of 
the  Grade,  and  turns  Eastward,  but  remains  standing.) 

THE  PRAYER  OF  THE  CELEBRANT  IN  CHIEF 

All  truth,  Most  High  Father,  comes  down  from  Thee;  the  greater  blessings  and 
graces  dost  Thou  dispense  continually.  Thou  hast  in  particular  emblazoned  the  symbolical 
characters  of  Nature  and  hast  established  that  Divine  School  which  imparts  their  true 
interpretation.  Take  us  by  its  leading  behind  all  forms  of  expression,  all  pageants  of  the 
manifested  world,  into  the  state  out  of  place  and  time,  into  the  still,  unspoken  peace  and  the 
loving  silence,  where  the  meaning  of  all  is  Thou.  In  Thee  is  our  help  alone;  in  Thee  are  our 
stay  and  strength  through  the  days  of  our  questing.  All  has  its  source  in  Thee,  and  to  the 
consolation  of  Thy  great  deeps  must  all  in  fine  return.  With  the  whole  aspiration  of  our 


105 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


hearts,  we  look  to  be  reintegrated  in  Thy  love.  Receive  us,  we  beseech  Thee;  aid  us  still  in 
our  necessity;  and  do  Thou,  the  Throne  of  Whose  Majesty  is  exalted  in  heavens 
inaccessible,  so  purify  and  transmute  Thy  children  of  the  Second  Birth,  the  poor  Brothers  of 
this  Thy  lowly  Sodality,  that  Thy  place  may  be  also  in  our  hearts.  Come  to  us  in  the  Life  of 
the  Cross,  come  to  us  in  the  Death  of  the  Mystic,  bring  us  to  the  Resurrection  which  is  in 
Thee.  And  through  all  the  Grades  of  the  Christhood,  give  unto  us  the  realisation  of  the 
union,  that  we  may  attain  that  self  which  is  in  Thee.  So  shall  we  come  into  our  own,  in  the 
kingdom  which  is  ours  and  Thine;  and  those  who  have  been  separate  in  manifestation  shall 
know  themselves  one  spirit  in  Thee,  Who  art  All  in  all. 

(Those  who  are  on  their  knees  rise  up.  The  Second  and  Third  Celebrants  are  seated, 
with  the  unofficial  Brethren.  The  Usher  of  the  Grade  brings  the  Rose-Crucifix  from  the 
Altar  and  presents  it  to  the  Celebrant  in  Chief.  The  Usher  of  the  Grade  goes  to  the  Western 
side  of  the  Altar,  where  he  faces  East.  The  Postulant  has  his  back  to  the  Altar  on  the  Eastern 
side.  The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  elevates  the  Rose-Crucifix  before  the  assembled  Fratres 
et  Sorores,  as  he  approaches  the  Postulant,  saying:) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

IN  HOC  SIGNO  VINCES.  (When  he  reaches  the  Postulant,  the  Merciful  Exempt 
Adept  raises  the  Rose-Crucifix  over  the  bowed  head  of  the  Postulant,  and  says:) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vet  nomen  aliud),  give  me  the  First  Sign  which  you  received 
on  the  Threshold  of  TI  PH  ERETH  in  the  Portal  of  the  Third  Order.  (There  is  no  prompting, 
as  the  Postulant  has  been  tested  previously.  He  gives  and  maintains  thereafter  the  Sign  of 
the  Opening  of  the  Veil.  The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  dips  the  Dagger  in  the  Wine  and 
cross-marks  the  Postulant  on  his  forehead.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

There  are  Three  that  bear  record  in  Heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 
These  Three  are  One.  (He  dips  the  Dagger  in  the  Wine  and  cross-marks  the  feet  of  the 
Postulant.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

There  are  three  that  bear  witness  on  earth,  the  spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood: 
and  these  three  agree  in  one.  (He  dips  the  Dagger  in  the  Wine  and  cross-marks  the  Postulant 
in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Except  a man  be  born  again  of  water  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the 
Kingdom  of  GOD.  (He  dips  the  Dagger  in  the  Wine  and  cross-marks  the  Postulant  in  the 
palm  of  the  left  hand.) 


106 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

If  we  be  crucified  with  Christ,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him.  (There  is  here  the  pause  of  a 
moment.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  give  me  the  Closing  Sign  which  you  received  on 
the  Threshold  of  TIPHERETH  in  the  Portal  of  the  Third  Order.  (The  Postulant  gives  and  maintains 
the  Sign  of  the  Closing  of  the  Veil.  The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  dips  the  Dagger  in  the  Wine  and 
cross-marks  the  Postulant  on  his  breast,  above  his  folded  arms.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

The  Lord  abide  within  Thee,  an  Everlasting  Presence. 

(The  Postulant  maintains  the  Sign.  The  Usher  of  the  Grade  receives  the  Dagger  and  replaces 
it  with  the  Cup  on  the  Altar.  He  then  returns  to  his  seat  and  stands  thereat.  The  Second  and  Third 
Celebrants  advance,  and  take  up  a position  on  either  side  of  the  Postulant,  facing  East.  The  Merciful 
Exempt  Adept  turns  Eastward  and  draws  slowly  toward  the  Sanctuary,  with  Wand  uplifted.  The 
Guides  follow  with  the  Postulant,  keeping  at  some  distance  from  the  Celebrant  in  Chief.  The 
Merciful  Exempt  Adept  enters  the  Sanctuary.  He  pauses  at  a due  distance  within  and  turns  Westward. 
The  Guides  and  the  Postulant  reach  the  Threshold  of  the  Sanctuary  and  pause.  The  Guides  face 
inward,  with  Wands  uplifted.  The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  draws  the  Postulant  over  the  Threshold, 
saying:) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

The  counsel  of  peace  is  between  us.  Come  in  peace. 

(He  has  brought  the  Postulant  with  these  words  to  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  He  withdraws  behind 
the  Cross  and  turns  Westward,  while  the  Second  and  Third  Celebrants  advance  and  hind  the  Postulant 
to  the  Cross.  Thereafter  they  go  back  to  their  positions  on  either  side  of  the  threshold,  facing  inward. 
The  Usher  of  the  Grade  gives  a battery  of  one  knock  and  the  unofficial  Brethren  rise  and  remain 
standing.  The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  comes  forward,  confronting  the  Postulant.  He  raises  his  face 
and  hands.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Spirit  of  the  Height,  look  down;  Guardian  of  our  Holy  Sodality;  Virgin  Soul  of  the 
Christhood;  Guide  of  the  elect  in  GOD.  By  the  Glorious  Name  of  SHEKINAH,  abiding  Presence  in 
the  Sanctuary,  hear  Thou  the  solemn  pledge.  Receive  the  perfect  oblation  of  this  Brother  of  the  Rosy 
Cross.  (Then  in  tones  that  are  audible  to  the  Postulant  only:) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Repeat  your  Sacramental  Name  and  say  after  me:  (The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  imposes  in  a 
clear  voice.) 


107 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  PLEDGE  OF  THE  GRADE 

I,  Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  an  aspirant  after  the  Life  of  the  Spirit, 
who  have  been  prepared,  purified  and  consecrated  by  the  Light  of  the  Rosy  Cross,  and 
thereafter  brought  in  the  Portal  of  the  Third  Order  to  a Second  Birth  in  symbolism,  do  offer  up 
my  life  in  sanctity  on  the  Mystical  Cross  of  the  Christhood,  for  the  Divine  End  declared  in  the 
heart  and  the  soul.  I desire  consciousness  in  the  Spirit,  knowledge  of  Eternal  Things  and  the 
realisation  of  GOD  abiding  in  that  Sanctuary  which  is  within.  I testify  that  from  this  day 
forward,  so  far  as  in  me  lies,  I will  look  unto  the  Supreme  Crown  and  the  Supernal  Unity  in 
KETHER: 

That  1 will  ever  seek  my  perfection  through  the  Mystery  of  Wisdom  in  CHOKMAH, 
which  is  Supernal  Wisdom,  where  Severity  is  transformed  into  Mercy,  and  will  build  my  House 
therein  as  a Temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit:  That  I aspire  to  the  Spirit  of  Understanding,  Spirit  of 
Counsel  and  Strength,  Spirit  of  Knowledge  and  Truth,  and  the  consolation  of  its  gifts  and 
fruits  in  the  sea  of  BINAH;  which  is  Supernal  Understanding,  wherein  is  the  Communion  of 
the  Elect:  That  1 look  for  the  Resurrection  of  the  Adept,  the  body  of  Redemption,  the 
mystical  life  of  union  and  the  Word  declared  in  CHESED: 

That  when  my  call  comes  I will  make  ready  to  enter  the  Sabbath,  desiring  the  Soul's 
Bridal,  the  Word  received  in  the  stillness,  the  sacred  release  of  GEBURAH,  in  the  Halls  of 
Compassion  and  Judgment,  where  death  is  by  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  and  not  by  the  serpent.  I 
promise  solemnly  that,  looking  toward  the  day  when  I shall  enter  into  the  rewards  of  the  spirit,  I 
will,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  and  with  a full  sense  of  dedication,  lead  the  life  of  adoption  in 
TIPHERETH,  desiring  the  beauty  of  the  life  and  the  abiding  Presence  of  the  Spirit.  1 will 
follow  the  rule  of  TIPHERETH,  wherein  is  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  as  one  who  has  been  horn 
again  of  Water  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  I will  abide  in  conformity  of  will,  the  consecration  of 
desire,  dedication  of  mind  and  the  purification  of  my  bodily  part,  preparing  the  garments  of  the 
soul,  as  one  who  has  been  betrothed  in  GOD  and  is  seeking  the  Word  of  Union.  1 testify  that,  as 
here  and  now  in  symbolism,  1 will  accept  the  Cross  in  Christ,  that  I may  descend  afterwards 
with  Him  into  the  Valley  of  Silence  and  may  arise  in  the  Glory  of  His  Union.  The  Veil  of  the 
Sanctuary  has  been  parted  in  my  respect.  I know  that  the  Veil  is  sacred.  I will  keep  its  secrets, 
which  are  Mysteries  of  Holy  Knowledge,  as  I have  kept  and  will  maintain  for  ever  the  first  and 
sacred  trust  committed  to  my  charge  in  the  Lower  Grades  of  the  Fellowship.  1 will  observe  the 
Laws  of  the  Sanctuary  in  faith,  honour  and  obedience.  I renew  hereby  and  hereon  the  pledges  of 
fraternity  and  fellowship,  with  the  other  obligations  by  which  I have  been  bound  previously.  The 
Law  is  a Law  of  Solidarity.  I will  preserve,  with  my  peers  and  co-heirs  of  the  Third  Order,  a 
perfect  union  in  the  Mystery  of  Faith.  My  desire  is  the  Divine  Union,  and  seeing  that  it  rests 
within  my  own  acts  and  will  whether  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  shall  in  me  be  the  Tree  of  Life,  I 
testify  that  neither  death  nor  life  shall  separate  me  henceforth  from  the  love  and  the  service  of 
GOD. 

This  is  my  pledge  in  purity,  by  which  I look  to  be  uplifted  in  my  higher  part  above  the 
sphere  of  those  elements  wherein  I once  abode;  and  I will  seek  to  draw  after  me  the  lower 
SEPHIROTH  of  my  nature  into  the  realisation  of  the  Eternal  Presence.  After  CHESED, 


108 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


GEBURAH  and  TIPHERETH,  draw  me,  my  Lord  and  my  GOD,  in  my  imperishable 
soul,  within  the  peace  of  Thy  Centre,  that  as  1 came  forth  at  Thy  bidding  into  the  manifest 
world,  so  I may  return  at  Thy  will  into  the  world  unmanifest.  May  the  light  of  the  Indwelling 
Glory  abide  with  me  in  the  kingdom  of  this  world,  that  I may  belong  to  the  world  no  more 
but  to  that  which  comes  down  from  Thee  with  the  life  of  grace  into  the  heart  and  bears  up 
those  who  receive  it  into  the  Land  of  the  Living,  even  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  world 
without  end. 

(The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  moves  aside  from  the  Cross  and  turns  Westward.  He 
lifts  up  his  arms  to  their  fullest  height.  The  unofficial  Brethren  are  seated.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Fratres  et  Sorores,  behold  the  Son  of  the  Cross,  our  most  faithful  and  beloved 
Brother,  Brother  of  the  Rosy  Cross,  Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  suspended 
on  the  Mystical  Tree.  He  represents  thereon  the  Divine  Son  of  the  Secret  Tradition,  First- 
Begotten  of  the  Mighty  Ones,  Whose  head  rests  upon  DAATH,  Whose  arms  stretch  to 
CHESED  and  GEBURAH,  who  has  TIPHERETH  over  the  region  of  the  heart,  and  whose 
feet  stand  on  MALKUTH.  As  the  Divine  Son  came  into  manifestation  for  a work  of 
election  through  the  universe,  so  is  our  Brother  in  GOD  manifested  this  day  out  of  material 
life,  within  the  Sanctuary  of  our  Holy  Assembly.  The  double  cube  of  his  natural  personality 
has  become  the  Cross.  May  it  be  unto  him  the  Tree  of  Life  for  the  healing  of  all  his 
principles.  May  he  realise  in  its  highest  sense  that  the  life  of  TIPHERETH  is  truly  the  life  of 
the  Cross.  May  he  find  at  the  end  thereof  after  what  manner  the  Cross  of  this  life  folds  up 
and  becomes  that  White  Stone,  in  the  hidden  centre  of  which  is  written  a New  Name,  which 
no  man  knoweth,  save  he  that  receiveth  it.  (There  follows  a short  space  of  perfect  silence. 
The  Second  Celebrant  lifts  up  his  arms.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

I testify  that  the  end  is  GOD  and  that  the  end  is  like  the  beginning.  (The  Third 
Celebrant  lifts  up  his  arms.) 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

I testify  that  the  Sun  of  Justice,  shining  above  the  Cross,  is  also  the  Sun  of  Love  and 
that  Love  is  the  Life  of  TIPHERETH.  (The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  points  solemnly  to 
the  Postulant). 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

HIC  PENDET  FRATER  FIDELISSIMUS,  FRATER  ROSEAE  CRUCIS.  (The 
Second  and  Third  Celebrants  close  the  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  and  draw  the  Veil  before  it. 
The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  unbinds  the  Postulant  and  gives  him  his  own  Wand  of  Office.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Frater  Adveniant  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  go  in  peace  and  sin  no  more. 
Remember  now  and  henceforward  that  you  have  become  the  Cross.  May  you  be  also  the 
Rose  theredn. 


109 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


(He  points  the  way  to  the  Postulant,  who  opens  the  Door.  The  Second  and  Third 
Celebrants  raise  the  Veil  to  permit  of  his  passing  through  and  no  more.  The  Usher  of  the 
Grade  comes  forward  and  leads  the  Postulant  from  the  Temple.  Here  ends  the  First  Point.) 

THE  SECOND  POINT 

(The  Cross  of  Obligation  is  removed,  and  the  Bier  is  placed  in  the  Sanctuary.  The 
Celebrant  in  Chief  takes  his  place  thereon,  in  an  attitude  of  repose.  The  Red  Veil  of 
GEBURAH  is  laid  over  him,  covering  him  from  head  to  foot,  so  that  his  outlines  are 
concealed.  The  Altar  is  restored  to  the  Sanctuary.  The  light  therein  is  extinguished,  except 
for  the  obscure  red  Lamp,  which  burns  on  the  Altar.  The  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  is  closed, 
and  the  Veil  is  drawn.  The  lights  are  subdued  in  the  Temple.  The  Second  and  Third 
Celebrants  are  seated  on  either  side  of  the  Sanctuary  Door.  The  Officers  and  Brethren 
remain  in  complete  silence. 

Meanwhile  the  Usher  of  the  Grade  has  conducted  the  Postulant  to  the  Vestibule, 
where  his  clothing  and  insignia,  as  a Master  of  the  Lower  Temple,  are  removed.  He  is 
vested  in  white,  with  the  Orange  Girdle  and  Rose-Cross  appropriate  to  an  Adeptus  Minor. 
While  this  is  being  done:) 

Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

Be  thou  clothed  with  the  garment  of  regeneration  and  with  the  life  renewed  in  GOD. 
May  GOD  Himself  engird  thee  with  the  righteousness  of  saints.  And  remember  on  your 
part,  0 Brother  of  the  Rosy  Cross,  that  the  life  of  TIPHERETH  prepares  the  bridal 
garments  which  clothe  the  soul  against  the  day  of  her  mystical  marriage. 

(The  Postulant  is  instructed  in  the  Battery  of  the  Grade  and  knocks  twice  and  when 
the  silence  within  is  broken  by  the  Battery  without,  the  Third  Celebrant  goes  to  the  Door  of 
the  Temple  and  admits  those  who  have  knocked.  The  Door  is  secured  behind  them  by  the 
Usher  of  the  Grade,  who  takes  the  Wand  of  the  Celebrant  in  Chief  which  the  Postulant  has 
carried.  Then,  as  they  stand  on  the  hither  side  of  the  Door:) 

Third  Celebrant. 

Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  receive  at  my  hands  the  Sacred  Grip  of 
this  Grade. 

(It  is  given  by  placing  the  left  hand  on  the  breast,  with  all  fingers  extended, 
mutually  raising  the  right  hand,  also  with  extended  fingers,  interlacing  the  fingers 
mutually,  at  first  still  extended  and  then  clasped  upon  the  hand,  at  the  same  time 
exchanging  the  salutation  as  follows:  AVE,  FRATER  (vel  SOROR),  which  is  answered  by: 
ROSEAU  ET  AUREAE  CRUCIS.  The  words  PAX  CHRISTI  TECUM  are  then  repeated 
simultaneously.  The  Third  Celebrant  returns  to  his  place.  The  Usher  of  the  Grade  leads  the 
Postulant  to  a seat  in 


110 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


front  of  the  unofficial  Members  and  facing  the  Door  of  the  Sanctuary.  The 
Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus  then  begins  to  recite.) 

THE  LEGEND  OF  THE  ROSY  CROSS. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Well-Beloved  Postulant  and  Brother,  the  particular  Mysteries  exhibited  and  the 
knowledge  communicated  in  symbolism  by  the  Order  of  the  Rosy  Cross  have  been 
shadowed  forth  under  various  veils  from  time  immemorial.  The  sanctuaries  of  a hidden 
tradition  have  been  established  among  many  nations,  and  as  there  was  never  a period  when 
the  ordinances  of  initiation  were  not  in  the  world,  so  there  was  never  a time  and  there  was 
never  a place  when  the  Greater  Mysteries  had  any  object  of  research  but  that  one  and 
inevitable  object  which  alone  concerns  every  man  who  has  entered  into  the  consciousness 
of  election.  Under  whatever  names,  and  with  whatsoever  varieties  of  pageant  and 
established  form,  all  true  Rites  and  Mysteries,  in  respect  of  their  intention,  have  been  ever 
but  one  Rite  expounding  one  Mystery,  which  - to  summarise  it  in  all  brevity  - has  been  the 
re-integration  of  man  in  GOD.  There  is  every  multiplicity  of  official  dogma;  there  is  every 
emblazonment  of  symbolism;  but,  from  neophyte  to  epopt,  every  postulant  who  has 
attained  the  knowledge  of  his  source  knows  also  that  his  perfect  end  is  a conscious  return 
therein. 

The  old  Rites  are  dead,  while  the  records  which  remain  of  most  are  insufficient 
memorials  and  often  mere  vestiges  or  rumours.  But  the  truths  embodied  by  initiation  are 
alive  for  evermore.  By  a dispensation  given  from  above,  as  from  a Great  and  Holy 
Assembly,  abiding  in  a Sanctuary  not  made  with  hands,  hidden  within  the  Veil,  the 
Hierarchic  Mystery  of  Christ  was  declared  in  space  and  time,  by  the  manifestation  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour.  He  is  to  us  in  an  especial  manner  the  Great  Exemplar  of  initiation  - its 
way,  its  truth  and  its  life.  He  exhibited  the  path  and  term,  no  longer  in  Rites  and  Symbols, 
but  in  the  form  of  life,  and  has  made  partakers  thereof,  heirs  and  co-heirs  with  Him,  all 
those  who  have  learned  the  great  secret  that  His  story  is  also  theirs  and  must  be  re-enacted 
in  every  soul.  The  Second  Birth,  my  Brother,  through  which  you  have  passed  in  symbolism, 
corresponds  to  the  nativity  in  Bethlehem.  The  life  of  the  Cross  in  TIPHERETH,  under  the 
Rule  of  TIPHERETH,  shall  be  unto  you  as  the  Christ-Life.  Thereafter  cometh  a Mystery  of 
Death  and  Resurrection  in  GOD,  which  is  hidden  in  the  Grades  beyond.  When  the  things 
which  now  and  hereafter  you  suffer  and  share  in  symbolism  have  become  native  inwardly 
and  outwardly  in  your  entire  being,  you  also  will  have  entered  into  Christhood,  or  that 
which  is  called  figuratively  the  state  of  heirship  and  brotherhood  in  the  Lord.  The  most 
secret  science  of  the  soul  is  here  formulated  and  the  life  of  initiation  through  all  its  stages, 
even  to  the  goal  of  all,  according  to  the  Doctrine  and  Practice  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  You  will 
observe  that  it  differs  generically  from  the  official  and  conventional  secrecy  of  the  Lesser 
Mysteries,  for  it  does  not  consist  in  verbal  and  occult  formula.  In  its  presentation  it  is  the 
story  at  large  of  the  chief  annals  of  sanctity;  but  in  its  inward  practice  and  understanding  it 


111 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


is  a mystery  of  experience.  It  is  really  secret  because  it  can  be  announced  everywhere 
but  can  be  understood  and  realised  only  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  have  entered  into  the 
experience  within. 

In  addition  to  such  open  memorials  as  are  records  of  saints  and  adepts  in  all  churches 
and  schools  of  Christendom,  there  is  the  Secret  Tradition  of  Christian  Times  enshrined  in 
cryptic  literatures,  of  which  Alchemy  on  its  spiritual  side  offers  a notable  instance.  The 
early  history  of  the  Rosy  Cross  is  connected  more  especially  with  this  aspect  of  the  great 
subject,  though  it  has  known  many  dedications  and  has  suffered  many  changes  in  its 
passage  through  the  centuries  and  various  countries  of  Europe.  It  reaches  here  and  now  its 
final  evolution  in  the  Sacred  Rites  of  our  Fellowship.  Antiquity,  my  Brother,  is  not 
regarded  among  us  as  essentially  a test  of  value,  and  we  confess  that  we  have  separated 
ourselves  from  much  that  was  of  false-seeming  and  disordered  enthusiasm  while  continuing 
therefore  to  preserve  the  holy.  It  was  a pilgrimage  of  the  soul  in  GOD.  a return  journey 
toward  the  centre.  He  tarried  at  other  houses  of  assembly,  where  it  might  be  said  that  he 
came  unto  his  own  and  that  his  own  received  him.  As  he  had  been  taught  according  to  the 
letter  within  the  convent  gate,  so  did  he  learn  otherwhere  according  to  the  grace  of  the  inward 
meaning.  That  which  opened  at  his  knocking  was  of  things  within  and  without;  of  GOD,  man 
and  the  universe:  Macrocosm  and  Minutum  Mundum;  the  travels  and  metamorphoses  of  the 
soul;  and  the  soul's  rest  in  the  union.  Hereof  is  his  ascent  toward  KEIHER,  through  the 
Paths  and  Worlds  of  the  Tree. 

lie  returned  at  length  to  the  world,  as  one  who  comes  back  from  CHESED  for  the 
healing  of  nations.  But  it  was  to  be  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  more  especially  by  the  wise  in 
their  wisdom.  It  was  only  in  his  own  cloister  that  he  found  a few  of  the  elect,  with  whom  he 
abode  in  a House  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Such  was  the  beginning  of  our  Fraternity  of  the  Rosy 
Cross,  incorporating  at  first  four  persons  only,  being  the  number  of  our  natural  humanity, 
but  afterwards  increased  to  eight,  the  number  of  the  Christhood.  It  was  agreed  that  the 
Brotherhood  as  such  should  remain  secret  one  hundred  and  twenty  years,  or  for  that 
symbolical  period  which  answers  to  the  earthly  age  of  the  Postulant  - when  he  stands  on  the 
threshold  of  TIPHERETH,  awaiting  the  Second  Birth,  the  new  age  and  the  life  of 
regeneration  therein.  Subsequently  some  of  the  Brethren  were  scattered  through  various 
countries  on  works  of  ministry.  They  appointed  successors  in  accordance  with  the  Laws  of 
the  Order,  and  there  arose  in  this  manner  that  Second  Circle  of  Initiates  which  is  mentioned  in 
the  original  memorials.  The  years  had  elapsed,  and  the  Loving  Frater  C R C had  passed  from 
the  House  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  TIPHERETH  to  the  Secret  Church  in  DAATH.  The 
Members  of  the  First  Circle  had  been  dissolved  also  in  their  day.  Those  who  came  after 
them  knew  little  of  the  sodality  in  its  beginning,  and  -as  it  is  hinted  in  the  records  - had  not 
been  admitted  to  all  things.  They  were  in  fact  Philosophical  Brethren,  awaiting  in  the 
SFPHIRA  NETZACH  for  the  end  of  the  allotted  period,  namely,  120  years. 

Adeptus  Major. 

It  came,  in  our  reading  of  the  legend.  Having  passed  through  the  mystical  experience 
of  that  Second  Birth  which  is  illustrated  in  symbolism  by  the  Portal  of  the  Third  Order,  a 


112 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


solemn  assembly  of  adepts  was  convened  in  the  House  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Children 
of  the  Portal  were  admitted  and  the  Veil  was  removed  from  the  Sanctuary.  (The  Second  and 
Third  Celebrants  rise  in  their  places  and  draw  the  Veil.  Afterwards  they  resume  their  seats.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

In  this  manner  there  was  uncovered  the  Door  of  entrance,  bearing  the  inscription 
POST  CENTU  M VIGINTI  ANNOS  PATEBO,  written  about  the  sacred  letter  SHIN, 
encompassed  by  the  four  Living  Creatures  and  crowned  by  the  Wheel  of  the  Spirit.  It 
represented  then  as  now  the  transmutation  of  human  personality  by  the  Christhood 
immanent  within  and  overshadowed  by  the  cosmic  Christ.  (The  Second  Celebrant  has 
pointed  to  the  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  and  the  emblazonments  thereon.  He  now  rises  in  his 
place,  as  does  also  the  Third  Celebrant.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vet  nomen  aliud),  I testify  that  the  Door  was  opened  by 
the  Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  Non  Nobis,  Domine,  and  that  those  who  had  been  called  and 
chosen  beheld  that  mystery  within,  over  which  the  records  of  the  past  have  laid  a heavy 
drapery  of  images.  That  which  they  saw  and  heard  concerned  an  epoch  to  come  in  their  own 
life  of  adeptship.  After  the  same  manner  you  also  shall  hear  and  see,  if  yours  be  the  gifts  of 
the  spirit,  as  I now  open  this  Door. 

(The  Honourable  Frater  Custos  Liminis,  at  these  concluding  words,  shuts  off  all  lights 
in  the  Temple,  and  the  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  is  opened.  The  dim  Red  Lamp  on  the  Alta- 
alone  enlightens  the  Sanctuary.  The  Celebrant  is  Chief,  beneath  the  great  Red  Veil,  betrays 
no  certain  outline.  The  wavering  shadows  are  everywhere.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

Having  come  so  far  in  our  journey,  by  GOD's  mosi  Holy  Grace,  let  us  lift  up  our 
hands  on  the  threshold  of  His  glorious  Sanctuary. 

Auxiliary  Prater  Adeptus. 

IN  ATRIIS  TUIS,  0 HIERUSALEM,  FLECTAMUS  GENUA.  (The  Celebrants  and  all 
present  kneel  down.) 

The  Second  Celebrant  (recites:) 

THE  PRAYER  OF  THE  PRECINCTS 

We  worship  Thee  in  the  hiddenness  of  Thy  presence,  in  the  darkness  and  light  of 
worlds,  in  the  silent  temple  of  the  soul.  Let  Thy  Word  speak  in  the  hiddenness,  and  Thy  glory 
shall  he  declared  therein.  In  the  heart's  stillness  we  shall  hear  Thee;  we  shall  behold  Thee 
with  inward  eyes;  the  light  of  Thy'  sanctuary  within  shall  transform  the  light  without;  the 
light  without  shall  he  even  as  the  light  within  - Thou  only  in  life  and  time;  in  death  and 


113 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


resurrection  Thou;  and  in  the  world  to  come  - which  is  the  world  of  ascension  - we 
shall  attain  our  end  in  Thee,  0 End  and  Crown  of  all.  Thou  hast  called  and  chosen  this 
Postulant,  who  kneels  here  within  the  precincts  of  Thy  Greater  Mysteries.  Shew  unto  him 
the  Secrets  of  Thy  Sanctuary,  the  life  and  death  which  are  in  Thee.  Shew  unto  him  the 
Glory  which  is  to  come.  Raise  up  this  son  of  man  to  the  Divine  Sonship  in  Thee,  an  heir  and 
co-heir  in  Christhood,  O Father  of  Worlds.  (The  Celebrants  rise.  The  unofficial  Brethren 
resume  their  seats.  The  Postulant  remains  on  his  knees.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

He  who  would  be  Master  in  Israel  must  watch  more  than  one  hour;  but  hereof  is 
the  Soul's  Vigil. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

The  day  for  deeds  and  the  night  for  contemplation;  but  out  of  this  succession  cometh 
the  Great  Quest  and  the  end  attained  therein. 

Adeptus  Major. 

It  is  written  that  He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep,  and  herein  is  a Mystery  of  GOD. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

The  sleep  of  thought  is  attained  in  a great  suspension;  and  the  sleep  of  Mystical 
Death  is  the  shadow  of  the  Eternal  Sabbath. 

(The  Postulant  is  assisted  to  rise  by  the  two  Celebrants.  He  is  drawn  across  the 
threshold  and  is  left  standing  at  the  Western  side  of  the  Altar.  The  Second  and  Third 
Celebrants  proceed  direct,  and  respectively  to  the  Southern  and  Northern  sides.  The 
Postulant  can  now  discern  in  the  obscurity  the  veiled  and  silent  form  of  the  Chief 
Celebrant.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

Behold  a Sanctuary  of  seven  sides  and  seven  angles,  every  side  of  five  feet  broad  and 
the  height  of  eight  feet.  No  earthly  sun  can  shine  herein,  but  the  glimmering  ray  of  an  Altar 
Famp  serves  to  make  darkness  visible.  That  shrouded  figurative  gleam  seems  only  to 
express  the  gloom  which  rests  on  the  prospect  before  you.  In  the  middle  part  of  the  crypt 
there  stands  this  circular  Altar,  covered  with  a plate  of  gold  and  variously  graven  and 
inscribed.  About  the  first  circle  or  margin  is  written  the  central  maxim  in  the  true  life  of 
adeptship:  Y E H ES  H U A MIHI  O M N IA.  The  second  circle  contains  in  cipher  the 
characteristic  motto  of  the  Fellowship,  or  A G R C - AD  GFORIAM  ROSEAE  CRUCIS. 
The  inscription  within  the  third  circle  is  HOC  ARCANISSIMAE  CLAUSTRUM 
I)EITATIS  MINI  SEPULCHRUM  FECI. 

The  interior  space  contains  a great  Cosmic  Cross,  having  four  circles  at  the 
extremities,  enclosing  the  traditional  emblems  of  the  Four  Living  Creatures  and  these  four 
inscriptions,  proceeding  with  the  Sun  from  the  South: 


114 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


1.  NEQUAQUAM  VACUUM 

2.  LEGIS  JUGUM. 

3.  LIBERTAS  EVANGELIE 

4.  DEI  GLORIA  INTACTA. 


(Should  it  seem  desirable  for  the  instruction  of  the  Postulate  to  elucidate  the 
inscriptions,  they  may  be  translated  literally  thus:  1.  Jesus  is  all  things  unto  me;  2.  To  the 
Glory  of  the  Rosy  Cross;  3.  I have  made  this  Inner  Sanctuary  of  the  Most  hidden  GOD  a 
sepulchre  for  myself;  4.  No  void;  5.  The  Yoke  of  the  Law;  6.  The  freedom  of  the  Gospel;  7. 
The  Glory  of  God  inviolate.) 


They  are  in  correspondence  with  the  Divine  Names  YOD,  HE,  VAU,  HE,  and 
ALEPH,  H E,  YOD,  HE,  read  crosswise  from  the  South  and  East  respectively;  with  the 
Divine  Name  ADNI,  understood  as  a title  of  SHEKINAH  and  read  from  the  East  against  the 
Sun;  and  with  the  Secret  Word  AGLA,  beginning  at  the  South  and  following  the  course  of 
the  Sun.  At  the  meeting  point  of  the  arms  in  the  middle  of  the  Cosmic  Cross  - is  placed  the 
Wheel  or  Circle  of  the  Spirit,  having  eight  radii,  proceeding  from  the  sacred  letter  SHIN. 
The  doctrine  of  the  Rosy  Cross  in  the  Grade  of  Adeptus  Minor  is  here  formulated  and 
symbolised,  with  intimations  of  mysteries  which  lie  beyond  the  Grade.  It  is  a doctrine  based 
upon  experience,  the  experience  of  Christ  realised  in  the  four  parts  of  our  personality,  in 
virtue  of  which  - at  the  term  of  adept  sanctity  - our  human  elements,  like  the  four  mystical 
creatures,  encompass  the  Great  White  Throne  of  GOD,  Who  is  within. 

Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  the  emblems  of  your  consecrated 
personality  are  beside  their  correspondences  on  the  Altar.  Symbolum  and  symbolum 
loquitur,  as  heart  unto  heart  in  the  silence.  Take  up  the  silver  chain,  which  represents  your 
material  part  transformed  in  the  life  of  rebirth.  Raise  it  in  your  right  hand,  as  one  who 
affirms  GOD  in  all  that  manifests  his  being.  Remember  now  and  henceforward  that  there  is  a 
tincturing  spirit  within  which  transmutes  our  earth  of  life.  Lay  down  the  mystic  chain,  as 
one  who  has  found  that  the  silver  cord  is  loosed  in  all  that  concerns  bondage.  Take  up  the 
dagger  of  gold  and  raise  it  in  your  right  hand.  So  may  Eternal  Mind  lift  up  your  mind  of 
manhood.  Remember  the  Sword  of  the  Spirit  and  that  purified  mind  has  talents  of  gold 
within.  Gifts  of  the  Spirit  sent  down.  Be  thou  a buyer,  my  Brother,  of  gold  tried  in  the 
furnace,  and  when  thou  art  tried  therein  come  forth  like  gold  refined.  Be  transformed 
therefore  by  renewing  of  the  mind,  and  thou  shalt  not  see  corruption.  Replace  the  golden 
dagger  and  take  up  the  cup  of  benedictions,  for  transmuted  desire  is  exalted  above  all 
blessing.  Partake  of  the  cup  in  charity,  and  receive  the  wine  of  the  kingdom.  Set  it  again 
upon  the  Altar  and  lift  up  the  lamp  on  high.  Be  thou  light  in  the  place  of  light,  and  having 
been  born  of  man,  according  to  the  will  of  flesh,  but  afterwards  reborn  of  GOD,  according 
to  His  holy  will,  work  out  thine  end  therein.  Stand  steadfast  in  the  purpose  of  the  Lord. 
Restore  the  lamp  to  its  Altar,  and  in  the  midst  of  speaking  symbols,  remember  the  things 
signified.  So  shall  the  types  dissolve,  but  thou  shalt  be  their  life;  for  that  which  the  Wheel  of 


115 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  Spirit  shews  forth,  at  the  centre  of  the  Altar-circle,  shall  be  Life  of  life  withiii  thee. 
And  death  shall  be  no  more.  (The  Celebrants  turn  to  the  East.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

PATER  AETERNUS  DEUS,  DONA  NOBIS  VITAM. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

VITEM  AETERNAM  TUAM  DONA  NOBIS,  DOMINE. 

Adeptus  Major. 

FILL  REDEMPTOR  MUNDI  DEUS,  DONA  NOBIS  VERBUM. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Eh  VERBUM  CARO  FACTUM  ERIT. 

Adeptus  Major. 

SPIRITUS  SANCTE  DEUS,  LUMEN  DONA  NOBIS. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

LUMEN  VERITATIS  TUAE,  ET  IN  TE  RESURGAMUS  NOS. 

(After  these  versicles  there  is  a hush  of  complete  silence.  The  Celebrant  in  Chief 
speaks  from  within  the  veil.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

In  six  days  of  his  life  is  material  man  created,  and  thereafter  cometh  a Jubilee.  The 
natural  man  is  complete  in  his  own  degree,  but  above  this  there  is  the  manhood  of  the 
Sacred  Temple.  From  the  life  of  man  in  Nature,  from  the  death  which  ensues  thereon  and 
opens  the  further  prospects,  we  who  have  been  called  of  the  spirit  have  sought  a path  of 
elevation  toward  a more  perfect  mode.  It  is  in  losing  that  which  the  natural  man  holds  most 
desirable  that  the  spiritual  man,  after  six  days,  shall  find  himself.  We  have  looked  for  life  in 
GOD  and  have  been  crucified  in  Him  to  all  which  here  below  interposes  between  Life  Divine 
and  the  free  way  of  the  Quest.  We  have  stripped  off  the  old  vestures,  praying  to  be  clothed  in 
GOD.  We  have  found  that  the  quest  is  love  and  that  is  also  the  end.  In  paths  of  contemplation, 
and  these  are  paths  of  love;  in  the  rule  of  sacrifice,  which  is  love  made  holy;  we  have  found 
that  life  is  love.  Opened  to  Divine  Love  on  the  threshold  of  the  life  of  TIPHERETH,  we 
have  been  born  by  love  into  true  life  forever.  We  have  laid  bare  our  whole  being  to  the 
sacred  influx  of  love,  and  this  is  the  life  of  the  Cross.  We  have  become  the  Mystic  Rose  in  the 
centre  of  the  Holy  Cross.  But  the  Secret  of  Death  is  also  the  Secret  of  Love.  We  have  died 
upon  the  Cross  of  TIPHERETH.  It  is  the  mystic  death  of  the  kiss.  There  is  a desire  which 
kills,  and  the  same  also  makes  alive,  Amen,  for  ever  and  evermore.  (The  voice  dies  away 
within  the  veil,  and  again  there  is  complete  silence.  Afterwards  the  voice  speaks.) 


116 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Once  it  was  the  day  of  our  espousals,  for  the  Second  Birth  is  Betrothal.  We  have 
prepared  our  wedding  garments.  This  also  is  life  in  TIPHERETH.  We  have  desired  to  be 
dissolved  and  to  be  with  Christ.  This  is  the  death  of  the  Cross.  Then  is  it  great  darkness, 
as  of  a rock-hewn  sepulchre.  But  He  Who  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks  enters  and  comes 
in.  This  is  the  marriage  of  the  soul.  (The  voice  dies  away  within  the  veil,  and  yet  again 
there  is  complete  silence.  But  afterwards  the  voice  speaks.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Brother  of  the  Rosy  Cross,  it  is  not  from  man  to  man  that  the  great  gifts  are 
communicated,  for  that  which  he  can  devise  to  another  is  that  only  which  has  been  lent  to 
the  man  himself.  It  is  for  this  reason  that,  after  solidarity  and  brotherhood,  each  of  us 
stands  alone.  Stand  therefore,  my  Brother,  maintaining  with  your  peers  and  co-heirs  a 
perfect  union  in  the  mystery  of  faith.  But  remember,  a night  cometh,  and  so  stand,  as  one 
awaiting  his  call  to  enter  the  darkness.  He  who  is  reborn  is  he  who  shall  die  also  and  pass 
into  the  Valley  of  Silence.  The  Sanctuary  of  your  tomb  is  hollowed  in  the  rock  of  ages,  and 
your  time  is  at  hand.  (The  voice  ceases  within  the  veil,  and  the  silence  which  follows  is  for  a 
brief  space  only.  The  Celebrants  have  taken  up  their  places  side  by  side  with  the  Postulant, 
whom  they  draw  backward  to  the  threshold,  but  are  still  facing  East.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

I certify  that  Frater  Non  Nobis,  Domine,  and  those  who  were  with  him,  heard  in  the 
House  of  the  Spirit  and  its  Holy  Sanctuary  the  Voice  of  the  Master,  testifying  concerning 
Divine  Darkness  and  union  with  the  Divine  therein.  It  is  an  opening  of  the  inward  world 
and  plenary  realisation  of  the  Presence  in  the  conscious  soul,  though  it  is  told  after  another 
manner  in  the  records  which  remain  among  us.  There  it  is  firstly  that  they  discovered  the 
body  of  the  Founder,  who  bore  the  book  of  the  Mysteries  on  his  breast,  a treasure  to  be 
hidden  from  the  world.  But  it  is  said  also  that  this  book  contained  by  way  of  colophon  the 
inscription:  EX  DEONASCIMUR,  INJESU  MORIMUR,  PER  SPIRITUM  SANCTUM 
REVIVISCIMUS.  And  this  is  a summary  in  brief  of  the  Rosy  Cross  in  all  its  Grades  of 
evolution.  Take  it  into  your  heart,  my  Brother,  having  prepared  the  heart  as  earth  of  the 
mystical  kingdom.  Let  it  dwell  as  a seed  therein;  the  letter  of  the  words  shall  die;  the  flower 
of  the  inward  sense  shall  spring  therefrom.  The  counsel  is  always  to  lose  the  symbols  in  their 
meaning.  The  material  part  should  dissolve  in  the  light  of  its  spiritual  significance,  and  this 
is  what  is  meant  among  us  by  getting  behind  the  symbol.  There  is  no  object  in  Nature,  no 
memorial  in  the  written  word  of  grace  which  cannot  be  used  in  this  manner.  There  is  above 
all  no  conception,  whether  of  Divine  Things  and  Persons,  or  of  saints  also  and  angels, 
which  will  not  open  to  us  great  vistas  of  secret  knowledge  by  this  philosophical  solution. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

We  know  in  this  manner  that  our  Founder  Christian  Rosy  Cross,  being  dead,  yet 
speaketh  - in  the  Hidden  Church  of  the  Adepts  - concerning  life,  death  and  resurrection  in 


117 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


GOD.  In  fine  therefore,  having  heard  and  seen  in  the  spirit,  Frater  Non  Nobis, 
Domine,  and  his  companions  made  fast  the  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  ad  interiora  terrae  and, 
setting  seals  thereon,  recited  their  solemn  closing  on  this  point  of  our  Christian  Mystery. 
(The  Celebrants  leave  the  Sanctuary,  together  with  the  Postulant.  The  Door  of  the 
Sanctuary  is  closed.  The  Second  Celebrant  lays  his  Wand  against  the  Door.  He  takes  the 
Postulant  by  his  two  hands  and  looks  earnestly  upon  him.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

I say  unto  you,  Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  that  this  also  is  your 
own  story.  (The  Usher  of  the  Grade  comes  forward  and  leads  the  Postulant  from  the 
Temple.  Here  ends  the  Second  Point.) 

THE  THIRD  POINT 

There  is  light  everywhere,  in  the  Temple  and  Inner  Sanctuary.  It  is  fuller  and 
brighter  than  in  the  First  Point.  The  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  stands  partly  open,  but  the  Veil  is 
drawn  across  the  threshold.  The  Chairs  of  the  Second  and  Third  Celebrant  are  placed  at  a 
considerable  distance  Westward,  toward  the  middle  part  of  the  Temple,  and  the  Celebrants 
arc  seated  facing  East.  There  is  a vacant  point  behind  them  for  the  Postulant.  The 
Celebrant  in  Chief  is  standing  within  the  Sanctuary,  erect,  on  the  Eastern  side  of  the  Altar; 
but  the  intervening  Door  conceals  him  from  those  who  are  without.  These  are  seated  in 
expectation  and  in  silence.  Meanwhile  the  Usher  of  the  Grade  has  conducted  the  Postulant  to 
the  Vestibule,  where  he  rests  for  a period.  While  the  two  are  seated  together); 

Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

Beloved  Brother,  you  have  heard  - and  how  often  - of  a light  which  shineth  in  the 
darkness  and  that  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not.  It  is  light  of  the  Mystic  End  and  the 
life  of  life.  I n its  absence  the  natural  man  is  said  to  be  complete  within  his  own  measures,  but  he 
has  no  conscious  part  in  eternity,  and  he  reigns  only  as  the  leader  of  the  animal  world.  A 
desire  of  the  true  end  which  is  set  before  all  being  may  begin  to  awaken  within  him,  as  a 
kindling  of  the  higher  light.  He  sets  out  on  the  great  quest.  The  light  within  him  is  also  a 
light  before  him,  and  the  desire  of  the  Holy  House  burns  in  his  heart.  So  is  he  brought  to  our 
Sanctuary  and  learns  to  comprehend  the  light  which  shines  from  the  Rosy  Cross.  It  is  for 
him  to  remember  therein  that  no  initiation  and  no  advancement  can  confer  the  light 
automatically.  They  remain  within  their  law  and  their  order,  and  operate  only  in 
symbolism.  May  you  who  are  reborn  in  Ritual  be  regenerated  in  the  life  of  the  soul,  and 
may  life,  death  and  resurrection  be  stages  of  your  inward  experience,  not  merely  an 
eloquent  pageant  performed  in  ceremony.  (The  Usher  of  the  Grade  again  leads  the 
Postulant  to  the  Door  of  the  Temple.  The  Battery  of  the  Grade  [2  knocks]  is  given  and  they 
enter  unannounced.  The  Door  is  secured  behind  them.  As  they  move  forward  through  the 
"Kemple:) 


118 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

He  who  puts  aside  the  folds  of  the  senses,  as  linen  cloths  laid  by  themselves,  and  the 
fleshly  mind,  as  a napkin  from  about  the  head,  shall  arise  in  his  spiritual  part  by  a 
resurrection  into  divine  life.  (The  Postulant  is  now  standing  behind  the  seats  of  the  Second 
and  Third  Celebrant,  in  the  middle  place  between  them,  looking  toward  the  Door  of  the 
Sanctuary.  The  Usher  of  the  Grade  has  returned  to  his  own  place.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

When  he  who  has  been  advanced  into  the  Mysteries  of  Divine  Experience  goes  forth 
again  into  the  world,  the  memorial  within  him  is  like  the  letter  of  the  sacred  books. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

The  spirit  communicated  in  his  Temple  is  reserved  to  the  Temple. 

Adeptus  Major. 

So  also  the  letter  alone  can  be  used  outside  the  Sanctuary  of  the  Rosy  Cross. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

There  is  shadow  of  light  only  beyond  the  Fodge  of  the  Adepts. 

Adeptus  Major. 

The  letter  also  is  used  within  the  Sanctuary,  but  there  is  the  sense  of  many  meanings 
behind  it. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

All  Degrees,  however,  end  in  expectation;  all  foreshadow  something  greater  than 
themselves,  by  which  the  Postulant  of  figurative  mysteries  should  arise  to  experience  in  the 
real  order. 

Adeptus  Major. 

But  the  initiations  of  the  Mysteries  are  true  and  efficacious,  because  they  convey  in 
circumstantial  signs  and  tokens  the  living  end  of  adeptship;  and  those  signs  can  therefore  be 
channels  of  life. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

May  all  the  sacramental  channels  be  opened  and  the  Word  which  is  life  be  spoken. 

Adeptus  Major. 

It  is  in  stillness  of  thought  that  we  shall  hear  the  Word  of  Life.  (The  Celebrant  in 
Chief  speaks  from  within  the  Sanctuary.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

I am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.  He  that  believeth  in  Me,  though  he  were  dead, 
yet 


119 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


shall  he  live,  and  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die.  (The  Frater 
Custos  Liminis  moves  quietly  to  the  Door  of  the  Sanctuary  and  draws  back  the  Veil, 
saying:) 

Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

The  angel  of  the  Lord  descended  from  heaven,  and  came  and  rolled  back  the  stone 
from  the  door.  (The  Celebrant  in  Chief  speaks  from  within  the  Sanctuary.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

I am  ALPHA  and  OMEGA,  the  First  and  the  Last.  I am  He  that  liveth  and  was 
dead,  and  behold,  1 am  alive  for  evermore,  Amen:  and  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death. 

(The  Usher  of  the  Grade  passes  round  to  the  Postulant,  whom  he  heads  to  the 
threshold  of  the  Sanctuary  and  there  directs  him  to  kneel.  He  sets  the  Door  of  the  Sanctuary 
open  to  its  full  extent.  The  Second  and  Third  Celebrant,  and  all  Members  stand  up.  The 
Postulant  sees  the  Celebrant  in  Chief  erect,  with  his  arms  extended  in  the  form  of  a Cross. 
The  Usher  of  the  Grade  moves  to  one  side  of  the  entrance.) 

Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

I know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  He  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the 
earth.  1 shall  see  Him  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another.  My  veins 
within  me  are  consumed  with  earnest  desire  for  that  day.  (He  remains  silently  at  his 
place.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

I am  the  Faithful  Witness,  the  first-begotten  of  the  dead  and  the  prince  of  the  kings  of 
the  earth.  I am  the  Way,  the  Truth  and  the  life.  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me. 
Peace  be  unto  you.  1 have  finished  the  work.  I know  whence  I came  and  whither  I go.  He 
that  believeth  in  me,  believeth  not  in  Me  but  in  Him  that  sent  Me.  I go  my  way  to  Him  that 
sent  Me.  1 ascend  unto  My  Father,  and  your  Father;  and  to  My  GOD,  and  your  GOD.  I am 
the  light  of  the  world.  He  that  followeth  Me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the 
light  of  life.  (The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  lifts  up  his  hands  and  face.) 

Adeptus  Major. 

He  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  Churches. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept. 
(The  Usher  of  the  Grade  moves  forward,  and  as  the  Postulant  sees  and  hears  the  Risen 
Adept  - directs  him  to  say  with  him:) 

Frater  Custos  Liminis. 

(Speaking  on  the  part  of  the  Postulant).  One  thing  1 know,  that,  whereas  1 was  blind, 
now  1 see. 


120 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

My  peace  I leave  with  you,  my  peace  1 give  unto  you.  The  Spirit  of  Truth  abide  with 
you  forever  and  teach  you  all  things.  May  the  Great  White  Glory  of  the  Divine  Spirit  come 
down.  (The  Usher  of  the  Grade  has  retired  silently  to  his  own  seat  and  stands  thereat.  The 
Celebrant  in  Chief  comes  round  the  Altar  to  the  threshold  of  the  Sanctuary  and  lays  his 
hands  upon  the  head  of  the  Postulant,  having  placed  his  Wand  aside.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

This  is  also  thine  own  story.  Look  to  it  therefore,  Beloved.  (The  Celebrant  in  Chief 
raises  the  Postulant.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

I raise  you  into  the  Company  of  Adepts  in  the  House  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (The 
Celebrant  in  Chief  seals  the  Postulant  on  his  forehead.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

May  your  mind  be  opened  to  the  realisation  that  is  above  knowledge.  (He  seals 
the  Postulant  on  the  heart.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

May  your  heart  become  a sanctuary  of  light.  (He  seals  the  Postulant  on  the  hips.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

May  your  body  be  the  Temple  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  (He  lifts  up  his  hands.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

May  the  Glory  of  the  lord  fill  this  House  of  the  Lord. 

(All  resume  their  seats,  with  the  exception  of  the  Celebrant  in  Chief  and  the 
Postulant.  The  Celebrant  in  Chief  turns  to  the  East  with  the  Postulant  and  leads  him  to  the 
Western  side  of  the  Altar.  Having  resumed  his  Wand  he  proceeds  himself  to  the  East,  and 
turns  West.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

The  Third  Order  of  the  Rosy  Cross  presents  in  symbolism  three  stages  of 
experience  in  the  realisation  of  the  Divine,  and  this  realisation  is  within.  These  stages  are 
summarised  in  the  Three  Points  of  the  Grade  of  T1PHERETH,  into  which  you  have  now 
entered,  and  it  is  therefore  a synthesis  of  the  Third  Order  at  large,  even  as  the  Grade  of 
Neophyte  offers  at  the  beginning  of  our  Sacred  Mystery  a compendium  of  the  work 
performed  in  the  Worlds  of  Action  and  Formation.  In  the  Grade  of  Adeptus  Minor  the 
Postulant  is  put  definitely  on  the  Path  of  Attainment,  understood  as  the  Way,  the  Truth  and 
the  Life  which  are  in  Christ  - the  Regenerated  Life  of  the  Soul,  the  state  of  Mystical  Death 
and  the  Risen  Life  of  Union. 


121 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Holy  Sanctuary  of  the  Adepts  depicts  in  symbolism  the  ascent  of  the  soul  in 
GOD,  from  the  deeps  even  to  the  heights,  through  the  paths  of  the  Christhood.  There  is 
firstly  the  dark  ground  whereon  we  now  stand,  being  that  out  of  which  we  have  risen,  the 
things  of  material  sense  and  the  absorption  of  the  soul  therein.  Beneath  the  Golden  Altar 
of  our  dedication  and  sacrifice  there  lies  an  inverted  triangle,  inscribed  within  a 
heptagram,  to  both  of  which  are  referred  the  SEPHIROTH  of  the  shadow,  as  opposed  to 
those  of  the  light.  After  this  manner  do  we  in  the  Sanctuary  of  the  Adepts,  by  virtue  of 
dedication  and  sacrifice,  symbolically  over-rule  and  enchain  the  malign  forces  of  our 
nature.  SUPER  ASPIDEM  ET  BASILISCUM  AMBULAVI  ET  CONCULCAV1  LEONEM 
ET  DRACONEM.  In  the  middle  of  the  black  triangle  there  is  placed  for  this  reason  the 
releasing  symbol  of  the  Golden  Cross  emblazoned  with  a Red  Rose  of  49  petals,  being  the 
Rose  of  the  Gates  of  Light.  Round  about  it  are  written  the  four  pregnant  words:  HE 
DESCENDED  INTO  HELL.  They  allude  to  the  Divine  Immanence  within  us  through  all 
phases  of  our  being,  in  our  darkness  as  well  as  in  our  light,  amidst  the  bondage  of  the  evil 
law  and  in  the  freedom  of  the  Sons  of  GOD.  We  have  come  out  of  the  evil  law,  and  therefore 
the  shadows  of  the  things  left  are  depicted  below  us. 

The  seven  walls  of  the  Sanctuary  represent  the  cosmos  summarised  in  the 
planetary  system,  the  sacramental  grace  signified  to  us  by  the  universe,  the  glory  of  the 
world  seen  in  the  light  of  adeptship,  SUB  SPECIE  AETERNITATIS.  It  is  the  world  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  Sanctuary.  It  is  seen  in  that  light  which  never  was  on  land  or  sea  for 
those  who  are  without  consciousness  of  GOD;  but  it  is  the  light  which  is  always  present  for 
those  who  look  at  the  world  from  the  summit  of  Patmos,  who  know  what  it  is  to  have  been 
in  the  spirit  on  the  Lord's  Day,  and  who  have  heard  the  Voice  which  says  unto  all  who  have 
ears:  Behold  I come  quickly.  The  light  is  therefore  communicated  from  within  the  Adept 
of  the  Rosy  Cross.  There  is  a dual  transfiguration  - that  of  the  man  and  his  world.  It  is 
not  that  he  changes  the  world;  but  for  him,  with  him  and  in  him  there  is  a change  in  its 
mode  of  manifestation.  The  consciousness  of  the  Immanence  within  reacts  upon  things 
without,  and  then  the  Divine  Immanence  shines  through  the  whole  universe.  It  is  the 
transmutation  of  regenerated  life,  of  the  Christ-life  on  earth.  This  is  the  way  in  which  sanctity 
transfigures  all  things,  and  the  adept  becomes  a tingeing  stone. 

The  world  is  transmuted  in  the  Christhood.  But  the  seven  walls  are  also  indicative  of 
states  within  the  Postulant,  and  they  are  seven  stages  of  his  progress  from  world  to  world  in 
the  Order  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  From  this  point  of  view  each  wall  is  a gate,  and  you  have 
entered  the  Holy  Sanctuary  by  the  Gate  of  Venus,  even  as  in  your  previous  progress  you 
passed  through  the  Gate  of  Earth  to  attain  the  SEPHIRA  YESOD,  through  that  of  the 
Moon  in  order  to  enter  HOD,  and  finally  through  the  Gate  of  Mercury  on  your  transit  from 
HOD  to  NETZACH.  That  you  have  yet  other  Gates  to  open  is  shewn  by  the  walls 
emblazoned  with  the  astronomical  signs  of  the  Sun,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn.  Beyond 
these  there  lies  the  Supreme  Mystery  of  the  Rosy  Cross. 


122 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


It  is,  however,  only  by  analogy  that  the  seven  walls  are  attributed  to  the  material  planets,  for  the 
true  stars  are  within  you,  and  you  know  already  that  in  our  sacramental  system  the  Moon  has  reference 
to  the  reflected  light  of  mind,  Mercury  to  the  state  of  our  desires,  which  must  be  fixed  on  GOD,  and 
Venus  to  the  conversion  or  redirection  of  will  and  purpose,  by  which  only  the  soul  can  become  a Venus 
and  having  been  reborn  in  GOD  is  the  conceiver  and  bearer  henceforth  of  the  Divine  within  it.  The 
seven  walls  are  also  the  SEPHIROTH  from  YESOD  to  DAATH  inclusive,  it  being  understood  that 
the  last  lies  within  the  mystical  decade  but  is  not  computed  therewith  in  our  Secret  Tradition.  It  is  the 
Threshold  of  the  Supernals.  In  the  middle  place  on  the  summit  of  each  wall  is  the  White  Wheel  or  Sign 
of  the  Christ-Spirit,  referring  to  the  Divine  Immanence  which  is  present  in  all  creation  and  operates  in 
all  the  states  of  grace  and  attainment  experienced  by  the  soul  of  man.  The  Sign  of  the  Planet  itself 
occupies  the  centre  of  the  wall,  enclosed  within  the  circle  of  the  SEPHI  RA  to  which  it  belongs, 
while  about  it  are  the  Divine  Names  and  Sephirotic  titles  referred  to  each  numeration.  The  ground  of 
each  wall  is  on  the  rainbow  or  spectrum  colour  ascribed  to  the  particular  planet,  while  its  spiritual 
counterpart  is  that  of  the  Sacred  SEP  H I RA.  And  because  there  is  a mystery  herein  which  is 
formulated  in  the  various  scales  of  colour  connected  with  this  Grade,  I confer  upon  you  the 
Sacramental  Name  of  Frater  Hodos  Chameleonis,  meaning  the  Path  of  the  Chameleon.  The  colours 
symbolise  graces:  may  you  pass  from  grace  to  grace  and  from  glory  to  glory. 

The  Supernal  SEPHIROTH  are  represented  by  the  triangle  on  the  ceiling,  and  within  this  triad 
is  placed  a Rose  of  22  petals,  similar  to  that  which  I wear  here  on  my  heart.  The  light  in  the  centre  is 
that  of  the  Christ-spirit,  and  it  flows  over  the  whole  Sanctuary.  The  petals  are  the  Paths  of  the 
Christhood,  the  Paths  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  through  some  of  which  you  have  travelled.  The  Rose  is 
placed  in  the  centre  of  a triangle  representing  the  Three  Supernals,  because  the  Christ  is  the  Way,  the 
Truth  of  the  Life,  and  no  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  Him,  through  Whom  we  look  in  fine  to  be 
withdrawn  in  GOD,  as  this  Sacred  Rose  in  the  roof  of  our  Holy  Sanctuary  is  withdrawn  into  the 
Sacred  Delta. 

Frater  Adveniat  Regnum  (vel  nomen  aliud),  look  to  that  which  you  are  and  remember  ever 
the  vocation  of  the  Christ-Life.  May  you  know  like  Christ  whence  you  came  and  whither  you  are 
going.  The  Christ-Life  in  our  Order  as  in  all  the  annals  of  sanctity  - is  only  in  broad  analogy  with  the 
Divine  Life  in  Palestine,  but  it  is  exact  within  its  own  measures.  The  state  of  mystical  death,  which  is 
intimated  by  the  Second  Point  of  the  Grade  of  TIPHERETU,  is  only  in  broad  analogy  with  the  death 
on  Calvary;  and  the  Adept  risen  in  symbolism  who  testifies  in  the  Third  Point  is  in  no  sense  taking 
the  part  of  the  Great  Manifested  Master  in  a dramatic  pageant;  but  he  bears  witness  to  resurrection  in 
the  spirit,  which  is  a mystery  of  experience  awaiting  those  who  have  been  brought  into  Divine  Union. 

(The  Celebrant  in  Chief  moves  round  by  the  South  and  leads  the  Postulant  from  the 
Sanctuary,  closing  but  not  sealing  the  Door  behind  them.  The  Second  and  Third  Celebrants  come  up 
from  their  places.) 


123 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

The  Sacred  and  Mystical  Number  of  this  Grade  is  21,  and  the  root  thereof  is  in  the 
triad.  It  is  derived  from  the  first  of  the  Sacred  Names  and  Words  which  will  now  be 
communicated  to  you.  Follow  them  on  your  own  part  in  the  heart  and  mind. 

Adeptus  Exemptus.  ALEPH,  HE. 

Adeptus  Major.  YOD,  HE. 


Auxiliary  Frater 
Adeptus.  EHYEH. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

It  is  written:  Before  Abraham  was  I AM. 

Adeptus  Major 

Whom  say  ye  that  I the  Son  of  Man  am? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Christ  the  Power  of  GOD  and  the  Wisdom  of  GOD. 

Adeptus 
Exemptus.  I,N. 

Adeptus 
Major.  R. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Adeptus  Exemptus.  YEHESNUA. 

Adeptus 

Major. 

NAZARAEUS. 


Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 
REX  JUDAEORUM. 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

LVX,  the  Light  of  the  Cross. 


124 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Remember  that  TIPHERETH  is  called  in  the  Secret  Tradition  the  Mediating 
Intelligence.  (Here  ends  the  Third  Point.) 

THE  OFFICE  OF  CLOSING  THE  HOUSE  AND  SANCTUARY  OF  ADEPTS 

(The  Celebrants  of  the  Rite  are  seated  as  Guardians  of  the  Veil.  The  Door  of  the 
Sanctuary  is  ajar,  but  the  Veil  is  drawn  before  it.  The  New  Adeptus  has  been  led  to  a seat  by 
Frater  Custos  Liminis.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Adeptus  Major. 

Auxiliary  Frater 
Adeptus.  (Each  officer  knocks 
twice.) 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Valete,  Fratres  et  Sorores  Roseae  et  Aureae  Crucis. 

Adeptus  Major. 

May  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Lord  of  Mercy,  prevailing  in  the  height  and  deep,  pour 
down  on  us  the  Gifts  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Fruits  thereof. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Orate,  Fratres  et  Sorores.  Glory  be  to  GOD  in  the  Highest,  Who  hath  visited  and 
redeemed  His  people. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Honourable  and  Adept  Brethren,  assist  me  to  close  the  House  and  its  Holy  Sanctuary 
in  the  fulness  of  spiritual  life  declared  in  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  in  the  gracious,  the  glorious, 
the  divine  intimations  of  this  august  ceremony.  Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  how  many  years 
does  the  Spirit  of  GOD  strive  with  the  spirit  of  man? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  it  is  written  that  the  Most  Holy  Spirit  shall  plead  the  cause  of 
the  Union  for  120  years. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  does  this  number  mean? 

Adeptus  Major. 

The  tetrad  of  our  natural  humanity  becomes  the  pentad,  and  by  an  operation  of  four 
and  five  the  number  120  is  reduced  to  the  hexad,  which  is  the  number  of  life  in 
TIPHERETH. 


125 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus,  when  do  we  open  the  Sanctuary  of  the  Holy  House  for 
the  Mystery  of  this  Grade? 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

When  the  age  of  120  years  has  been  attained  by  the  Postulant. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  for  what  period  do  we  close  it'? 

Adeptus  Major. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  it  is  closed  in  expectation  and  the  silence  of  great  desire 
while  the  Spirit  of  GOD  strives  with  the  spirit  of  man. 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

POST  CENTUM  VIGINTI  ANNOS  PATEBO.  (He  shuts  and  secures  the  Door.) 
Looking  therefore  toward  the  Grades  which  go  up  to  the  height,  toward  the  height  itself 
and  the  summit,  0 Brethren  of  the  Rose  and  Cross,  in  the  recollection  of  the  mind,  in  the 
devotion  of  the  heart,  in  the  great  love  and  the  great  desire  which  past  all  space  and  time 
alone  can  find  their  object,  1 have  closed  the  Sanctuary  of  the  Adepts. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

I close  this  House  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  Mystic  Mountain  of  the  Wise. 

Auxiliary  Frater  Adeptus. 

Ex  Deo  nascimur.  (Knocks  twice). 

Adeptus  Major. 

In  Yeheshuah  morimur.  (Knocks  twice). 

Adeptus  Exemptus. 

Per  Spiritum  Sanctum  reviviscimus.  (Knocks  twice.  The  Closing  Sign  is  given  by 
all  present.  Here  ends  the  High  Office  of  Closing  the  House  and  Sanctuary  of  the  Adepts.) 


126 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


THE  ADEPTUS  MAJOR  CEREMONY 
THE  OPENING 

The  Vault  of  the  5-6  Grade  has  been  draped  in  the  colours  of  the  Feminine  Scale,  and  the 
Portal  itself  in  the  colour  attributed  to  Mercury,  which  is  reddish-violet.  The  Vestibule  which  is 
without  the  Portal  has  in  its  centre  the  Mystic  Altar  of  the  Rite,  in  the  form  of  a perfect  cube 
vested  in  white.  At  the  western  angles  thereof  two  great  candlesticks  or  Pillars  are  placed  on  the 
floor;  of  these  the  one  in  the  South  bears  a lighted  candl-  and  that  in  the  north  a skull.  The  lighted 
candle  should,  if  possible,  be  the  only  illumination  in  the  Temple,  but  shaded  or  otherwise  subdued 
lamps  may  be  placed,  if  necessary,  at  points  which  are  of  no  symbolical  importance.  The  Tarot 
Keys  of  Lamed  and  Mem  are  arranged  side  by  side  on  the  Altar.  The  Paths  corresponding  thereto 
are  not  otherwise  indicated  than  by  the  two  Pillars  which  symbolise  the  Path  of  Lamed,  and  by 
the  Tomb  itself  which  signifies  that  of  Mem.  Two  seats  facing  the  Tomb  are  provided  for  the 
Celebrants,  the  place  of  the  Chief  Adept  being  at  the  south  side,  close  to  the  Altar,  and  that  of 
the  Second  Adept  in  similar  contiguity  on  the  north  side.  Both  officers  appear  in  the  robes  allotted 
to  the  corresponding  Celebrants  of  the  5-6  Grade,  and  are  saluted  by  the  same  titles,  the  Merciful 
Exempt  Adept  holding  in  actuality  or  imputation  the  august  Degree  of  7-4.  Strictly  speaking  the 
Celebrant  in  Chief  is  therefore  in  the  same  position  as  the  Praemonstrator  of  an  Outer  Temple,  that 
is,  a ruler  empowered  from  beyond.  The  Usher  of  the  Rite  has  his  proper  place  at  the  Door  of 
Entrance,  and  the  goings  and  comings  of  the  Candidate  are  more  especially  under  his  charge. 
He  has  the  title  of  Frater  Parepidemos  Vallis. 

It  should  be  observed  that  the  First  Point  of  the  Ceremony  corresponds  to  the  Portal  of 
the  5-6  Grade,  and  that  the  Portal  attributed  to  Mem  is  the  Door  of  the  Tomb  itself.  The  passage 
from  Sephira  to  Sephira  is  in  both  cases,  by  the  direct  lineal  way,  and  not  by  the  circuitous  Path 
of  the  Serpent,  as  in  the  Grades  of  the  Outer  Order. 

The  Merciful  Exempt  Adept  opens  the  Rite  with  a single  knock  and  proceeds  as  follows: 

Chief. 

Fratres  and  Sorores  Adepti  Majores,  I invite  you  to  join  your  intention  with  mine  in  the 
great  act  of  Opening  the  Shrine  of  the  West.  (All  rise.) 

Chief. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  having  come  so  far  in  our  journey  from  the  circumference  to  the 
centre,  and  being  conscious  of  all  that  which  is  beyond  the  things  which  are  seen  by  the  eye,  let 
us  pause  here  for  a period,  since  the  day  is  far  spent. 

Second. 

We  have  traversed  many  spheres  in  our  time  and  up  and  down  in  the  course  of  the  world 
and  life  we  have  often  returned  and  shall  doubtless  again  revisit. 


127 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Chief. 

You  say  well,  faithful  companion  of  our  common  exile!  Let  us  therefore  remember 
the  Centre. 

Second. 

It  is  known  that  this  is  also  the  height  to  which  many  voices  summon  us. 

Chief. 

It  is  well  that  those  who  are  called  should  go  before  their  election,  but  also  that  those 
that  come  after  them  should  find  the  Path  less  toilsome  because  others  have  gone  up  first. 

Second. 

I pray  you  therefore  to  remember  that,  seeking  the  height  or  the  Centre  we  do  not 
stand  alone. 

Chief. 

A memorial  is  always  with  us  behind  the  doors  of  this  sanctuary,  wherein,  having 
first  found  a refuge  as  a house  of  rest  on  the  way,  the  solemn  task  devolves  upon  us  to  open 
wide  its  doors  for  other  travellers  whose  knocking  is  heard  without. 

Second. 

Say  therefore,  0 Master,  in  your  mercy,  what  manner  of  place  is  this? 

Chief. 

It  is  the  House  of  Love,  which  is  also  the  House  of  Judgment. 

Second. 

What  is  the  sign  thereof? 

Chief. 

That  of  the  Mystic  Rose,  the  Symbol  of  the  Great  Mother. 

Second. 

Let  us  kneel,  therefore,  Master,  for  here  is  the  Holy  Place. 

Seeing  that  the  first  death  is  salutary  and  unto  this  present  is  not  less  than  necessary, 
that  over  us  the  second  death  may  at  no  time  extend  its  power,  we  who  are  the  Stewards  of 
the  Mysteries  in  this  little  kingdom  of  Thy  Love,  do  beseech  Thee,  0 Mistress  of  Life,  by  the 
Great  Name  of  Thy  Love,  even  by  TABOONA  TABANU,  and  by  the  other  symbols  of 
I'hine  infinite  virtue  which  we  have  formerly  recited  in  Thy  Presence,  as  also  by  those  other 
words  which  remain  here  unspoken:  we  beseech  and  appeal  to  Thee,  that  the  saving  graces  of 
Thy  Spirit  may  be  with  us  now  and  to  the  end,  and  that  these  which  do  also  enlighten,  may 
strongly  fortify  our  hearts.  So  may  we  well  and  worthily  accomplish  the  work  which 


128 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


we  are  about  to  perform.  We  have  dwelt,  our  Lady  and  Mother,  under  many 
stewardships,  seasons  of  youth,  seasons  of  maturity,  seasons  of  age,  dispensations  of  natural 
darkness,  of  derived  lights  of  the  sorrow  which  does  not  lead,  and  the  joy  which  diverts 
from  the  way.  But  the  call  at  length  came  by  which  we  were  brought  to  Thy  knowledge,  and 
seeing  that  it  has  been  given  us  in  fine,  to  lead  others  in  the  Path  which  Thou  halt  opened 
before  us,  we  ask  Thee  in  Thy  great  clemency  for  the  Light  to  guide  them  well. 

Second. 

It  is  written,  My  House  is  a House  of  Prayer. 

Chief. 

In  the  Spirit  thereof,  I now  declare  this  vestibule  to  stand  open  mystically  for  the 
work  which  it  is  given  us  mystically  to  perform,  by  the  power  to  us  commissioned. 

Second. 

This  is  well,  brother,  Amen. 


C 

hief. 

Amen. 

Second. 

All  are  seated. 

THE  SYMBOLIC  CEREMONY  OF  ADVANCEMENT 
THE  FIRST  POINT 
THE  PATHS  OF  THE  6-5  GRADE. 

Chief. 

It  is  written  in  faithful  words  that  those  who  are  guides  of  the  perplexed  are  truly 
leaders  of  men.  At  the  beginning  of  this  High  Celebration,  I testify  that  we  are  Wardens  of 
Life,  and  that  in  virtue  of  our  high  office  we  are  deputed  to  bring  many  out  of  great 
tribulation  into  cool  and  sacred  chambers. 


Second. 

So  high  a duty  now  devolves  upon  us.  Therefore  in  your  perfect  compassion,  I 
beseech  you  to  have  mercy  on  the  soul  of  our  faithful  associate,  the  Most  Honored  Frater 
Filius  natus,  filius  datus  (vel  alius),  on  whom  the  necessity  of  the  time  exhorts  us,  even  at 
the  expense  of  his  visible  nature,  with  which  we  have  been  elsewhere  acquainted,  to  confer 
the  benefit  of  silence. 

Chief. 

Do  you  testify,  Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  that  now  is  the  accepted  time? 


129 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Second. 

Even  the  day  of  salvation. 

Chief. 

Fratres  and  Sorores,  I beseech  you  therefore,  to  assist  me  with  loving  hearts,  here 
seeking  the  higher  direction. 

Second. 

It  is  written  that  the  Merciful  are  blessed,  and  that  the  same  shall  obtain  mercy. 

Chief. 

Most  Honored  Frater  Parepidemos  Vallis,  you  have  my  commands  to  ascertain 
the  dispositions  of  the  Candidate,  to  see  that  he  is  duly  prepared,  and  to  present  him  in 
due  form. 

Usher. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  I obey  your  behests. 

(He  leaves  the  vestibule,  and  goes  to  prepare  the  Candidate  who  should  be  at 
hand  in  another  chamber,  still  under  obedience  of  the  Watch,  which  has  sealed  his  lips 
in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Rite.  The  Candidate  is  now  clothed  in  the  robes  of 
an  Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  with  the  Wand  and  Insignia  thereto  belonging.  Having 
been  thus  properly  prepared,  and  being  so  far  as  possible  unaddressed  by  the  conductor, 
he  is  taken  to  the  door  of  the  Vestibule,  where  the  Usher  sounds  the  solemn  battery  of  the 
Grade.  This  being  heard  within,  the  Second  Adept  leaves  his  seat  at  the  northern  side  of 
the  Altar  and  strikes  the  hour  of  the  Rite  on  the  gong  by  the  door  of  the  Tomb.  As  a 
matter  of  convenience,  this  may  be  done  alternatively  by  one  of  the  Fratres  or  Sorores.) 

Chief. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  that? 

Second. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  this  is  the  hour  of  sunset. 

Chief. 

I say  that  it  is  the  hour  of  the  Rite. 

Second. 

The  night  cometh  wherein  no  man  shall  labour. 

Chief. 

It  is  therefore  meet  and  just  that  we  should  zealously  redeem  the  time.  (During 
this  discharge,  the  Second  Adept  returns  to  his  place.  When  the  hour  has  been  struck,  the 
Usher 


130 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


of  the  Rite  for  whom  it  is  a response  to  his  battery,  at  once  enters  with  the  Candidate, 
after  which  the  precinct  is  tyled  immediately.  The  entrance  is  so  ordered  that  the  Candidate 
shall  hear  the  question  of  the  Chief  Adept  after  the  sound  of  the  gong.  As  the  Usher  of  the 
Rite  brings  his  charge  forward.) 


Chief. 

Welcome,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  those  who  are  with  us,  a great  company,  keeping 
the  place  of  our  mystery.  (The  Usher  places  the  Candidate  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  hall, 
facing  west.) 

Chief. 

Frater  Parepidemos  Vallis,  who  is  he  that  has  followed  you? 

Usher. 

He  is  the  Associate  Adeptus  Minor  Filius  natus,  filius  datus,  (vel  alius)  who,  being 
well  known  among  us,  has  come  in  the  fullness  of  time  seeking  the  benefit  of  sanctuary. 

Chief. 

What  is  the  age  of  our  Truly  Honored  Frater? 

Usher. 

It  is  six  years  and  many. 

Chief. 

Do  you  testify,  Frater  Parepidemos  Vallis,  that  during  the  period  of  his  preparation, 
even  from  sunset  to  sunset,  he  has  reserved  the  outward  word? 

Usher. 

Our  Associate  himself  testifies,  in  accordance  with  the  sacred  covenant.  (The 
Second  Adept  turns  direct  to  the  Candidate.) 

Second. 

By  what  sign  do  you  enter?  (Prior  to  his  entrance  the  Candidate  has  been  handed  a 
scroll  containing  the  directions  which  are  necessary  to  preserve  his  complete  silence 
throughout  all  the  proceedings,  and  being  prompted  by  the  Usher  of  the  Rite,  he  gives  the  sign 
of  the  5-6  Grade.) 


Second. 

Do  you  firmly  and  fully  believe  that  beyond  this  Grade  there  are  Mysteries  which 
are  withheld  and  that  the  Closed  Veil  is  not  an  unknown  darkness?  (The  Candidate  gives 
the  sign  of  Osiris  slain.) 


131 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Second. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  our  Truly  Honored  Frater,  bears  the  sacramental  name  of 
Filins  natus,  filius  datus  (vel  alius).  He  is  an  Adeptus  Minor  of  the  R.R.  et  A.C.  He  has 
officiated  as  an  Associate  within  the  Portal  of  the  Vault.  He  has  heard  the  Voice  of  our 
Loving  Father,  and  he  looks  in  due  time  to  pass  from  death  to  life. 

Chief. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  1 bear  witness  that  he  who  has  been  faithful  even  in  the  least 
things  shall  be  set  over  many  kingdoms.  Do  you  also  testify  that  our  Frater  has  fulfilled  the 
Covenant  of  silence  from  sunset  to  sunset,  on  this  great  day  of  his  advancement? 

Second. 

It  is  known  that  he  himself  testifies. 

Chief. 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  give  me  some  sign  of  the  Covenant.  (The  Candidate,  who 
has  been  previously  instructed,  places  the  three  fingers  of  the  right  hand  on  his  mouth  and 
then  lifts  the  hand  on  high.) 

Chief. 

It  is  said  also:  Behold,  I come  quickly  and  my  reward  is  with  me. 

Second. 

For  those  who  have  been  faithful  unto  death. 

Chief. 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  as  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit  at  each  degree  of  their 
fruition  involve  new  responsibilities,  I now  ask  you  whether  you  will  assume  these  with  a 
real  sense  of  their  importance,  and  with  a firm  intention  to  sustain  them  to  the  end.  (The 
Usher  of  the  Rite  goes  behind  the  Candidate,  extends  his  arms  in  the  form  of  a Cross,  and 
says  as  his  sponsor:) 


Usher. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  I have  heard  that  the  sons  of  the  true  legitimacy  should 
ever  remember  the  yoke  of  their  calling. 

Chief. 

I will  ask  you  therefore,  in  your  present  erect  position,  with  arms  extended  in  the 
sacred  cruciform  sign,  to  say  in  your  heart  with  me: 

" THE  OBLIGATION 

1,  Frater  N.N.,  Associate  Adeptus  Minor  of  the  5-6  Grade  in  the  Fraternity  of  the 

Ruby 


132 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Rose  and  the  Golden  Cross,  do  here,  in  the  vestibule  of  the  Order,  most  vividly  realise 
and  confess,  that  the  Mysteries  of  the  Greater  Initiation  are  protected  by  invisible  seals  from 
all  knowledge  of  the  profane,  and  that,  albeit  the  outward  signs  may  be  put  forth  in  the 
exterior  world,  the  essential  secrets  are  never  openly  promulgated.  I testify  also  that  their 
communication  is  in  the  silence  of  the  soul,  even  from  the  Light  which  is  beyond  to  the 
innermost  depths  of  the  understanding,  in  the  faith  of  which  my  arms  are  here  extended  in 
the  eternal  sign  of  the  Cross.  It  is  for  this  reason  that,  standing  at  the  threshold  of  things 
which  are  to  me  still  unknown,  albeit  they  are  close  at  hand,  the  only  pledges  which  the 
sovereign  Headship  of  the  Order  can  here  and  now  exact,  I here  and  now  offer,  and  in  place  of 
a covenant  to  keep  secret  those  things  which  exceed  revelation,  I promise  that  to  the  whole 
extent  of  my  ability,  I will  maintain  the  Mysteries  of  the  Sanctuary  by  the  proper 
preservation  of  the  seals  and  veils  thereof,  in  testimony  of  which  I complete  the  sacred  sign. 
(The  Candidate,  in  accordance  with  his  instructions,  here  crosses  his  arms  on  his  breast  and 
bows  his  head  reverently.) 

Chief. 

We  know,  beloved  brother,  that  something  at  its  allotted  time  must  set  open  the  doors 
of  Eternity;  and  the  Mystical  Paths  and  Gates  of  this  august  Grade  are  in  your  respect  already 
set  open  in  our  hearts  by  the  pledge  which  you  have  now  taken.  Mighty  Adeptus  Major, 
what  are  the  general  dispositions  of  our  beloved  brother?  (Usher  of  the  Rite  during  this 
speech  has  returned  to  his  seat  with  the  Sun.) 

Second. 

He  has  been  made  familiar  with  vanity  and  the  time  has  come  that  he  is  weary. 

Chief. 

There  is  one  place  in  the  world  where  the  heart  ceases  from  troubling,  and  the  weary 
find  their  rest. 


Second. 

He  has  been  made  subject  to  many  accidents,  and  he  desires  that  which  is 
permanent. 

Chief. 

There  is  One  only  in  Whom  there  is  neither  change  nor  shadow  of  vissicitude. 

Second. 

He  desires,  therefore,  to  ascend,  at  what  cost  soever,  even  from  the  Holy  Mountain 
into  Eternal  Life. 

Chief. 

By  the  task  which  we  have  undertaken,  it  is  imposed  upon  us  to  assist  our  beloved 
brother  in  the  need  which  has  thus  arisen,  that  he  may  come  forth  with  his  own  will  from  the 


133 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


things  which  are  extraneous,  and  may  enter  into  the  things  which  are  within.  Mighty  Adeptus 
Major,  you  will  assist  him  to  kneel  at  the  eastern  side  of  the  Altar,  while  we  on  our  part  turn  for  light 
and  assistance  to  the  Source  of  strength  and  light.  (This  is  done  accordingly,  and  the  Celebrants  also 
kneel  down,  facing  the  West,  where  there  is  the  Door  of  the  Rose.) 

THE  PRAYER  OF  THE  PORTAL 

Chief. 

0 Merciful  and  Divine  Mistress  of  the  Life  which  is  manifested  within,  Thou  hast  called  this 
man  and  our  brother,  who  in  the  secret  places  of  his  heart  has  heard  the  Word  of  Thy  summons,  and  we 
beseech  Thee  to  grant  him  the  gift  of  perseverance,  that  he  may  not  fall  in  the  trial  of  his  fortitude,  but 
may  keep  his  soul  in  patience  till  Thy  Word  shall  again  go  forth  full  of  power  and  salvation,  when  he 
shall  rise  in  his  renewal  at  Thy  bidding,  in  a true  resurrection,  and  shall  know  that  within  the  veils  of 
Judgment  and  Severity  there  is  the  High  Palace  of  Thy  Clemency,  where  he  shall  hail  Thee  by  a true 
name,  receiving  Light  from  the  Crown.  We  pray  Thee  also  to  have  mercy  upon  us,  even  as  upon  him 
whom  we  have  chosen  under  Thy  guidance,  our  beloved  Frater,  N.N.,  that  having  assumed  to 
ourselves  the  care  of  his  decreed  passage  through  the  Halls  of  Thy  Loving  Chastening,  we  may  restore 
him  gloriously  in  the  end,  to  the  honour  of  Thy  Holy  Name  and  his  everlasting  exaltation  in  Thee. 
Praise  unto  TABOONA  TABANU  through  the  years  and  the  ages,  even  unto  the  mystery  of  God. 
Amen.  (The  Celebrants  and  the  Candidate  rise  up.  The  Celebrants  resume  their  seats.  A seat  is  also 
given  to  the  Candidate  in  the  position  of  the  Third  Adept,  that  is,  by  the  door  of  the  Vault  in  the  5-6 
Grade,  on  the  northern  side  looking  westward. 

Second. 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  you  have  already  traversed  unto  our  auspices  many  paths  of 
experience  and  have  been  advanced  in  many  Grades  of  our  Mystery.  In  each  of  these  the  Candidate 
by  a voluntary  act  gives  himself  to  the  Order,  in  return  for  the  measure  of  illumination  which  it  then 
confers  upon  him.  You  have  crossed  long  ago  the  threshold  of  spiritual  knowledge,  but,  having  been 
still  far  from  the  goal,  you  have,  at  least  in  a certain  sense,  known  periods  of  drought  and  dryness;  yet 
you  have  ever  looked  for  those  better  things  which  come  in  the  land  of  the  Living.  All  Degrees, 
however,  end  in  expectation;  all  foreshadow  something  greater  than  themselves,  from  which  the 
Candidate  should  arise  to  an  experience  in  the  real  Order.  But  it  is  still  communicated  only  in  symbols, 
and  during  the  period  of  our  earthly  exile  the  Word  of  Life  is  never  spoken  with  the  lips.  This 
notwithstanding,  the  initiations  of  the  Mysteries  are  true  and  efficacious,  because  they  convey  in 
circumstantial  signs  and  tokens  the  living  end  of  Adeptship.  They  shadow  forth  the  secret  doctrine  of 
the  union;  and,  seeing  that  outside  time,  we  have  come  forth  from  God  Who  is  our  end;  seeing  that 
again  outside  time,  we  aspire  to  return,  the  pledges  of  our  reception  exact  a great  reticence,  not  only  in 
respect  of  the  accidentals  but  of  the  Essentials 


134 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


signified  by  our  progress  apart  from  those  things  which  here  exceed  expression.  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  when  the  Initiate  goes  out  into  the  world  he  takes  with  him  the  letters  only 
of  the  sacred  books.  The  Spirit  communicated  in  the  Temple  is  reserved  to  the  Temple.  The 
letter  alone  can  be  used  outside  the  Sanctuary.  It  is  night  always  outside  the  Lodge  of  the 
Adepts.  The  letter  also  is  used  within  the  Sanctuary,  but  there  is  the  sense  of  many  meanings 
behind  it,  even  as  by  the  arrangement  of  our  Lodges  something  is  assumed  that  has  preceded, 
while  our  fundamental  doctrines  are  set  forth,  for  those  who  can  grasp  them,  that  there  is 
something  also  which  comes  after.  Beloved  brother,  we  are  not  now,  at  least  substantially, 
with  the  Centre.  We  have,  in  a sense,  come  forth  therefrom,  and  in  the  end  we  shall  return 
thereto.  We  came  forth  naked  into  our  exile,  we  go  forth  naked  at  our  call.  We  must  also 
again  issue  naked  on  our  second  birth,  having  put  away  the  things  which  were  before.  We 
enter  into  a new  state  of  consciousness,  and  have  to  be  clothed  upon.  At  this  stage  of  your 
experience,  I beseech  you  to  remember  that  the  arch-natural  life,  sometimes  symbolised  in 
our  teaching  by  the  sign  of  the  Four  Elements  and  the  Grand  Quintessence,  lifts  up  and 
assumes  to  itself  the  life  which  is  in  the  midst  of  death  of  our  natural  humanity,  taking  it 
helpless  into  the  Sanctuary,  to  be  vivified  and  illuminated,  not  without  a certain  necessary 
violence,  by  an  act  of  force  and  will.  Remember  also,  that  no  initiation  or  advancement  can 
confer  the  Light  automatically,  but  they  do  confer  it  symbolically,  which  is  their  law  and 
their  order.  It  is  in  this  sense  only  that  the  Sanctuaries  of  the  Mysteries  signify  those  places 
in  which  there  is  a dispensation  of  the  Light  to  every  man  who  has  come  into  this  world.  It  is 
in  this  sense  that  these  places  are  worlds  of  transcension,  the  Penetralia  in  which  Plotinus 
found  the  identity  of  subject  and  object,  the  Temple  of  the  Ideal  Reality  which  is  concealed 
behind  appearances.  Finally,  it  is  in  this  sense  or  divested  of  all  that  seems,  however 
beautiful  and  elusive,  that  we  desire,  God  willing,  to  put  aside  all  veils  and  go  forth 
unclothed  as  we  came. 

These  are  intentionally  detached  thoughts  rather  than  an  ordered  thesis,  but  they 
serve  a particular  purpose  in  connection  with  the  secret  knowledge  which  is  communicated 
in  this  Grade.  They  will  remind  the  prepared  Postulant  of  much  which  his  personal 
reflections  must  have  undoubtedly  already  indicated,  that  outside  the  specific 
significance  of  the  express  symbolism  contained  in  the  successive  divisions  of  our  Mystery, 
the  whole  process  of  his  advancement  can  be  regarded  in  a synthetic  sense,  and  that  as 
such,  it  presents  in  a formal  summary  the  life  of  the  soul  of  man.  In  a word,  the  soul's 
legend  is  exhibited,  with  the  travels  and  metamorphoses  thereof.  A tabulation  of  this  kind 
can  be  set  forth  assuredly  after  more  than  one  manner,  nor  is  the  expression  of  a single 
phrase  exclusive  of  several  parallel  interpretations,  which  might  enter  into  the  general 
harmony;  but  that  which  most  naturally  coincides  with  the  Grades  of  our  Order,  so  far  as 
they  have  been  at  present  traversed,  can  be  stated  in  the  following  way. 

The  Ceremony  of  the  Neophyte  in  the  Outer  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  will,  on 
various  considerations,  remain  one  of  the  most  important  of  the  system,  because  it 
corresponds  to  the  first  enunciation  of  the  Spiritual  Light  in  the  void  of  the  universal 
darkness,  it  is  the  Fiat 


135 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Lux  of  a new  order,  moving  over  the  formless  waters.  That  Word  of  the  Mystery 
of  Illumination,  designed  ultimately  to  disperse  the  Mystery  of  Darkness  is  the  message  to 
an  unborn  soul,  and  thereto  the  influx  of  Light  makes  known  that  in  order  to  attain 
perfection  the  soul  must  assume  flesh.  What  is  signified  therefore  is  a remote  prenatal 
experience,  but  we  have  no  mystical  symbolism  to  speak  to  us  of  that  which  went  before  it. 
We  only  know  that  the  soul  had  already  come  forth  from  God,  and  in  respect  of  the 
Divine  Unity  was  therefore  in  a state  of  detachment,  or  that  it  was  necessary  for  its 
progress  to  become  attached  in  a state  of  environment,  yet  so  only,  that  it  might 
ultimately  set  aside  all  accidents  and  return  as  we  have  seen  into  Unity.  The  Second  Grade 
of  the  Outer  Order,  which  is  termed  that  of  Zelator,  is  concerned  with  a spiritual 
condition  apart  from  and  preceding  experience,  wherein  the  soul  is  formulating  the 
condition  of  the  work  by  the  quest  of  its  proper  agents,  or,  to  put  it  in  more  simple 
language,  the  soul  is  in  search  of  its  parents.  In  the  Grade  of  Theoricus  we  are  reminded  of 
the  Hermetic  philosophy  which  was  accustomed  to  instruct  its  disciples  that  it  was  useless  to 
go  in  search  of  the  practice  till  they  had  worked  out  a clear  theory.  The  soul,  after  a 
manner,  is  formulating  the  theory  of  the  work  outside  the  prime  condition  conceived  in  the 
Second  Degree.  It  has  so  far  worked  well  that  the  quest  is  ended;  it  has  found  its  parents  and 
the  process  of  generation  is  inaugurated.  By  an  act  of  its  own  will  the  soul  has  consented  to 
immersion  in  the  material,  and  has  passed  into  the  deep  sleep  of  gestation.  In  the  Grade  of 
Practicus  there  is  presented  symbolically  that  unseen  process  by  which  the  physical  body  is 
designed  and  the  building  of  the  house  begins. 

The  next  Grade  refers  to  the  building  of  the  house  in  beauty  to  become  the  Temple  of 
the  Living  Soul.  Though  it  is  termed  and  that  fitly  the  Degree  of  Philosophus,  its  entire 
process  is  of  an  automatic  kind,  for  the  great  experiment  is  continued  in  virtue  of  those  forces 
which  have  been  previously  set  in  motion. 

The  soul  has  renounced  the  remembrance  of  its  former  knowledge,  nor  has  it  gained 
the  wisdom  of  the  world,  but  that  notwithstanding,  it  has  deserved  to  be  classed  as  one  who 
is  friendly  thereto,  and  has  acted  in  consonance  with  its  ends.  We  come  now  to  that  Grade 
which  is  without  any  number  in  our  system.  In  its  more  remote  interpretation  it  signifies  the 
event  of  birth  into  natural  life,  for  the  attainment  of  which  the  soul  has  set  aside  all 
whatsoever  that  remained  of  its  first  prerogatives  and  has  at  the  same  time  drunk  of  the 
chalice  of  forgetfulness.  By  his  entrance  therein,  the  newly-born  man  has  ceased  to 
remember  the  past,  and  before  him  spreads  the  unknown  future,  even  as  those  who  in  the 
Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  enter  at  a given  season  within  the  experience  of  the  Portal  as 
recipients  who  at  least  by  the  hypothesis,  are  unaware  whether  there  is  anything  beyond  it, 
while  a certain  imputed  forgetfulness,  or  setting  aside,  is  symbolically  assured  by  the 
change  in  the  name  of  the  Member  who  has  passed  within  the  First  Circle  of  the  Fraternity 
by  the  ostensible  renunciation  of  his  earthly  titles.  Of  that  Portal  the  Philosophus  on  his 
admission  becomes  a Lord  indeed,  and  of  the  Paths  that  lead  thereto,  but  the  Vault  is  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Mystery,  and  of  our  Mystic  Founder  who,  being  dead,  yet  speaketh,  he  has 


136 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


never  consciously  heard  the  voice.  The  time  may  be  long  or  short,  but  it  comes  about 
in  due  season  that  they  who  have  entered  by  the  door,  or  those  at  least  who  have  not  at  this 
stage  suffered  the  calamity  of  abortment,  are  received  into  the  5-6  Grade,  in  which  the 
powers  of  life  are  manifested,  and  for  a period  which  is  for  symbolic  reasons  fixed  at  six 
years,  they  pass  through  the  varied  experiences  which  symbolise  material  existence.  Herein 
they  are  after  the  manner  of  men  whose  eyes  have  been  opened  recently;  they  behold  many 
things  in  a distorted  light  and  some  others  are  inverted.  They  are  to  a certain  extent  in  the 
wonder-state  of  childhood.  They  discern  things  of  the  occult  order  in  place  of  true  things 
which  are  mystic,  and  there  is  given  to  them  almost,  it  may  be,  of  necessity,  the  slight 
substitutes  of  magic  in  place  of  the  processes  which  belong  to  the  Greater  Mystery.  They 
make  for  themselves  baubles  and  playthings  from  patterns  which  have  indeed  their  higher 
significance,  but  this  has  not  been  communicated,  and  they  are  subjected  in  their  own 
degree  to  all  the  illusions  which  are  connected  with  the  astral  region  of  existence.  In  this 
Grade  also  they  make  strange  marriages  and  accept  the  phenomena  of  Theurgy  for  the  Path 
of  the  Union.  It  is  a period  for  the  exercise  of  divination,  for  the  telling  of  fortunes,  the 
study  of  Astrology,  the  placing  of  fantastic  constructions  on  Grades  and  Liturgies;  and  they 
believe  that  they  are  in  possession  of  great  and  secret  knowledge  if  in  some  strange  and 
reverse  direction  they  revolve  the  wheel  of  fortune.  But  it  is  not  after  this  manner  that 
Sapiens  dominabitur  astris. 

In  the  latter  dejections  of  such  a transitory  stage  some  of  them  drop  aside 
altogether,  while  others  remain  only,  with  an  artificial  and  automatic  concern  in  the  things 
of  their  spiritual  progress.  Others,  as  it  is  unnecessary  to  say,  are  never  wholly  deceived  by 
the  illusions  of  the  threshold,  or  satisfied  with  the  partial  lights  which  shine  beyond  it  to 
encourage  them  on  their  way.  They  have  their  own  tribulations,  but  they  have  no  cause  to 
fear  those  who  dwell  at  the  doorways,  as  they  have  no  inclination  to  mistake  the  false  gleam 
for  the  true  radiance  that  is  to  come.  They  will  be  led  after  many  manners  to  the  proper  use 
of  the  powers  of  life  in  the  search  for  the  Holy  Symbol  of  the  Lamb  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world,  of  that  Builder  buried  in  the  Tomb  of  his  own  creation.  In  dying 
that  man  may  live,  He  has  left  His  Life  and  Power  outside  the  place  of  His  interment,  that 
they  may  be  assumed  by  man  in  the  Great  Quest. 

It  is  only  when  the  Candidate  is  willing  to  restore  the  life  and  power  to  Him  Who  gave 
it,  that  equilibrium,  in  return,  is  bestowed  on  himself;  that  he  hears  the  Voice  of  the  Symbol, 
that  he  beholds  the  way  of  his  manifestation  from  the  Tomb.  It  will  be  understood  that  the 
conscious  realization  of  this  symbolism  at  the  stage  in  question  is  not  expressly  supposed, 
and,  as  said  previously,  the  quality  of  direction  varies;  but,  in  any  case,  the  time  arrives 
when  every  guided  member  of  the  5-6  Grade  begins  to  realise  that  the  sequence  of  Rites  in 
the  Order,  apart  from  the  Sephirotic  scheme,  supposes  that  beyond  the  Adeptus  Minor  there 
is  and  must  be  some  higher  stage  of  knowledge,  even  as  in  material  life,  for  all  thinking  men  a 
moment  also  comes,  when  they  realise,  however  dimly,  that  the  things  of  earth  are  not  the 
grand  totality.  It  is  the  symbolical  experience  of  this  other  side  of  the  existence 


137 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


which  the  6-5  Grade  offers  to  the  prepared  Postulant.  It  is  this  which  is  now  offered  to  you;  but 
before  we  proceed  further,  it  is  necessary  that  I should  ask  you  formally  whether  you  are  still  prepared 
to  continue  the  Rite  of  your  advancement,  and  to  undergo  the  severe  test  of  your  perseverance  and 
fortitude,  which  is  of  necessity  involved  therein.  If  so,  you  will  arise  and  signify  your  assent  by  the 
communication  of  the  LVX  signs  peculiar  to  the  5-6  Grade.  (The  Postulant  who  intends  to  go 
forward,  gives  the  signs  as  required,  rising  from  his  seat  for  the  purpose  and  then  again  resuming  it.) 

Chief. 

Beloved  brother,  the  Order  applauds  your  fortitude.  It  is  written  that  the  last  shall  be  first, 
and  the  Associate  Adeptus  Minor  does  not  differ  generically  from  the  Exempt  Adept.  Your  knowledge 
of  the  hierarchic  symbolism  which  characterises  the  Mysteries  will  have  shown  you  that  the 
Celebrants  of  every  Rite  are  either  one  or  three.  We  are  therefore  united  as  it  were,  in  a common  act, 
which  depends  in  part  on  us  and  in  part  on  you.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  you  have  been  addressed  in 
the  present  Ceremony  by  the  title  of  the  Third  Adept  in  the  procedure  of  the  5-6  Grade.  As  such,  I 
again  commit  you,  for  the  time  being  into  the  hands  of  the  Second  Celebrant.  (The  Chief  Adept 
resumes  his  seat.) 

Second. 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  I will  ask  you  to  approach  the  eastern  side  of  the  Altar.  (This  is 
done  accordingly,  and  the  Second  Adept  rises,  so  that  he  can  see  the  diagrams  on  the  Altar,  when  he 
explains  the  Path  of  Lamed.) 

Second. 

The  Portal  of  the  6-5  Grade  is  reached  as  in  previous  cases  by  symbolically  traversing 
certain  Paths  which  are  the  channels  of  communication  from  Sephira  to  Sephira  in  the  scheme  of  the 
Tree  of  Life.  Those  which  are  now  open  before  you  are  the  Paths  of  Lamed  and  Mem  by  which 
Geburah  is  attained  in  the  ascent  respectively  from  the  Grade  of  Adeptus  Minor  and  from  the  grade 
of  Practicus  in  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn.  All  true  Paths  are  however  the  Paths  of  the  Unity,  and 
those  who  have  been  received  into  the  Mysteries  know  that  man  returns  by  many  ways  whence  he 
came.  I will  ask  you  to  observe  here  that  as  in  the  Lirst  Order  the  Candidate  has  followed  the  Paths 
according  to  the  scheme  of  their  correspondence  with  the  body  of  the  Serpent  on  the  Tree  of  Life,  so 
in  the  Second  Order,  and  in  the  Grades  of  the  Portal  thereof,  he  follows  them  in  a direct  ascent.  The 
explanation  is  that  previously  to  birth,  the  Paths  of  Nature  in  growth  and  evolution  were  the  course 
of  man's  progress,  but  in  the  Degrees  after  birth  his  own  will  must  be  his  aid. 

The  letters  Lamed  and  Mem  are  both  of  importance  in  Qabalism,  and  they  correspond,  as  you 
already  know,  in  another  order  of  symbolism  to  the  1 1th  and  12th  Keys  of  the  Tarot  which  are 
depicted  in  these  diagrams  on  the  Altar. 


138 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


That  to  which  your  attention  is  especially  drawn  is  the  Key  of  Justice,  referable  to 
the  letter  Lamed,  whereto  many  attributions  are  given.  The  writers  of  the  Zohar  and  the  old 
scholiasts  thereon  dwell  upon  the  form  of  Lamed,  which  is  the  highest  of  all  the  letters;  they 
say  also  that  it  is  composite,  being  formulated  of  Vau  and  Kaph.  These  are  the  accidents  of 
their  subtlety;  but  you  should  know  that  its  dominion  is  in  the  hour  of  the  planet  Shabbathai 
or  Saturn,  because  from  Binah,  which  is  the  great  Sabbath,  the  rest  whereof  we  desire,  there  is 
an  influx  to  the  Path  of  Lamed,  through  the  Path  of  Geburah,  from  the  Sephira  Binah.  It 
further  denotes  the  Mystery  of  Equilibrium.  Now,  the  place  of  Geburah  can  be  withstood 
only  by  those  who  restrain  their  concupiscence,  because  it  is  the  Supernal  Tribunal,  and 
Geburah,  in  this  sense,  signifies  the  force  of  will,  as  Lamed  is  the  condition  of  equilibrium, 
which  represents  the  Portal  of  the  Mysteries.  The  ideas  which  have  been  thus  expressed  are 
found  differently  exhibited  by  another  order  of  symbolism  in  the  two  Pillars  which  stand  at 
the  western  angles  of  the  Altar,  bearing  respectively  a lighted  candle  and  a human  skull. 
With  the  conventional  attributions  of  light  in  the  mystical  order  and  the  obvious  lessons  to 
be  derived  from  the  disjecta  membra  of  humanity,  we  have  no  concern  here.  They  speak  too 
fully  for  themselves.  Of  that  death  which  encompasses  us  in  the  midst  of  ordinary  life  there 
is  however  little  realisation.  All  that  falls  short  of  the  mystic  end  falls  short  of  the  life  of  life, 
outside  of  which  we  are  still  in  the  sphere  of  simulacra.  You  have  heard,  0 brother,  how 
often,  of  a Light  which  shineth  in  the  Darkness,  and  that  the  Darkness  comprehendeth  it 
not.  The  Light  thus  referred  to  is  at  once  the  mystic  end  and  the  Life  of  Life.  It  is  that 
without  which  the  natural  man  is,  according  to  the  Qabalah,  complete  after  his  own  manner, 
possessing  by  the  communication  of  nature  an  understanding  qualified  to  protect  him  and 
minister  to  his  daily  wants.  But  as  such,  he  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  without  any  part 
in  Eternity,  and  he  reigns  simply  as  a leader  of  the  animal  world.  It  is  possible,  however, 
that  another  light  may  be  added  to  his  natural  condition,  by  the  desire  of  the  true  end  which 
is  set  before  all  beings,  and  of  the  life  which  is  beyond  all  life  of  the  apparent  order.  It  is 
then  that  he  is  made  ready  to  set  out  on  the  great  search,  when  the  higher  light  which  has 
now  entered  within  him  goes  also  before  him,  and  the  desire  of  the  Holy  House  is  enkindled 
in  his  heart.  In  this  manner  he  passes  under  the  judgments  and  severities  of  his  election, 
behind  which  is  the  concealed  love  that  shall  take  him  to  his  term.  For  as  the  natural  man  is 
impelled  by  a certain  elementary  justice  suited  to  his  condition,  so  there  is  a justice  which  is 
above,  working  in  the  souls  of  the  chosen  ones,  so  that  once  indeed,  they  shall  taste  death, 
that  they  may  pass  into  life  for  ever,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Faithful  Intelligence.  It  is 
not,  however,  through  the  Portal  of  Lamed  that  you  can  enter  into  the  Mysteries  which  are 
beyond  the  Grade  symbolizing  material  life.  The  contemplation  therein  and  the  Path  thereto 
belonging  is  a middle  state  between  life  and  death,  and  its  result  is  the  attainment  of  that 
which  we  term  symbolically  the  Path  of  Mem.  As  a remembrance  of  this  meditation  and  of 
the  place  which  it  occupies,  I now  set  you  between  the  two  Pillars,  bearing  respectively  the 
lighted  candle  as  a token  of  life,  and  the  skull  as  the  witness  of  mortality;  and  1 bid  you 
remember  the  dispassionate  equilibrium  which  is  poised  between  life  and  death,  and  I bid  you 
also  observe  that  the  Altar  in  this  Grade  is  cubical  and 


139 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


white,  to  show  that  before  you  can  discover  the  manifestation  in  concealment  of  the 
Rose,  the  Cross  of  the  manifestation  of  life  in  Tiphareth  must  reclose  its  arms  in  a state  of 
purity.  (The  Second  Adept,  having  led  the  Candidate  with  the  Sun,  to  the  western  end  of  the 
Altar,  returns  to  his  place.  The  Chief  Adept  rises  and  turns  inwards  towards  the  Altar, 
without  leaving  his  place.  The  Candidate  now  sees  the  diagram  of  the  Hanged  Man,  with  a 
Rainbow  above,  and  the  head  of  the  Giant  below.) 

Chief. 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  you  will  remember  that  the  letter  Mem  occupies  the 
middle  position  in  the  series  of  the  Three  Mothers.  It  is  said  in  the  school  of  the  Zohar  that  its 
open  operation  is  through  the  descent  of  its  influence  to  the  abyss,  and  thus  it  restrains  the 
rising  of  those  great  waters  by  which  the  earth  would  otherwise  again  be  inundated.  In  its 
closed  operation  it  restricts  the  power  of  judgment  from  the  downward  course  thereof.  It  is 
also  said  that  it  is  like  a vessel  which  in  turn  is  sealed  and  unsealed,  according  as  there  is 
inhibition  or  indulgence  of  its  influx  to  the  emanations  which  are  below.  In  our  own 
Rosicrucian  system  the  symbolism  of  Mem  is  developed  after  a peculiar  manner  in  its 
correspondence  with  the  12th  Key  of  the  Tarot.  With  the  more  general  import  of  the 
Hanged  Man  you  will  be  already  familiar;  but  in  this  Grade  you  are  invited  to  regard  it  after  a 
new  manner,  which  can  still  be  brought  into  harmony  with  the  previous  forms  of 
interpretation,  since  it  is  simply  an  advance  thereon.  The  enforced  sacrifice  and 
punishment,  the  involuntary  and  fatal  loss,  which  are  ascribed  to  it  in  our  Tarot  teaching, 
are  here  connected  with  the  Divine  death,  with  the  sacrifice  of  God  himself.  That  death 
connects  closely  with  the  true  meaning  attached  to  the  High  Ceremony  of  the  Dies  C., 
wherein  the  Chief  Adept  typifies  at  once  the  Founder  of  the  Rosicrucian  Order  and  the 
Founder  of  the  Universe.  Year  by  year  the  Order  is  withdrawn  for  one  moment  of  time  that 
it  may  be  again  formulated  out  of  chaos,  the  Builder  is  also  withdrawn  into  the  concealment 
of  the  Tomb,  as  you  are  told  in  the  Symbolism  of  the  5-6  Grade.  The  Maker  of  our 
Rosicrucian  Fraternity  was  taken  hence  that  Light  should  come  to  His  disciples,  and  the 
Maker  of  the  great  world  entered  into  another  concealment,  for  God  dies  in  order  that  man 
shall  live,  and  shall  not  only  seek  but  find  Him. 

The  symbolism  with  which  we  are  here  dealing  also  recalls  the  Apocalyptic  figure  of 
the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  in  correspondence  with  previous 
explanations,  it  indicates  that  the  palmary  misfortune  of  the  universe,  which  is  exoterically 
called  the  Fall  of  Man,  exercised  a species  of  incomprehensible  compulsion  upon  the 
Divine  Nature,  so  that  the  scheme  of  what  is  familiar  to  everyone  under  the  name  of 
redemption  comes  before  us  in  a certain  manner  as  an  eternal  necessity  and  as  a 
consequence  of  the  free  will  rather  of  man  than  of  God.  The  importance  which  has  been 
attached  throughout  the  Grades  of  our  two  Orders  to  Egyptian  symbolism  should  also 
remind  us  that  Mem,  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  has  analogy  with  the  legend  of  the 
dead  Osiris,  one  of  whose  appellations  was  the  shipwrecked  or  drowned  Mariner,  even  as 
this  terrible  Key,  which  you  see  now  in  its  true  form,  represents  a drowned  giant. 


140 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


The  23rd  Key  of  the  Tarot  is  referred,  as  you  are  aware,  to  the  Elemental  sign  of 
Water,  and  in  this  diagram  the  drowned  giant  is  depicted  reposing  on  the  rocky  bed  of  the 
ocean  with  the  rainbow  at  his  feet,  corresponding  to  that  which  has  been  sunk  below  the 
phenomenal  world  by  a sacrifice  eternally  preordained,  which,  in  one  of  its  aspects  at  least,  is 
the  necessary  limitation  suffered  by  the  Divine  Nature  in  the  act  of  becoming  manifest.  The 
Divine,  in  a word,  is  drowned  in  the  waters  of  natural  life;  and  that  which  in  this  respect 
obtains  in  the  external  world,  obtains  also  for  humanity,  wherein  the  Divine  Spark,  beyond 
all  plummets  of  the  sense,  all  reach  of  the  logical  understanding,  is  immersed  in  the  waters  of 
the  material  existence.  In  both  cases,  the  symbol  with  which  we  are  dealing  corresponds  to  the 
legend  of  our  Founder,  sleeping  in  the  centre  of  the  Tomb,  which  is  encircled  by  the 
Rainbow,  as  in  the  Sanctuary  of  Israel  there  was  the  abiding  Presence  of  the  Shekinah.  We 
must  remember,  moreover,  that  the  ocean  of  phenomenal  life  supports  on  its  surface  the 
mystical  Ark  of  Noah,  which,  in  one  of  its  aspects,  is  the  Vessel  of  Correspondences,  wherein 
the  types  of  all  things  were  collected  from  the  wreckage  of  the  old  initiations  for  transmission 
through  a new  era.  In  another  sense,  which  is  intimately  connected  with  the  first,  the  Ark  is 
the  body  of  man,  the  ship  of  humanity,  poised  on  the  waters  of  the  world  which  conceal  the 
divine  within  them.  It  is  man,  collective  and  individual,  man  in  possession  of  his  senses  and 
also  enclosed  by  his  senses.  There  is  that  within  him  which,  during  this  his  time  of  probation 
is  put  to  sleep  as  deeply  as  the  symbolical  Giant.  His  originally  great  nature  is  restricted  in  the 
body  after  the  manner  of  God  in  creation.  There  is  yet  another  aspect  in  which  we  may  regard 
the  Ark,  for  by  many  issues  the  great  symbols  open  upon  the  Infinite  which  they  show  forth, 
though  it  is  after  the  manner  of  a reversed  glass  minutely.  It  is  that  namely,  which  for  a time 
suspends  the  soul's  communication  with  the  external  that  she  may  receive  the  influx  of  the 
Divine.  It  is  the  house  of  deep  contemplation,  of  fixed,  well-directed  thought,  by  which  our 
exit  is  found  fora  time,  even  from  thought  itself,  to  the  world  of  true  experience.  The  ceremony 
of  the  6-5  Grade  symbolises  this  indrawn  state,  in  which  connection  I would  ask  you  to 
remember  that  in  the  roof  of  the  Ark  of  old  there  was  a window  through  which  the  Dove 
passed  and  repassed,  now  in  frustrated  flight,  because  many  wings  are  beaters  at  the  Golden 
Gates;  now  bearing  the  olive-branch  of  peace  which  for  us  signifies  the  suspension  of  the  life 
of  the  senses.  But,  in  fine,  there  came  an  hour  when  the  dove  returned  no  more,  because  the 
aspiration  and  outreaching  of  the  soul  at  length  attains  its  term.  Beloved  brother,  we  have 
dwelt  at  great  length  upon  the  import  of  certain  symbols,  for  albeit  the  work  of  detachment 
may  operate  scarcely  less  in  suspension  from  the  world,  yet  it  is  through  many  types  that  we 
pass  ultimately  behind  the  veils. 

I have  therefore  something  to  say  to  you  of  Mercury,  which  the  Alchemists  in  their 
secret  language,  tell  us  is  coagulated  by  its  interior  sulphur,  this  operation  being  the 
conjunction  of  their  Sun  and  Moon,  or  the  marriage  of  Adam  and  Eve.  Now,  this  can  be 
understood  mystically,  because  they  say  also  that  herein  is  the  union  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  by 
which  you  will  see  that  all  systems  of  symbolism,  however  apparently  divergent,  meet  in  the 
ultimate  identity  of  their  one  object.  It  is  affirmed  further  that  we  now  behold  Mercury  as  it 


141 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


exists  imprisoned  in  a body,  but  there  will  come  a day  when  we  shall  see  it  set  free 
from  its  present  limitations  and  manifested  as  a pure,  fixed,  intelligible,  constant  fire.  We 
know  otherwise  that  the  Mercury  described  by  the  philosophers  is  a fluidic  or  volatile 
substance,  and  that  to  fix  it  is  the  work  of  wisdom.  These  statements  are  rendered  readily 
intelligible  by  a mode  of  interpretation  which  is  peculiar  to  this  Grade,  for  which  Mercury 
signifies  thought.  It  is  in  fixity,  rest  and  simplicity  that  consciousness  exceeds  the  material 
bounds  which  encompass  it,  and  receives,  according  to  its  measure,  the  mode  of  the 
Universal.  There  is  here  set  forth  a certain  great  operation  of  the  will  which  does  not  die, 
the  concentration  of  thought  by  a high  act  of  intentness.  Remember  the  Apocalyptic 
promise  to  him  that  overcometh,  and  the  last  conquest  is  that  of  the  logical  understanding, 
so  that  thought  may  be  reduced  by  thought  to  the  point  at  which  it  vanishes  for  a period, 
but  returns  subsequently,  made  splendid  by  the  transmutation  of  a great  experience.  You 
know  that  the  natural  mind  of  man  is  earthly  above  all  things,  and  that  the  Path  of  our  ascent 
of  the  mystic  Mountain  must  carry  us  far  from  earth,  far  from  the  ways  and  forms  of  the 
material  mind.  You  know  further  that  ordinary  thought  is  wandering  and  volatile,  and  this  is 
the  Mercury  which  the  Adept  is  called  upon  to  fix.  I have  spoken  on  the  Authority  of  the 
Alchemists  concerning  our  imprisoned  and  liberated  Mercury;  which  are  also  the  forms  of 
thought,  one  of  them  errant  in  the  Material  and  confined  therein,  the  other  emancipated;  the 
one  volatile,  the  other  fixed  by  wisdom.  Their  correspondences  in  Egyptian  symbolism  are 
AN  U BIS,  the  Guardian  of  the  Egyptian  Tomb  and  preventing  entrance  therein,  the  Mystic 
Tomb  being  the  Gate  of  Life;  and  THOTH,  who  enables  man  finally  to  penetrate  therein. 
This  is  the  Word  which  is  sought  in  all  initiations,  which  is  reversed  and  transliterated,  is 
substituted  after  all  manners,  to  be  recovered  finally  in  the  vestures  of  another  sense,  as  it 
is  said  by  St.  Paul:  We  shall  not  all  die,  but  we  shall  be  changed,  in  a moment,  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye.  It  is  in  the  silence  of  thought  that  we  shall  hear  the  Word  of  Life.  The 
Absolute  exceeds  thought,  but  in  a certain  suspension  it  enters  to  fill  the  heart,  and  it  is  in 
this  way  that  God  is  truly  with  us. 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  I now  ask  you  to  remember  that  the  dead  Gods  are 
useless,  whether  Christ  or  Osiris.  If  the  Titan  immersed  beneath  the  great  waters  can  never 
more  waken,  there  is  no  need  that  we  should  have  part  in  Him,  for  we  are  seeking  the  fuller 
life,  that  truth  and  beauty  which  are  ever  ancient  yet  ever  new.  But  even  as  in  the  old  legend 
the  communication  of  a Grand  Hailing  Sign  awakened  the  Princess  from  a sleep  of  one 
hundred  years,  so  is  the  slumber  of  the  gods  precious  to  the  soul  of  the  Postulant  at  the  Gate  of 
the  Holy  of  Holies,  because  of  that  Centre  wherein  is  the  utter  stillness  of  a great  activity. 
They  are  not  dead  but  sleeping;  it  is  for  us  to  manifest  them  without  by  the  penetration  of 
the  Centre,  and  it  is  in  this  way  that  the  Divine  will  awaken  within  us.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  the  limbs  of  the  Titan  correspond  in  their  posture  to  a form  of  the  Fylfot  Cross,  for 
though  he  appears  to  be  dead  and  has  suffered  a real  death,  he  is  yet  the  source  of  life  and 
activity  in  the  universe;  for  this  reason  also  the  direction  of  the  face  of  the  Titan  symbolises 
the  appeal  of  God  to  man.  (The  Chief  Adept  turns  to  the  East  and  points  to  the  door  of  the 
Tomb,  whereon  is  the  symbol  of  Mercury.) 


142 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Chief. 

Beloved  Brother,  we  are  all,  in  fine,  called  back  to  the  House  of  the  Father;  fear 
not,  therefore,  those  waters  that  intervene,  though  they  are  cold  to  the  simple  senses.  It  is 
such  an  ordeal  that  is  foreshadowed  in  the  experiences  of  the  Mystical  Death  through  which 
you  have  now  to  pass,  after  the  manner  of  the  great  Masters  who  have  preceded  us.  The  death 
of  the  man  is  the  path  to  the  resurrection  of  the  God.  Like  our  traditional  Founder,  you 
must  be  buried  with  the  Light  in  a Mystical  Death,  which  is  necessary  before  we  can  rise 
again  in  a Mystical  Resurrection.  Remember  that  if  you  be  crucified  with  Christ,  you  shall 
also  reign  with  Him.  This  is  the  folly  of  the  Cross,  which  is  a scandal  to  the  wise  of  the 
world.  I will  ask  you  to  note  in  conclusion  that  you  entered  the  Vault  of  Life  in  the  5-6  Grade 
by  the  Gate  of  Venus,  but  you  stand  now  at  the  threshold  of  the  Gate  of  Mercury,  by  which 
you  will  enter  the  Tomb  of  the  Mystic  Death. 

As  in  the  Scale  of  the  King,  the  spectrum  opens  at  the  green  band,  so  in  that  of  the 
Queen,  which  is  the  Scale  of  Winter,  of  Night,  and  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  it  divides 
between  the  violet  and  the  red.  Mercury  is  therefore  in  this  Scale  a reddish-violet,  which  is 
the  colour  of  the  door  before  you.  The  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  Life  is  in  NETZACH,  but  the 
Portal  of  the  Tomb  of  Mortality  and  of  the  Path  of  MEM  is  in  HOD.  It  may  also  be  noted 
that  the  Door  of  the  Tomb  of  Mortality  is  in  its  lower  aspect,  that  Argus  of  the  hundred 
eyes  whom  Hermes  slew,  in  order  that  10.  whom  some  have  identified  with  ISIS,  might  be 
released  from  her  imprisonment  in  the  form  of  a heifer.  (There  is  a short  pause.) 

Chief. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  you  have  my  permission  to  open  the  Gate  of  the  Tomb,  and 
may  God  lead  us  all  into  everlasting  Life. 

Second. 

Amen,  Brother.  May  God  be  ever  with  us,  and  His  Peace  with  thy  Spirit. 

(The  Tomb  is  then  opened,  and  there  is  discovered  within  it  a plain  coffin  of 
ebony,  having  an  inscription  of  silver  on  the  lid,  being  the  sacramental  name  of  the 
Candidate.  A single  taper  burns  at  the  head  of  the  sarcophagus.  The  Second  Adept  leads  the 
Candidate  to  the  East  of  the  Altar,  and  thence  the  two  Celebrants  take  him  across  the 
threshold,  as  one  that  is  not  able  yet  to  walk  alone.  They  pause  at  the  Door  of  the  Vault.) 

Chief. 

The  one  light  that  burns  before  you  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  Tomb  signifies 
meditation  concentrated  into  a single  point.  Here  is  the  hour  and  here  the  place  thereof.  The 
Pastos  of  the  Celebrant  in  Chief  in  the  5-6  Grade  is  of  many  colours,  to  indicate  the 
beauties  of  creation  manifested  by  the  sacrifice  of  God.  It  is  the  covenant  of  the  Divine 
with  the  Universe  which  has  issued  from  the  Will  of  the  Divine.  But  this  coffin  is  black,  to 
signify  the  inbreathing  and  abeyance  of  material  life.  Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  it  is  given 
unto  every 


143 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


man  once  to  die  and  after  that  the  Judgment.  But  that  which  in  the  things  which  are 
above  is  manifested  as  Divine  Love  in  Justice  among  the  things  which  are  below.  Death, 
properly  understood,  is  the  examination,  in  fine,  of  the  Candidate,  prior  to  his  admission 
within  the  Hall  of  the  Greater  Mysteries.  The  Portal  to  the  Centre  is  through  the  Gate  of 
the  Tomb,  and  there  is  no  other  way  opened  to  man  whereby  he  can  enter  into  his  rest.  The 
Mystical  Death,  however,  does  not  regard  the  dissolution  of  the  bodily  part,  but  is  that 
which  the  Qabalists  term  the  Mors  Osculi.  The  concern  thereof  is  to  put  away  the  earthly 
substance  of  the  mind,  that  whatsoever  is  imperishable  within  us  may  be  joined  with  that 
which  does  not  pass  in  the  Universe,  with  those  things  great  and  high  which  have  their 
sphere  of  operation  above  the  trammels  of  the  senses.  It  is  necessary  on  this  account  that 
you  should  be  unclothed  of  all  insignia  because  naked  we  came  into  the  world.  Purity 
alone,  symbolised  by  your  white  robe,  can  accompany  your  entrance  into  the  Tomb.  (The 
Candidate  is  stripped  of  his  vestments,  excepting  the  white  robe,  and  led  to  the  northern 
side  of  the  Tomb,  and  there  left.  The  Celebrant  in  Chief  takes  up  his  position  behind  the 
taper  at  the  head  of  the  coffin,  and  the  Second  Celebrant  in  the  south,  facing  the  Candidate. 
The  lid  of  the  coffin  is  removed.) 


Second. 

It  is  time  now  that  we  take  up  scrip  and  wallet,  and  enter  into  the  Mystery  of 

Death. 

Chief. 

If  it  were  not  for  cool,  restful  and  wholesome  death,  we  should  never  have  part  in 

the  Resurrection. 

Second. 

It  is  the  call  of  every  man  ultimately  to  stand  alone,  that  is  to  say,  independently  of 

his  kind. 

Chief. 

But  when  a man  is  alone  so  far  as  the  world  is  concerned,  he  is  the  nearer  to  the 

Presence  of  God. 

Second. 

Herein  is  the  Divine  help  which  always  remains  with  us,  in  the  equipoise  of  faculties, 
the  adjustment  of  the  powers  of  the  mind,  and  the  coordination  of  the  soul's  phases,  which 
is  the  condition  of  Eternal  Life. 

Chief. 

Beloved  Brother,  we  also  have  slept  in  the  deep  sea  of  the  senses;  we  have  paid  the  price 
of  our  exile.  (The  Celebrant  in  Chief  joins  the  Second  Celebrant  in  the  South,  and  they 
proceed  again  to  take  up  their  places  on  either  side  of  the  Candidate,  whom  they  assist  to 
enter  the  coffin  and  dispose  therein.  This  being  done,  the  Celebrant  in  Chief  says:) 


144 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Chief. 

There  are  many  witnesses  and  above  them  are  the  High  and  Holy  Wardens,  whose 
unfailing  care  will  watch  over  you  during  your  ensuing  solemn  vigil  of  six  hours.  By  the  will 
and  testament  of  the  Mysteries,  we  bequeath  you  to  the  sacred  shadows,  that  through  a 
final  passage  you  may  be  brought  forth  from  the  things  which  pass  to  those  which  alone 
remain.  (The  two  Celebrants  proceed  with  the  Sun  to  the  western  end  of  the  Tomb,  here 
they  pause,  facing  the  coffin.) 

Chief. 

By  the  power  to  me  committed,  I pray  and  beseech  the  Father  of  graces  and  the 
Auxiliaries  of  the  Divine  Will  to  pour  down  upon  you,  our  brother,  the  living  power  of  the 
Word  and  the  illumination  thereof. 

Second. 

Beatus  in  conspectu  domini  mors  sanctorum  ejus. 

(The  Celebrants  leave  the  Tomb  and  the  Portal  is  closed,  but  is  not  made  fast  at 
this  point.  During  the  period  which  follows,  the  utmost  possible  silence  is  preserved 
throughout,  with  the  exception  of  the  Watchwords  of  the  Night,  which  are  uttered 
solemnly  but  in  a subdued  voice.  The  vestibule  is  put  into  the  charge  of  two  Wardens,  who 
must  he  Fratres  or  Sorores  of  the  6-5  Grade,  according  as  the  candidate  is  either  male  or 
female.  In  the  former  case,  it  is  not  of  obligation  that  they  should  be  Celebrants  of  the  Rite. 
Their  ceremonial  duty  is  to  strike  the  hours  and  the  quarters  on  a muffled  gong  and  to 
exchange  the  prescribed  Watchwords.  The  care  of  the  Candidate  is  also  in  their  hands,  so 
that  communication  can  be  established  with  him  or  her  in  case  of  illness  or  other  necessity, 
when  the  Rite  is  for  the  time  being  suspended,  and  the  Portal  thrown  open.  Should  such  a 
condition  supervene  that  the  Vigil  cannot  be  resumed  by  the  Candidate,  an  implied 
dispensation  comes  automatically  into  force,  and  the  Rule  of  Silence  is  finally  abrogated. 
In  the  case  of  temporary  illness  it  is  abrogated  if  required,  but  for  the  time  being  only. 
Under  normal  circumstances  the  Vestibule  is  silently  prepared  for  the  Third  Point,  at  a 
suitable  period,  prior  to  the  expiration  of  the  alloted  six  hours.) 


145 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


SECOND  POINT 

THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  HOLY  WATCH 

The  Office  of  the  Vigil  may  be  performed  by  either  Warden,  or  may  be  taken  in 
turn,  and  this  refers  especially  to  the  celebrants  if  the  observance  is  under  their  charge, 
seeing  that  the  preparation  of  the  chamber  for  the  next  Point  will  involve  periods  of 
interruption.  The  Watchwords  of  the  Vigil  follow  an  ordered  sequence,  which  should 
be  maintained  in  recital.  The  utterances  come  immediately  after  the  striking  of  the 
hours  and  quarters. 

THE  FIRST  WATCHWORD 

He  who  would  be  master  in  Israel  must  watch  more  than  one  hour,  but  hereof  is  the 
soul's  vigil. 

THE  SECOND  WATCHWORD 

The  day  for  work  and  the  night  for  contemplation,  but  out  of  this  union  cometh  the 
Great  Work. 

THE  THIRD  WATCHWORD 

It  is  written  that  He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep,  and  herein  is  a great  mystery. 

THE  FOURTH  WATCHWORD 

"The  sleep  of  thought  is  obtained  on  the  threshold  of  ecstasy,  but  the  sleep  of  death  is 
the  Shadow  of  the  Eternal  Sabbath. 

THE  FIFTH  WATCHWORD 

He  who  puts  aside  the  folds  of  the  senses  by  a great  act  of  the  will,  shall,  as  one  born  out 
of  due  time,  receive  in  a high  symbolism  the  first  fruits  of  the  resurrection. 

THE  SIXTH  WATCHWORD 

It  is  not  from  man  to  man  that  the  great  gifts  are  communicated,  for  that  which  he 
can  give  to  another  is  that  only  which  a man  can  spare  from  himself.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that,  after  solidarity  and  brotherhood,  each  of  us  stands  alone. 

THE  SEVENTH  WATCHWORD 

It  is  in  losing  that  which  the  outward  man  holds  most  desirable  and  precious  that 
the  spiritual  man,  after  many  days,  shall  find  himself. 


146 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


THE  EIGHTH  WATCHWORD 

The  natural  man  is  complete  in  his  own  degree,  but  above  this  there  is  the  sacred 
Temple.  THE  NINTH  WATCHWORD 

From  the  Natural  life  of  man  there  extends  a certain  narrow  path  to  the  Crown,  and 
this  is  called  Magnanimity. 


THE  TENTH  WATCHWORD 

If  the  Pillar  of  Mercy  were  separated  from  that  of  Judgment,  the  Vault  of  the 
Temple  would  fall. 


THE  ELEVENTH  WATCHWORD 

The  stability  and  equipoise  of  the  universe  are  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Lord 
manifested.  THE  TWELFTH  WATCHWORD 

A man  deviates  from  the  way  of  nature,  and 
thereby  he  enters  into  judgment.  THE  THIRTEENTH 
WATCHWORD 

It  may  so  befall  that  a man  comes  back  under  the  obedience  of  nature,  and 
afterwards  again  deviates,  but  this  time  it  is  to  enter  within  the  sphere  of  Mercury. 

THE  FOURTEENTH  WATCHWORD  Beyond  those 
gates  shall  no  man  go,  except  by  the  call  of  knowledge.  THE 

FIFTEENTH  WATCHWORD 

Blessed  and  Holy  is  he  who  shall  enter  into  real  Knowledge;  Wisdom  and 
Understanding  meet  to  pour  their  influx  upon  him. 

THE  SIXTEENTH  WATCHWORD 

The  Supernal  Triad  would  never  manifest  without  us,  were  it  not  for  the  Triad 
within  THE  SEVENTEENTH  WATCHWORD 

The  Holy  Mysteries  do  ever  recall  us  to  the  one  way  which  has  been  known  and 
declared  from  of  old. 


147 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  EIGHTEENTH  WATCHWORD 

Many  lights  show  forth  the  Father  of  Lights,  and  the  darkness  testifies  concerning  Him. 

THE  NINETEENTH  WATCHWORD 

We  confess  that  we  have  aspired  to  the  Crown,  seeing  that  we  are  King’s  sons,  and  we  look 
for  the  Glory  of  God,  when  it  shall  be  made  manifest. 

THE  TWENTIETH  WATCHWORD 

In  six  days  of  his  life  is  material  man  completed,  and  thereafter  cometh  a Jubilee. 

THE  TWENTY-FIRST  WATCHWORD 

The  secret  of  death  is  analogous  to  the  secret  of  birth,  and  in  his  resurrection  is  man 
reborn. 


THE  TWENTY-SECOND  WATCHWORD 

We  desire  to  put  off  mortality  and  to  be  clothed  again  in  God. 

THE  TWENTY-THIRD  WATCHWORD 

Man  entereth  into  his  true  self  as  a priest  into  the  Holy  Place. 

THE  TWENTY-FOURTH  WATCHWORD 

It  is  made  known  that  the  Light  of  the  soul  is  even  as  the  Light  of  the  Throne:  let  us 
therefore  look  up,  for  our  salvation  draweth  near. 

HERE  ENDETH  THE  SECOND  POINT 
ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  HALL  FOR  THE  THIRD  POINT 

The  necessary  changes  in  the  furniture  and  the  vestments  of  the  Officers  are  to  be 
carried  out  as  silently  as  possible  towards  the  close  of  the  Vigil  of  the  Holy  Watch  in  the 
Second  Point. 

'The  Hall  reps  esents  a chamber  in  the  centre  of  the  earth.  In  the  north-west  is  the  door 
of  the  chamber,  bearing  the  symbol  of  a five-petalled  Rose,  which  should  be  luminous. 
Within  the  chamber  a priestess  sits,  representing  the  Virgin  Mother,  surrounded  by  incense, 
bread,  honey,  flowers,  a chalice  of  milk,  and  wine.  A couch  with  painted  lions  on  either  side  of 
it  is  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  in  place  of  the  Altar,  which  is  moved  away. 

The  Officers  required  for  the  Third  Point  are: 


148 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


The  Celebrant  in  Chief. 

The  Second  Adept. 

The  Usher  of  the  Rite. 

The  Priestess  (as  Nut)  within  the  Shrine. 

Two  other  Priestesses. 

The  priests  and  priestesses  are  clothed  in  white.  The  purification  of  the  vessels  and 
Shrine  takes  place  before  the  beginning  of  the  Third  Point. 

THE  THIRD  POINT 
THE  CEREMONY  OF  THE  S.O.S. 

When  the  hour  of  twelve,  midnight,  has  at  length  been  sounded  on  the  gong,  which  in 
this  case  may  be  unmuffled,  and  struck  with  a certain  resonance,  the  two  Celebrants  of  the 
Rite  set  open  the  Door  of  the  Tomb,  enter  therein,  and  take  up  their  places  south  and  north 
of  the  ebony  coffin,  where  they  stand  facing  each  other.  The  condition  of  the  Candidate  is 
observed,  and  any  necessary  assistance  is  given  him. 

Chief. 

The  watches  of  sleep  are  long,  but  it  is  time  now  to  awaken. 

Second. 

Think  you  these  bones  shall  live? 


rise. 


Chief. 

The  Word  of  the  Lord  shall  pass  over  the  wastes  of  life,  and  he  that  was  dead  shall 

Second. 

Expecting,  we  have  expected  the  Lord. 


Chief. 

It  is  defined  by  the  wise  Masters  that  Mercury  kills  and  makes  alive. 

Second. 

Therefore  the  Degree  of  that  Death  which  is  entered  through  the  Door  of  Mercury  is 
of  Death,  symbolically  regarded.  The  priests,  princes  and  philosophers  of  Israel  say  that  the 
recession  of  death  is  not  otherwise  than  the  transit  from  one  world  and  one  system  to 
another.  If  this  is  true  in  the  descent  from  Sephira  to  Sephira,  it  is  true  also  in  the  recession 
from  sphere  to  sphere  on  the  return  to  the  Centre. 

Chief. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  that  Centre? 


149 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Second. 

It  is  the  middle  point  of  the  Universe,  wherein  the  Mystery  of  Life  is  assumed  into 
the  Higher  Mystery  of  the  Life  of  Life. 

Chief. 

By  what  Path  is  it  reached? 

Second. 

Through  the  Path  in  the  Portal  of  the  Tomb  of  Mortality,  and  thereafter  through  the 

Shadow  of  Death. 

Chief. 

What  is  the  Mystery  of  the  Centre? 

Second. 

It  is  written  that  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  hath  ear  heard,  nor  hath  it  entered  into  the 
heart  of  man  to  conceive  what  God  hath  prepared  for  those  who  love  Him. 

Chief. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  by  the  power  to  me  committed  I call  upon  you  here  and  now 
to  communicate  the  outward  words  of  the  Mystery. 

Second. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  the  Mystery  of  the  Life  of  Life  is  communicated  in  the 
Glorious  Mysteries  of  Resurrection  from  Death. 

Chief. 

How  can  we  impart  to  another  that  which  cannot  be  discerned  by  the  senses  or 
realised  by  the  inmost  heart? 

Second. 

It  is  not  given  us  to  express  these  Mysteries  except  by  a substituted  symbol. 

Chief. 

In  the  Name  and  Power  of  that  substituted  symbol,  (he  stoops  and  seals  the  Candidate 
on  the  forehead):  by  the  love  of  brethren,  strong  as  life  and  stronger  than  death,  (he  seals  the 
Candidate  on  the  breast):  and  by  the  Cross  whcih  overcomes  death,  (he  seals  the  Candidate 
on  both  shoulders):  I say  unto  you:  Arise  and  come  forth. 

(The  Candidate  is  raised  from  the  coffin.  The  Sign  of  Silence  is  indicated  by  both 
Celebrants,  as  the  reservation  of  his  speech  is  necessary  until  his  mouth  has  been  opened 
ceremonially  in  this  Point.  He  is  given  a seat  in  the  Tomb,  and  sacramental  bread  and  wine 
are  offered  for  his  refreshment.  He  is  then  led  to  the  western  end,  where  he  stands  between 
the  Celebrants,  facing  the  Door  of  the  Tomb.) 


150 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Chief. 

Blessed  is  he  who  has  entered  into  the  place  of  the  Darkness,  and  out  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death  comes  forth  alive. 

Second. 

It  is  written  that  the  Eternal  Fount  of  Love  is  found  in  Geburah,  though  this  is  also 

the  place  of  Judgment. 

Chief. 

Let  us  pass  quickly  from  this  place  of  the  shadows,  because  faithful  witnesses 
have  testified  that  there  is  true  Light  beyond.  (The  Candidate  is  brought  out  of  the  Tomb, 
and  is  taken  past  the  couch  of  the  S.O.S.  to  the  Door  of  the  Shrine  of  the  West.  The  Chief 
Adept  says:) 

Chief. 

Let  the  Postulant  kneel  and  make  obeisance  to  the  Rose,  touching  the  earth  with 
his  forehead.  (This  is  done  accordingly.) 

THE  RITUAL  OF  THE  S.O.S. 

The  Candidate  is  raised  to  his  feet  and  the  Second  Adept  touches  his  mouth  with 
the  Adie,  as  the  Shrine  of  Osiris  surmounted  by  the  image  of  Anubis  as  a jackal  is  carried 
round  in  solemn  procession. 


Chief. 

Hail,  Osiris,  Chief  of  Amentet,  Lord  of  Immortals,  stretching  out  unto  the 
uttermost  regions  of  space,  Lord  of  the  prayers  of  the  faithful.  Chief  among  the  mighty!  Hail, 
Anubis,  Dweller  in  the  Tomb,  Great  Chief  in  the  Holy  Dwelling!  Grant  that  the  dead  may  live: 
grant  that  in  life  we  may  know  God.  (The  shoulder  and  heart  are  laid  at  the  feet  of  the 
Candidate  by  the  Second  Adept  and  the  Usher  of  the  Rite.) 

Chief. 

i hey  have  brought  thee  the  sacrifice  as  the  eye  of  Horus.  They  have  brought  thee 
the  heart  of  Horus.  The  sacrifice  is  complete:  let  none  resist  the  will  of  the  Cods.  Behold, 
Horus  (indicating  the  Second  Adept)  has  overcome  that  which  would  devour  thee!  Behold, 
Horus  is  the  Spirit,  the  Holy  Son,  Redeemer  of  the  soul,  the  Holy  Father,  Osiris.  (Second 
A.  Holds  shoulder  of  sacrifice  to  mouth  of  Candidate.) 

Chief. 

I am  thy  Spirit,  thy  Son,  Horus:  I speak  to  thy  soul,  Osiris.  I have  touched  thy  mouth: 
the  Spirit  of  the  Divine  Ones  loveth  thy  soul.  (The  Priestesses  beat  their  breasts,  and  say 
wailingly,)  Woe!  O Woe!  We  cry  aloud  for  those  are  in  chains. 


151 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Chief. 

Take  now,  Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  the  ram-headed  Wand  and  set  free  the  voice  . 

. .(Done.) 

Chief. 

Take  thou  the  Ram-headed  Wand  and  liberate  the  sight  of  . . .(Done.  The  Priestesses 
wail  again.)  Woe!  Woe!  This  gan  (woman)  is  in  chains,  he  (she)  cannot  free  himself 
(herself)  from  the  bonds.  (The  Candidate  is  laid  upon  a lion-headed  couch,  his  head 
being  toward  the  north,  and  his  feet  to  the  south.  One  Priestess  is  at  the  head  and  another  at 
the  foot.  The  Usher  walks  round,  sprinkling  water  freely  with  papyrus  grass  in  the  four 
quarters.) 

Chief. 

O Osiris,  all  that  is  hateful  in... has  been  brought  unto  Thee,  and  all  the  evil  letters 
that  are  in  the  name  of.  . .(give  name).  0 Thoth!  Come!  Come!  Take  these  evil  letters  in 
the  hollow  of  thine  hand  and  lay  them  at  the  feet  of  Osiris,  (repeat  four  times).  0 Thoth,  lay 
the  evil  that  is  in  the  heart  of  (give  name)  at  the  feet  of  Osiris.  (Repeat  four  time.  The 
Usher  takes  incense  and  burns  it  at  the  four  quarters.) 

Chief. 

Behold,  the  God  of  Creation,  the  God  who  forms  and  moulds  thy  limbs,  dwelleth 
in  thy  heart.  He  is  thy  aspiration,  and  thy  aspiration  gives  thee  protection  in  this  day.  (The 
Usher  of  the  rite  pours  out  water,  and  burns  incense  in  front  of  the  Candidate.) 

Usher. 

O (gives  name),  1 have  given  thee  the  essence  of  the  eye  of  Horus,  the  illuminating 
power  of  the  Spirit:  thy  face  is  filled  therewith,  and  the  perfume  thereof  spreadeth  over 
thee.  (The  Usher  lays  oil  on  the  lips.) 

Usher. 

Receive  the  crystal  unguent,  the  scent  of  Holy  Places.  (The  Usher  pours  out  water 
mixed  with  soda,  and  lays  it  between  the  brows.)  Thou  art  pure  like  Horus,  thou  art  pure 
like  Set,  the  Hawks  of  the  North  and  the  South.  (He  brings  the  Black  Wand  and  places  it  to 
the  lips  of  the  Candidate.) 

Chief. 

Hail!  Holy  One!  The  Twin  Hawks  have  opened  thy  mouth,  and  henceforth  thou 
shalt  have  speech  in  Heaven,  in  Earth  and  in  the  Rose.  The  eye  of  Horus  has  been  given  to 
thee.  Drink  the  milk  of  thy  Heavenly  Mother.  (The  Usher  gives  him  a small  vessel  of 
milk,  and  the  Candidate  drinks.  This  is  repeated  with  another  small  vessel  of  milk 
given  by  the  Second  Adept.  The  Candidate  rises  to  his  feet.) 


152 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Chief. 

Holy  is  the  spot  that  the  purified  child  of  man  has  reached.  It  is  the  spot  in  which  he 
(she)  shall  become  the  Child  of  Heaven.  (Pause.)  Let  the  Candidate  be  bound  with  the  five- 
fold bandage  of  Osiris,  that  he  may  utter  the  five-fold  dedication.  (Two  Priests  bring  a 
bandage,  5 yards  long,  and  tie  it  round  the  Candidate's  left  foot.  It  is  coiled  round  his  feet, 
and  the  Chief  Adept  prompts  him  to  say:) 

Chief. 

(At  the  first  coiling.)  I dedicate  my  feet  to  the  Paths  of  Ra.  (It  is  coiled  round  his 

legs.) 

Chief. 

(Prompts  at  the  second  coiling.)  I dedicate  my  life  to  the  Mother  of  God.  (It  is 

bound  about  the  heart.) 

Chief. 

(Prompts  at  the  third  coiling.)  I dedicate  my  heart  to  the  Divine  Rapture.  (It  is 

coiled  about  the  neck.) 

Chief. 

(Prompts  at  the  fourth  coiling.)  I dedicate  my  mind  to  the  Great  Quest.  (It  is  bound 

about  the  head.) 

Chief. 

(Prompts  at  the  fifth  coiling.)  I dedicate  myself  to  that  Mighty  Star  in  Heaven, 
which  contains  all  I was,  or  am,  or  shall  be.  Let  me  know  myself  one  with  God,  and  before  I 
utter  the  mysteries,  or  suffer  them  to  be  profaned,  may  my  lips  wither.  (The  Candidate  is  laid 
on  the  lion-couch.  The  Priestesses  at  the  head  and  foot  alternately  chant  softly  in  soothing 
whispers:) 


Priestess. 

Child  of  Light,  come  forth! 

Star-body  of  the  dying  form,  come 
forth!  Child  of  Light,  enter  in  at  the  closed 
gates.  Star-body  of  the  dying  form,  thy  life  is 
sure.  The  Key  of  the  Door  is  within  you, 

The  Way  of  Truth  is  within  reach  of  thine 
hand.  Behold,  the  Door  is  before  you. 

Enter,  enter,  be  not  afraid. 

(This  speech  is  recited  thrice.  The  Priestess  in  the  inner  chamber  speaks,  formulating 
the  Star-body  of  the  Candidate  before  her,  and  taking  the  form  of  the  goddess.) 


153 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Priestess. 

I am  the  Veiled  One.  No  mortal  may  see  my  face  and  live,  but  the  Star-body  may  enter 
the  place  of  mystery.  Child  of  Light,  1 welcome  thee.  (The  Priestesses  without  continue  to 
murmur  alternately:) 


Priestess. 

Behold,  the  Door  is  before 
thee,  Enter,  enter,  be  not  afraid. 

Second. 

(In  a leopard  skin.)  1 am  He  Who  cometh  in  triumph.  I am  He  Who  maketh  His  way 
through  the  Rose;  I shine  forth  as  the  Lord  of  Life,  the  Glorious  Lord  of  Day. 

Chief. 

(Speaking  for  the  Candidate.)  0 Silent  Place  of  the  Mysteries,  which  is  within  her 
sister  who  createth  shapes,  even  as  the  God  of  Creation,  open  to  me  the  sealed  chamber; 
grant  that  1 may  manifest  as  the  sun,  even  as  the  head  of  Dazzling  Radiance,  that  I may  shine 
in  the  sealed  chamber;  that  1 may  rise  unclouded  as  Ra  in  the  Gate  of  the  double  Cavern;  that  1 
may  burn  in  the  presence  of  the  Great  God,  even  in  the  presence  of  that  Divine  Light  which 
inhabiteth  Eternity. 


Second. 

(Speaking  as  Horus.)  1 travel  upon  the  sky.  I adore  the  radiance  which  illuminates 
mine  eyes.  I fly  to  behold  the  splendours  of  the  Shining  Ones  in  the  presence  of  Ra;  yea,  1 
am  transformed  as  Ra,  giving  life  to  all  initiates  when  he  walks  above  the  zones  of  the  earth. 

Chief. 

O Viator!  Who  dost  disperse  the  Shadows  of  the  Shining  Ones  in  the  Holy  Land; 
give  unto  this  wanderer  the  Perfect  Path,  that  he  may  pass  through  the  Rose  of  the 
Favoured  Ones,  even  that  Path  which  is  made  for  the  restoration  of  those  who  cannot 
concentrate  their  forces.  ( Pause.)  0 Glorious  Unborn  Souls  aid  this  wanderer  with  your 
unsullied  spirit,  for  he  (she)  is  purified  and  hallowed.  (The  Priests  hold  up  their  Wands  to 
invoke.) 

Chief. 

(After  a pause.)  I am  he  who  ruleth  within  the  Gate  of  the  Paths,  entering  in  his  own 
name,  and  again  manifesting  as  endless  time,  Lord  of  the  ' eons  of  the  World  is  his  name. 
(The  Priestess  within.) 


Priestess. 

The  work  is  accomplished.  Horus  has  received  his  eye.  Let  him  go  forth  as  the  lion's 
cub,  and  may  the  palm  flowers  of  the  Light  be  within  him.  (The  Priests  bless  him  by  holding 
up  their  Wands.) 


154 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Chief. 

Mayest  thou  go  forth  under  the  protection  of  the  Warriors  of  Light;  may  thy  flesh 
be  sound,  and  thy  radiance  a protection  to  thy  body;  may  thy  Creator  dwelling  in  thee  hold 
converse  with  thy  Holy  Spirit  when  it  brings  thee  gifts  from  on  high.  (While  these  words  are 
said  by  the  Chief  Adept,  the  Door  of  the  Shrine  is  opened.  The  Priestess  within.) 

Priestess. 

The  peace  of  Osiris  be  upon  thee.  The  wings  of  Isis  overshadow  thee.  Go  thou  forth 
unto  the  world  as  Light,  and  let  the  darkness  be  as  the  sandals  under  thy  feet. 

(The  Priestess  comes  out,  and  gives  a red  rose  to  the  Candidate,  who  is  assisted  to  his 
feet  and  placed  facing  the  Priestess,  and  is  unbound.  The  Priestess  communicates  the  signs 
of  the  6-5  Grade  in  dumb  show  to  the  Candidate,  their  explanation  being  given  by  the 
Chief  Adept,  who  also  communicates  the  Words,  as  follows:) 

Chief. 

The  Sign  of  the  6-5  Grade  is  two-fold,  corresponding  to  the  attitudes  of  the 
Priestesses  at  the  head  and  foot  of  the  couch  when  you  were  extended  thereon.  Both  hands 
are  therefore  placed  in  front  of  the  eyes,  with  the  palms  outwards,  the  arms  stretched 
forward,  and  the  face  turned  right  or  left.  The  latter  signifies  the  putting  away  of  the  lower 
desires,  and  it  corresponds  to  Nephthys  kneeling  at  the  foot  of  the  bier.  The  former  Sign 
signifies  the  setting  aside  of  the  manifested  symbols  of  mind,  together  with  mortal  desires; 
it  corresponds  to  Isis  at  the  head  of  the  bier.  The  averting  of  the  face  to  the  left  is  the  first  part 
of  the  two-fold  Sign,  and  to  the  right  is  the  second  part.  The  Grip  or  Token  is  symbolical  of 
the  union  of  opposites  and  the  form  of  the  Pentagram.  It  is  given  by  the  left  hand  clasping 
the  right.  It  may  also  be  given  thus  with  both  hands.  It  forms  the  Key  to  the  Greater  and 
Lesser  Rituals  of  the  Pentagram.  The  Active  Elements  belong  to  the  right,  and  the  Passive 
Elements  to  the  left  hand,  while  the  Spirit  is  referable  to  both.  It  will  also  be  noticed  that  the 
lines  of  evocation  of  air  and  water  are  arranged  to  draw  the  force  out  of  the  hands,  and  of 
earth  and  fire  to  draw  the  force  of  those  Elements  out  of  the  body.  The  Equilibriating 
Pentagrams,  which  are  those  of  the  Spirit,  are  commenced  along  the  lines  of  the  thumbs. 
The  Symbol  is  Pison,  the  first  river  of  Eden,  which  flows  into  the  land  where  there  is  gold. 

The  Mystic  Number  is  15,  whence  is  formed  the  Password  YOD  HE,  the 
constructive  form  of  the  Tetragrammaton,  derived  from  signifying  to  exist  or  to  be.  It  also 
means  desire,  fall,  destruction,  and  thus  the  Password  indicates  the  parting  of  the  ways, 
whereafter  man  cannot  serve  God  and  Mammon.  The  Mystic  Titles  are  PAREPIDEMOS 
VALLIS  and  DOULOS  SILENTII.  The  two  together  are  interpreted  as,  Servant  of  Silence, 
sojourning  in  the  Valley  of  the  Tombs  of  the  Kings  of  the  Earth,  wherein  it  is  your  privilege 
and  your  duty  to  construct  your  own  sepulchre.  There  is  also  a secret  Egyptian  Title,  which  is 
S H EN  SOKA  RI,  meaning  the  Seal  of  Him  that  closeth.  In  this  sense  the  Pentagram  is  the 
Seal  of  Solomon,  because  it  is  the  Seai  of  Peace.  This  being  the  Grade  of  the  Rose,  the 
Pentagram 


155 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


is  attributed  to  it  in  a special  manner,  while  the  Hexagram  is  referable  to  Tiphareth 
or  the  Sun,  and  the  purified  man,  and  is  interpreted  as  the  Shield  of  the  Beloved  or  of  David 
in  our  scheme  of  the  higher  Degrees.  The  Grand  Word  is  TABOONA,  the  Hebrew  name  of 
Sophia.  It  is  derived  from  the  same  root  as  Binah,  and  therefore  signifies  the  Great  Mother. 
A certain  permutation  results  in  the  name  TABANU,  our  desire  and  longing.  And  you 
should  know  that  the  desire  of  the  Great  Mother  must  fill  the  heart  of  the  Postulant  passing 
to  the  ineffable  Grades,  for  our  purification  is  in  union  with  her,  as  in  the  salt  sea  of  Binah, 
and  this  is  the  Mystic  Union  of  the  Lover  and  the  Beloved. 

THE  CEREMONY  OF  CLOSING  THE  TEMPLE 

Chief. 

Fratres  and  Sorores  Majores,  1 testify  that  the  Mystery  which  we  have  finished  is 
in  communion  with  all  the  Mysteries;  that  the  things  which  are  above,  being  analogous 
with  the  things  which  are  below,  the  Exalted  Grades  of  advancement  beyond  this  Grade 
are  identical  as  to  the  roots  therewith,  and  those  also  which  are  below,  because  one 
experiment  has  in  all  things  concerned  the  universe.  Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  is  this  your 
testimony  also? 

Second. 

I am  the  least  among  the  faithful  witnesses,  but  I have  beheld  the  end  of  the  Quest, 
for  there  are  no  glasses  of  vision  so  darkened  that  they  can  long  succeed  in  concealing  it.  1 
have  also  come  from  afar,  and  the  experience  of  many  worlds  is  laid  up  in  my  heart. 

Chief. 

I do  not  ask  you  to  announce  the  Great  End  on  the  faith  of  your  vision,  for  it  is 
known  among  those  who  have  followed  the  Path  of  the  mysteries  and  have  advanced  therein, 
that  when  most  we  covenant  to  lay  aside  all  veils,  that  Mystery  itself  withdraws  into  a 
deeper  concealment,  and  that  which  at  need  assumes  all  modes  in  symbolic  expression,  at 
need  also  descends  beyond  all  reach  of  representation  into  the  abyss  which  gives  up  no 
form.  1 ask  you  therefore  not  what  you  have  seen,  but  rather  what  have  you  been  doing? 

Second. 

1 have  journeyed  so  far  through  distance  and  distance,  even  unto  the  great  distance, 
that  I have  reached  the  setting  sun. 

Chief. 

That  was  a long  journey,  Brother,  but  was  it  the  term  of  your  pilgrimage? 


156 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


Second. 

It  was  not.  Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  for  afterwards  I continued  my  way  beyond  the 

setting  sun. 

Chief. 

That  was  also  a long  way,  but  where,  I pray,  did  it  bring  you? 

Second. 

To  the  Egyptian  land  of  Amentet,  to  the  Mountain  of  the  Sunset,  and,  in  fine,  to  the 
cavern  which  is  within  the  Mountain. 

Chief. 

We  have  been  told  that  those  who  attain  so  far  a point  do  not  for  more  than  a season 

remain  at  the  door  of  the  cavern. 

Second. 

For  my  own  part,  Master,  I knocked  and  entered  therein,  with  such  success  that  I 

attained  at  last  to  the  Centre. 

Chief. 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  I beseech  you  in  your  charity,  to  show  forth  some  part  or 
shadow  of  that  which  you  found  therein,  and  I testify,  on  my  part  that  all  the  Holy 
Assemblies  shall  hearken  while  you  announce  the  tidings. 

Second. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  the  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  tongue  is  weak.  With 
great  veneration  I must  tell  you,  as  you  also  would  tell  me,  that  I do  not  know,  God 

knoweth. 

Chief. 

But  I divine  the  impediments  which  may  at  this  time  hinder  you.  Do  you  assure  me 
also  that  you  have  brought  nothing  back  from  your  pilgrimage?  (The  Second  Adept  points 
solemnly  to  the  Ka  Door  in  the  West). 


Second. 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  I testify  that  the  Great  Mother  gave  me  the  symbol  of  the 
rose,  and  that,  after  many  wanderings,  I have  returned  therewith. 

Chief. 

The  operations  of  this  Grade  having  been  therefore  accomplished,  by  the  power  to 
me  committed  and  in  accordance  with  my  high  trust,  I close  the  Holy  Temple  in  the  name  of 
TABOONA  TABANU. 

(The  Priestess  turns  and  adores  the  shrine  --  enters  and  takes  the  Paten.  The  rest 

kneel.) 


157 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


When  all  is  done  she  turns  again  and  having  closed  the  door  from  without  stands  in  front  of  and 

facing  the  Shrine.) 

Priestess. 

Beautiful  Mother  of  Heaven,  Nut,  Lady  of  the  Firmament,  grant  that  any  error  we  may  have 
made  in  thus  seeking  to  set  forth  Thine  Ancient  Ritual,  may  be  atoned  for  by  the  earnestness  of  those 
who  have  come  thus  far  in  their  search  for  the  wisdom  that  once  lived  in  Egypt.  Protect  us  in  peace,  now 
and  in  Eternity. 

Shed  Light  upon  us  here  and  forever. 


158 


VOLUME  SEVEN 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


OTHER  ORDER  RITUALS 
AND  MAGICAL  DOCTRINES. 


159 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


VOLUME  EIGHT 

OTHER  ORDER  RITUALS 
AND  MAGICAL  DOCTRINES 


CEREMONY  OF  THE  EQUINOX 

This  Ceremony  is  held  twice  yearly:  THE  VERNAL  EQUINOX  about  March  21st 
the  AUTUMNAL  EQUINOX  about  September  21st.  (Officers  assemble  and  Robe.  Chiefs 
seat  themselves  on  the  Dais.  Members  gowned  and  wearing  their  sashes  enter  and  sit  as  far 
as  possible  by  members  of  the  same  grade.  Inner  Members  in  the  East,  Philosophi  in  the 
South,  Practici  and  Theorici  in  the  West,  Zelatores  and  Neophytes  in  the  North.  The 
Temple  is  opened  in  the  Neophyte  Grade.  All  are  seated.) 

Hiero: 

(Knocks)  Fratres  and  Sorores  of  all  Grades  of  the  Golden  Dawn  in  the  Outer,  let  us 
celebrate  the  Festival  of  the  VERNAL  (Autumnal)  EQUINOX. 

(All  rise  except  Hierophant.) 

(Knocks)  Frater  Kerux,  proclaim  the  EQUINOX  and  announce  that  the  Pass-word  is 
abrogated. 

(Kerux  passes  to  the  North  East,  raises  his  Wand,  and  facing  West,  says:) 

Kerux: 

In  the  Name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  and  by  command  of  the  Very  Honoured 
Hierophant,  I proclaim  that  the  VERNAL  (autumnal)  EQUINOX  is  here  and  that  the  Pass-word 
is  abrogated.  (Kerux  returns  to  his  place.  Members  stand  facing  towards  the  Altar  and  follow  the 
Officers  in  making  the  Signs  towards  it.) 

Hiero: 

Let  us  consecrate  according  to  ancient  custom  the  return  of  the  Equinox. 


1 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

Hiero: 

LIGHT 

Hiereus: 

DAR  KNESS 

Hiero: 

EAST 

Hiereus: 

WEST 

Hiero: 

AIR 

Hiereus: 

WATER 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  I am  the  Reconciler  between  them.  (All  make  Neophyte  Signs  towards  the 

Altar.) 

Dad: 

HEAT 

Stol: 

COLD 

Dad: 

SOUTH 

Stol: 

NORTH 

Dad: 

FIRE 

Stol: 

EARTH 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  I am  the  Reconciler  beteen  them.  (All  make  Signs  towards  the  Altar.) 


2 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Hiero: 

ONE  CREATOR 

Dad: 

ONE  PRESERVER 

Hiereus: 

ONE  DESTROYER 

Stol: 

ONE  REDEEMER 

Heg: 

(Knocks)  One  Reconciler  between  them.  (All  make  Signs  towards  the  Altar.  Hierophant 
goes  to  the  West  of  the  Altar  and  lays  down  his  Sceptre,  saying:) 

Hiero: 

With  the  Pass-word  I lay  down  my  Sceptre.  (Hierophant  takes  the  ROSE  from  the  Altar 
and  returns  to  his  place.  Hiereus  passes  direct  to  the  Altar  and  lays  down  his  Sword,  saying:) 

Hiereus: 

With  the  Pass-word  I lay  down  my  Sword.  (Hiereus  takes  the  Cup  of  Wine  and  returns  to 
place.  Hegemon  comes  direct  to  the  East  of  the  Altar  and  lays  down  Sceptre,  saying:) 

Heg: 

With  the  Pass-word  I lay  down  my  Sceptre.  (Hegemon  remains  standing  East  of  the 
Altar.  Kerux  comes  direct  to  the  Altar,  hands  his  Lamp  to  Hegemon,  and  lays  down  his  Wand, 
saying:) 

Kerux: 

With  the  Pass-word  I lay  down  my  Lamp  and  Wand.  (Kerux  returns  to  his  place. 
Hegemon  also  returns,  taking  Lamp  of  Kerux.  (Stolistes  comes  round  by  East  and  South  to  West 
of  Altar  and  puts  down  Cup,  saying:) 

Stol: 

With  the  Pass-word  I lay  down  my  Cup.  (Stolistes  takes  the  Paten  of  Bread  and  Salt  and 
returns  to  place.  Dadouchos  comes  direct  to  the  Altar  and  lays  down  his  Censer,  saying:) 

Dad: 

With  the  Pass-word  I lay  down  my  Censer.  (Dad  ouchos  takes  the  Red  Lamp  from  the 
Altar  and  returns  with  Sun  to  his  place.) 


3 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

(Sentinel  comes  by  South  to  East  of  the  Altar  and  puts  down  his  Sword,  saying:) 

Sent: 

With  the  Pass-word  I lay  down  my  Sword.  (He  returns  by  North  and  East  to  his  place. 
Kerux  passes  to  the  North  East  to  begin  his  Circumambulation.  As  he  reaches  each 
Quarter,  and  the  Prayer  is  said,  Officers  and  Members  face  that  Quarter  and  at  the  end  of 
the  Prayer,  all  make  Signs  towards  the  Quarter.  Kerux  moves  to  the  East  and  halts  before 
Hierophant,  who,  holding  up  the  Rose,  faces  East.  All  face  East.) 

Hiero: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  AIR,  Who  hast  created 
the  Firmament.  (Hierophant  makes  a Cross  in  the  Air  with  the  Rose  and  salutes.  All  salute. 
Kerux  passes  to  the  South  and  faces  Dadouchos,  who  turns  South  holding  up  the  Lamp.  All  face 
South.) 


Dad: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  FIRE,  wherein  Thou  hast 
shown  forth  the  Throne  of  Thy  Glory.  (Dadouchos  makes  a Cross  with  the  Lamp  and  salutes.  All 
salute.  Kerux  passes  to  West  and  faces  Hiereus,  who  turns  West  holding  Cup  on  high.  All  face 
West.) 


Hiereus: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  WATERS,  whereon 
Thy  Spirit  moved  at  the  Beginning.  (Hiereus  makes  a Cross  with  the  Cup,  and  salutes.  All  salute. 
Kerux  passes  to  the  North  and  faces  Stolistes,  who  turns  North,  holding  Paten  on  high,  and  says:) 

Stol: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  EARTH,  which  Thou 
hast  made  for  Thy  Footstool!  (Stolistes  makes  a Cross  with  the  Paten  and  salutes.  All  salute. 
Kerux  passes  round  the  Temple  to  his  place.  All  face  towards  the  Altar.  Hegemon  stands  East  of 
the  Altar,  facing  West,  and  holding  Kerux’ s Lamp  on  high,  says:) 

Heg: 

Let  us  adore  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  Holy  art  Thou,  Who  art  in  all  things,  in  Whom  are 
all  things.  If  I climb  up  to  Heaven,  Thou  art  there  and  if  I go  down  to  Hell  Thou  art  there  also!  If 
I take  the  Wings  of  the  Morning  and  flee  unto  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  Sea,  Even  there  shall 
Thy  hand  lead  me  and  Thy  right  hand  shall  hold  me.  If  I say,  Peradventure  the  Darkness  shall 
cover  me,  even  the  Night  shall  be  turned  Light  unto  Thee!  Thine  is  the  AIR  with  its  Movement! 
Thine  is  the  FIRE  with  its  Flashing  Flame!  Thine  is  the  WATER  with  its  Ebb  and  Flow!  Thine  is 
the  EARTH  with  its  enduring  Stability!  (Hegemon  makes  a Cross  over  the  Altar  with  the  Lamp. 
All  salute  towards  the  Altar.  Hegemon  keeps  the  Lamp.  All  sit  down.  Imperator  rises  and 
knocks,  and  says:) 


4 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Imper: 

By  the  Power  and  Authority  vested  in  me,  I confer  the  new  Pass-word.  It  is  (XYZ). 

(Hierophant,  taking  the  Rose,  quits  his  Throne,  which  is  taken  by  Imperator. 

Hierophant  then  goes  East  of  the  Altar  and  lays  down  the  Rose.  He  returns  to  the  East  and 
lays  his  Lamen  and  Cloak  at  the  foot  of  the  Throne,  and  takes  his  place  in  the  East  as  a 
Member  of  the  Temple.  In  the  same  manner,  Hiereus  puts  down  the  Cup,  Hegemon  the 
Lamp  of  Kerux,  Stolistes  the  Paten,  Dadouchos  the  Red  Lamp  in  turn,  and  lay  their 
Lamens  at  the  foot  of  the  Throne.  Kerux,  after  Hegemon,  and  Sentinel  last,  lay  their 
Lamens  at  the  foot  of  the  Throne  and  all  are  seated  with  Members  of  their  own  rank. 
Praemonstrator  rises  to  read  out  the  names  of  the  new  Officers.) 

Praem: 

The  Officers  appointed  to  do  the  Work  of  the  Temple  for  the  ensuing  six  months  are.,  (at  the  end, 
he  says:) 

Praem: 

The  Fraters  and  Sorores  of  the  Outer  Order  will  now  retire  for  a season. 

(Kerux  gathers  up  and  leads  out  all  who  have  not  attained  the  White  Sash.  There  is  a 
pause  while  the  New  Officers  are  provided  with  Nemysses  and  Lamen  Collars.  Outer  Order 
Members,  taking  Office,  should  take  these  things  with  them  and  clothe  outside  in  readiness  for 
their  Installation  by  the  new  Hierophant  now  to  be  appointed.  All  Inner  Order  Members  now 
present  assume  their  Rose-Crosses.  Chief  takes  his  place  on  the  Throne  of  East.  Second  on  his 
left;  Third  on  his  right.  Lesser  Officers  leave  dais  and  take  seats  among  other  Members.) 

(N.B.  I have  examined  several  of  the  early  Order  rituals  including  one  each  of  the  A.O., 
and  Golden  Dawn  - and  in  none  of  them  is  there  anything  resembling  this  segment.  In  view  of 
the  style  of  the  Ritual  etc.  I am  obliged  to  assume  that  this  is  a literary  creation  of  Dr.  Felkins.  In 
stating  this,  I am  not  to  be  construed  as  being  condemnatory.  On  the  contrary,  especially  after 
reading  the  earliest  Rituals  of  the  Order,  lam  convinced  that  Dr.  Felkins  or  whoever  was 
responsible  for  editing  some  of  the  Order  documents  in  the  Stella  Matutina,  did  an  exemplary 
job.  The  editing  was  extremely  well  done.  So  well  done  in  fact  that  criticism  is  rendered 
unnecessary.  And  in  so  stating,  it  is  clear  that  I am  not  to  be  numbered  amongst  those  who  are 
critical  of  the  Stella  Matutina.  Perhaps  its  emphasis  on  skrying  may  have  been  exaggerated,  but  a 
human  Order  has  to  have  some  faults.  Again,  let  me  state  the  editing  was  superbly  executed. 
I.R.) 


Chief: 

Peace  Profound,  my  Brethren.  (He  rises.) 

Second: 

Emanuel.  (He  rises.) 


5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Third: 

God  is  with  us.  (He  rises.) 

Chief: 

In  Nomine  Dei  viventis. 

Second: 

Et  vivificantis. 

Chief: 

Qui  vivit  et  regnet  in  saecula  saeculorum. 

Third: 

Amen. 

Chief: 

Avete,  Fratres  et  Sorores. 

Second: 

Roseae  Rubeae. 

Third: 

Et  Aureae  Crucis. 

Chief: 

Very  Honoured  Fratres  et  Sorores,  seeing  that  the  things  which  are  above  do  continually 
lift  up  unto  their  high  estate  the  things  which  are  below,  and  do  thence  return  them  after  a certain 
great  transfiguration,  that  the  work  of  Wisdom  may  continue  and  that  the  Grace  and 
Sanctification  of  the  Holy  and  Glorious  Zion  may  be  communicated  to  the  Zion  which  is  on 
Earth,  wherefore  the  worlds  rejoice  together  and  are  fulfilled  in  all  completion,  I beseech  you  to 
join  with  me  in  my  intention,  and  to  ratify  in  your  hearts,  the  solemn  and  sacramental  words  by 
which  I assume  this  external  and  visible  Temple  of  the  Golden  Dawn  into  the  House  not  made  by 
hands,  builded  of  lively  stones  the  Company  of  the  Adepts.  And  it  is  so  assumed  accordingly. 

Second: 

Cum  Potestate  et  Gloria. 

Third: 

Amen!  (The  Chiefs  are  seated.) 

Chief: 

Fratres  et  Sorores  of  the  Roseae  Rubeae  et  Aureae  Crucis.  We  know  that  the  Mystic 
Temple,  which  was  erected  of  old  by  Wisdom,  as  a Witness  of  the  Mysteries  which  are 


6 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


above  the  Sphere  of  Knowledge,  doth  abide  in  the  Supernal  Triad,  in  the  Understanding  which 
transcends  Reason,  in  the  Wisdom  which  comes  before  Understanding  and  in  the  Crown  which 
is  the  Light  of  the  Supernals.  We  know  that  the  Shekinah,  the  co-habiting  Glory,  dwelt  in  the 
Inner  Sanctuary,  but  the  first  Creation  was  made  void.  The  Holy  Place  was  made  waste  and  the 
Sons  of  the  House  of  Wisdom  were  taken  away  into  the  captivity  of  the  Senses.  We  have 
worshipped  since  then  in  a house  made  with  hands,  receiving  a Sacramental  Ministration  by  a 
derived  Light  in  place  of  the  Co-habiting  Glory.  And  yet,  amidst  Signs  and  Symbols  the  Tokens 
of  the  Higher  Presence  have  never  been  wanting  in  our  hearts.  By  the  Waters  of  Babylon  we 
have  sat  down  and  wept,  but  we  have  ever  remembered  Zion,  and  that  Memorial  is  a Witness 
testifying  that  we  shall  yet  return  with  exultation  into  the  House  of  our  Father.  As  a Witness  in 
the  Temple  of  the  Heart,  so  in  the  Outer  House  of  our  Initiation,  we  have  ever  present  certain 
Watchers  from  within,  deputed  by  the  Second  Order  to  guard  and  lead  the  Lesser  Mysteries  of 
the  Golden  Dawn  and  those  who  advance  therein,  that  they  may  be  fitted  in  due  course  to 
participate  in  the  Light  which  is  beyond  it.  It  is  in  virtue  of  this  connecting  link,  this  bond  of 
consanguinity,  that  I have  assumed  the  things  which  are  without  in  the  Temple  of  the  Golden 
Dawn  into  the  things  which  are  within  the  company  of  the  Second  Order  at  this  secret  meeting 
held  at  the  Equinox  for  the  solemn  puipose  of  proclaiming  a new  Hierophant  charged  with  the 
Rites  of  the  Temple  during  the  ensuing  six  months,  being  a part  of  the  temporary  period  which 
intervenes  between  us  and  our  rest. 

Second: 

Let  us  work,  therefore,  my  Brethren  and  effect  righteousness,  because  the  Night  cometh. 

Third: 

Wherein  no  man  shall  labour. 

Chief: 

(Rises)  Fratres  and  Sorores  of  the  Roseae  Rubeae  et  Aureae  Crucis,  by  the  power  in  me 
vested,  I proceed  to  the  installation  and  investiture  of  the  Hierophant  of  the  Golden  Dawn 
Temple  in  the  Order  of  the  R.R.  et  A.C.  in  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the  Adepti. 

Second: 

(Rises)  Benedictus  qui  venit. 

Third: 

(Rises)  In  Nomine  Domini.  (The  ±hree  Adepti  give  LVX  signs,  and  seat  themselves.) 

Chief: 

Very  Honoured  Frater,  at  the  discretion  of  the  Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order  you  have  been 
appointed  to  the  Office  of  Hierophant  of  this  Temple  for  the  ensuing  six  months.  Are  you  willing 
to  assume  its  duties  and  responsibilities? 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Hiero: 

I am. 

Chief: 

Then  I will  thank  you  to  advance  to  the  East,  giving  the  Grand  Sign  of  the  Order  of  the 

R.R.  et  A.C.  (Done.) 

Second: 

Benedictus  Dominus  deus  Noster. 

Third: 

Qui  dedit  nobis  hoc  Signum  (touches  Rose  Cross  on  breast.) 

Chief: 

Very  Honoured  Frater  (XYZ)  standing  in  the  Eastern  place  of  the  Temple,  I will  thank 
you  to  give  me  the  secret  word  ofthe  Order  R.R.  et  A.C.  (Done.) 

Second: 

Habes  Verbum. 

Third: 

Et  verbum  caro  factum  est,  et  habitavit  in  nobis. 

Chief: 

(Rises)  Wherefore,  Brethren,  let  us  remember  that  when  the  Body  is  assumed  by  the 
Word,  the  Man  becomes  a living  Soul.  For  which  reason  we  persevere  in  the  Pathway  of  the 
Cross  as  we  look  for  the  Assumption  of  the  Rose.  The  Very  Honoured  Adeptus  Secundus  will 
now  deliver  the  Charge  before  Installation.  (He  sits  down.) 

Second: 

(Rises)  The  high  Office  to  which  you  have  been  appointed  by  the  decree  of  the  Chiefs  of 
the  Second  Order  involves  duties  of  a solemn  kind  and  their  proper  fulfilment  is  a sacred 
responsibility  which  rests  for  a period  upon  you.  While  the  rule  of  the  Outer  Order  is  more 
particularly  committed  to  the  Imperator,  while  the  instruction  of  its  members  is  entrusted  to  the 
Praemonstrator  above  all,  and  the  general  business  of  the  Temple  devolves  especially  upon  the 
Cancellarius,  amidst  the  distinction  of  these  services  there  is  still  a common  ground  of 
interaction  which  must  be  maintained  by  a perfect  adjustment  to  ensure  the  right  conduct  and 
harmony  of  the  whole.  In  like  manner,  the  Chief  Officers  of  the  Temple  are  distinct  and  yet 
allied;  the  perfection  and  beauty  of  its  Ritual  depends  indeed  upon  the  Hierophant  as  the 
Expounder  of  the  Mysteries,  but  not  on  him  alone.  For  all  must  work  together  to  encompass  the 
good  of  all.  I invite  you,  therefore,  not  only  to  take  counsel  with  the  Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order 
on  all  important  occasions  and  to  maintain  a regular  communication  with  the  Guardians  of  the 
Outer  Temple,  but  to  consult  and  assist  the 


8 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Lesser  Officers  so  that  these  Rites  which,  under  the  Supreme  Authority,  are  about  to  be  placed  in 
your  hands,  may,  after  your  term  of  Office,  be  restored  to  the  Chief  Adept  not  merely  intact  in 
their  working  but  showing  an  increased  beauty  and  a greater  Light  of  Symbolism.  Thus  and  thus 
only  will  you  give,  when  the  time  comes,  a good  account  of  your  stewardship.  Let  me  further 
remind  you  that  the  Guardians  of  the  Outer  Temple  should  at  all  time,  in  all  things,  command 
your  respect  as  the  Deputies  of  the  Absolute  Power  which  dwells  behind  the  Veil,  directing  all 
things  in  the  two  Orders  for  the  attainment  of  its  Divine  Ends.  Let  the  memory  of  these  objects 
abide  with  you,  even  as  it  abides  in  them  and  do  you  assist  them  in  their  labour  so  to  direct  the 
Temple  that  Peace  may  be  maintained  with  Power.  (He  sits  down.  Chief  rises.) 

Chief: 

In  the  presence  of  this  solemn  Convocation  of  Adepti  of  the  Second  Order,  seated  in  this 
assumed  Temple,  I again  ask  you  whether  you  are  prepared  in  your  mind  to  accept  the 
responsible  Office  to  which  you  have  been  appointed? 

Hiero: 

I am. 

Chief: 

Then  you  will  kneel  down,  repeat  the  Sacramental  Name  by  which  you  are  known  in  the 
Order  and  say  after  me:  I,  Frater  (XYZ),  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  and  of  that 
Eternal  and  Unchangeable  Unity  which  I seek  in  common  with  my  Brethren,  do  solemnly 
promise,  that  I will,  to  the  utmost  of  my  power,  fulfil  the  high  Office  which  has  been  imposed 
upon  me,  and  by  me  acccepted  freely,  for  the  good  of  the  whole  Order;  that  I will  maintain  the 
rites  of  the  Order  and  observe  the  duties  of  my  position  with  conscientiousness  and  loving  care, 
not  alone  towards  the  Temple  itself,  but  every  individual  Member;  that  I will  co-operate  with  the 
Guardians  of  the  Temple;  that  I will  execute  the  decree  of  the  Chiefs  of  the  Second  Order,  acting 
with  justice  and  without  fear  or  favour  in  accordance  with  the  dictates  of  my  conscience.  This  I 
affirm  by  the  Symbol  worn  upon  the  breast  of  the  Officiating  Adept.  (Hiero.  is  directed  to  stretch 
out  his  hand  in  the  direction  of  the  Rose-Cross  on  Chief  Adept’s  breast.) 

Arise,  Very  Honoured  Frater  and  receive  at  my  hand  the  highest  Office  I can  bestow 
upon  you  in  this  Temple.  By  the  Power  in  me  vested,  I now  appoint  you  Hierophant  of  the 
Golden  Dawn  Temple  to  work  and  confer  the  Grades  of  the  Outer  Order,  under  the  dispensation 
of  the  Chiefs  during  the  ensuing  six  months.  May  the  Light  which  is  behind  the  Veil  shine 
through  you  from  your  Throne  in  the  East  on  the  Fratres  and  Sorores  of  the  Order,  and  lead  them 
to  the  Perfect  Day. 

Second: 

When  the  Glory  of  this  World  passes. 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Third: 

And  a Great  Light  shines  over  the  Splendid  Sea.  (Chief  invests  Hierophant  with  Robes 
assisted  by  a server.) 

Chief: 

I clothe  you  with  the  Robe  of  a Hierophant.  Bear  it  unspotted,  my  brother,  during  the 
period  of  your  office.  Keep  clean  your  heart  beneath  it,  so  shall  it  sanctify  your  flesh  and  prepare 
you  for  that  great  Day  when  you,  who  are  now  clothed  by  the  Power  of  the  Order,  shall  be 
unclothed  from  the  body  of  your  death.  I invest  you  also  with  the  Lamen  of  your  Office;  may  the 
virtue  which  it  typifies  without,  be  present  efficaciously  within  you,  and  after  the  term  of  your 
present  dignity,  may  such  virtue  still  maintain  you  in  your  search  after  the  White  Stone  on  which 
a New  Name  is  written  which  no  man  knoweth  save  he  who  receiveth  it.  You  will  now  pass  to 
the  symbolic  Altar  of  the  Universe  and  assume  the  Sceptre  of  the  Hierophant.  (Hiero,  goes  to 
West  of  Altar,  raises  Sceptre  in  both  hands  and  says:) 

Hiero: 

By  the  Pass-word.  I claim  my  Sceptre.  (He  returns  to  East.  Chief  takes  him  by  both  hands 
and  enthrones  him  with  the  grip  of  the  Second  Order.) 

Chief: 

By  the  Power  in  me  vested,  I install  you  Hierophant  of  the  Golden  Dawn  Temple.  May 
the  steps  of  this  Throne  lead  you  to  your  proper  place  among  the  Seats  of  the  Mighty  which  are 
above.  (He  turns  to  Members.)  Behold  my  Brethren,  him  who  now  stands  amongst  us,  clothed 
with  the  attribute  of  lawful  Revealer  of  the  Mysteries  for  those  whom  we  are  leading  towards  the 
Light.  You  are  the  Adepti  of  those  Mysteries  and  you  can  assist  him  to  proclaim  them,  that  those 
who  are  still  without  may  be  lead  by  loving  hands  to  that  which  is  within.  Fratres  and  Sorores  of 
the  R.R.  et  A.C.,  I now  invite  you  to  join  with  me  in  a common  act  of  prayer.  (All  face  East.) 

We  give  Thee  thanks,  Supreme  and  Gracious  God,  for  the  manifestation  of  Thy  Light 
which  is  vouchsafed  to  us,  for  that  measure  of  knowledge  which  Thou  hast  revealed  to  us 
concerning  Thy  Mysteries,  for  those  guiding  Hands  which  raise  the  comer  of  the  Veil  and  for  the 
firm  hope  of  a further  Light  beyond.  Keep,  we  beseech  Thee,  this  man  our  brother,  in  the  Justice 
of  Thy  Ways,  in  the  Spirit  of  Thy  Great  Council,  that  he  may  well  and  worthily  direct  those  who 
have  been  called  from  the  tribulation  of  the  Darkness  into  the  Light  of  this  little  Kingdom  of  Thy 
Love;  and  vouchsafe  also,  that  going  forward  in  love  for  Thee,  through  Him  and  with  Him,  they 
may  pass  from  the  Desire  of  Thy  house  into  the  Light  of  Thy  Presence. 

Second: 

The  Desire  of  Thy  House  hath  eaten  me  up. 


10 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Third: 

I desire  to  be  dissolved  and  to  be  with  Thee. 

Chief: 

God  save  you,  Fratres  et  Sorores.  The  work  of  the  Light  for  which  we  have  assumed  this 
Temple  has  been  accomplished  faithfully,  and  the  Temple  has  received  its  Hierophant.  By  the 
power  in  me  vested,  I now  remit  it  into  its  due  place  in  the  Outer  World  taking  with  it  the  Graces 
and  benedictions  which  at  this  time  we  have  been  permitted  to  bestow  thereon.  And  it  is  so 
remitted  accordingly.  In  Nomine  Dei  Viventis. 

Second: 

Et  vivificantis. 

Chief: 

Qui  vivit  et  regnet  in  saecula  saeculorum. 

Third: 

Amen.  (All  Adepti  give  LVX  Signs,  and  resume  their  proper  places  in  the  Temple.  They 
remove  Rose  Crosses.  Praemonstrator  goes  to  the  door,  opens  it  and  says:) 

Praem: 

The  Brethren  of  the  Outer  Order  will  resume  their  places  in  the  Temple.  (Done.  Door 
closed.  Chief  rises,  and  says:) 

Chief: 

Fratres  et  Sorores  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Dawn  behold  your  Hierophant,  our  Frater 
(XYZ)  who  has  been  regularly  installed  and  enthroned,  and  by  the  power  in  me  vested,  I 
proclaim  him  the  Revealer  of  Mysteries  among  you  for  the  ensuing  six  months,  being  part  of  that 
temporal  period  through  which  we  are  conducted  into  Light.  Very  Honoured  Frater,  in  the 
presence  of  the  Children  of  your  Temple,  I call  upon  you  to  make  your  Confession. 

Hiero: 

(Rising)  Fratres  et  Sorores  of  the  Order,  seeing  that  the  whole  intention  of  the  Lower 
Mysteries,  or  of  external  initiation,  is  by  the  intervention  of  the  Symbol,  Ceremonial,  and 
Sacrament,  so  to  lead  the  Soul  that  it  may  be  withdrawn  from  the  attraction  of  matter  and 
delivered  from  the  absorption  therein,  whereby  it  walks  in  somnambulism,  knowing  not  whence 
it  cometh  nor  whither  it  goeth;  and  seeing  also,  that  thus  withdrawn,  the  Soul  by  true  direction 
must  be  brought  to  study  of  Divine  Things,  that  it  may  offer  the  only  clean  Oblation  and 
acceptable  sacrifice,  which  is  Love  expressed  towards  God,  Man  and  the  Universe.  Now, 
therefore,  I confess  and  testify  thereto,  from  my  Throne  in  this  Temple,  and  I promise,  so  far  as 
in  me  lies,  to  lead  you  by  the  Rites  of  this  Order,  faithfully  conserved, 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

and  exhibited  with  becoming  reverence,  that  through  such  love  and  such  sacrifice,  you  may  be 
prepared  in  due  time  for  the  greater  Mysteries,  the  Supreme  and  inward  Initiation.  (He  sits  down. 
The  installation  of  the  Lesser  Officers  is  now  proceeded  with.  Cloaks  and  Lamens  are  arranged 
at  the  foot  of  the  Dais,  ready  for  the  Server  to  hand  them  to  Hierophant.  The  Ceremony  of 
Installation  follows  immediately  the  Confession  of  the  Hierophant.  The  Outer  Members  are 
called  in  by  Praemonstrator  and  Kerux  sees  that  all  have  places.  Hierophant  reads  his 
Confession,  then  says:) 

Hiero: 

In  virtue  of  the  power  to  me  committed,  I proceed  to  invest  my  Officers.  Let  the  Hiereus 
come  to  the  East.  (Hiereus,  standing  in  the  East,  is  invested  with  the  Cloak  by  the  Server,  who 
also  clips  the  Lamen  in  place  and  Hierophant  holds  the  Lamen  while  saying:) 

Hiero: 

By  the  power  to  me  committed,  I ordain  you  Hiereus  of  this  Temple  for  the  ensuing  six 
months,  and  I pray  that  from  your  Throne  in  the  West,  symbolising  the  failing  light,  you  also, 
may  lead  the  Fratres  and  Sorores  of  the  Order,  to  the  full  Light  in  the  end,  and  that  you  and  they, 
in  the  midst  of  material  gloom,  will  ever  remember  that  the  Divine  Darkness  is  the  same  as  the 
Divine  Glory.  (Hiereus  passes  to  the  East  of  the  Altar  and  takes  up  the  Sword,  saying:) 

Hiereus: 

By  the  Password  I claim  my  Sword.  (He  goes  to  his  Throne.  When  he  is  seated, 
Hierophant  says:) 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Hegemon  come  to  the  East.  (Hegemon  is  given  the  Cloak  and  Lamen  in  the  same 
way,  and  Hierophant,  holding  the  Lamen,  says:) 

By  the  power  to  me  committed,  I ordain  you  Hegemon  of  this  Temple  for  the  ensuing  six 
months,  and  I pray  that  from  between  the  Pillars,  you  may  lead  the  Fratres  and  Sorores  into  the 
equilibrium  of  perfect  reconciliation.  (Hegemon  goes  to  the  East  of  the  Altar,  takes  his  Sceptre, 
and  says:) 

Heg: 

By  the  Password  1 claim  my  Sceptre.  (Takes  his  place.) 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Kerux  come  to  the  East.  (Kerux  and  other  Officers  to  follow  are  served  with  the 
Lamen  which  Hierophant  holds  while  addressing  them.) 

By  the  power  to  me  committed,  I ordain  you  Kerux  of  this  Temple  for  the  ensuing  six 
months,  to  guard  the  inner  side  of  the  Portal,  and  to  lead  all  Mystic  Processions.  I pray  that 


12 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


you  may  ever  go  before  us  with  the  Torch  of  the  Higher  Luminaries,  uttering  the  Watchwords  of 
the  Day.  Thanks  be  to  God,  my  brother,  for  the  Admirable  Light. 

Kerux: 

By  the  Password  I claim  my  Lamp  and  Wand. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Stolistes  come  to  the  East.  (Done.)  By  the  power  to  me  committed,  I ordain  you 
Stolistes  of  this  Temple  for  the  ensuing  six  months,  to  watch  over  the  Cup  of  Clear  Water,  and  to 
purify  the  Hall,  the  Brethren  and  the  Candidate.  May  you  also,  in  your  own  Soul,  be  sprinkled 
with  Hyssop  and  be  cleansed.  May  you  be  washed  and  made  whiter  than  snow.  Thanks  be  to 
God,  my  brother,  for  the  living  Water  which  purifies  the  whole  Creation. 

Stol: 

By  the  Password  I claim  my  Cup. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Dadouchos  come  to  the  East.  (Done.)  By  the  power  to  me  committed,  I ordain 
you  Dadouchos  of  this  Temple  for  the  ensuing  six  months,  to  watch  over  the  Fires  of  the  Temple 
and  to  perform  the  Consecrations  by  Fire.  Remember  the  sweet  odour  of  the  Greater  Sanctuary, 
and  the  Savour  of  the  Beauty  of  the  House.  Thanks  be  to  God,  my  brother,  for  the  true  Incense 
which  hallows  our  life. 

Dad: 

By  the  Password  I claim  my  Censer. 

Hiero: 

Let  the  Sentinel  come  to  the  East.  (Done.)  By  the  power  to  me  committed,  I ordain  you 
Sentinel  of  this  Temple  for  the  ensuing  six  months.  Be  thou  faithful,  keep  strict  watch  without, 
lest  any  Evil  enter  our  Sacred  Hall. 

Sent: 

By  the  Password  I claim  my  Sword. 

(Hierophant  sits  down.  All  are  seated.  Kerux  comes  forward  and  arranges  the  Elements 
properly  upon  the  Altar.  The  Chiefs  will  now  make  any  announcements.  The  Hierophant  can 
address  the  Temple.  When  he  has  finished,  he  gives  one  knock  and  Kerux  comes  forward  to 
begin  the  Closing,  which  is  that  of  the  Neophyte  Grade.) 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

WATCHTOWER  CEREMONY 
By 

V.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 

(Stand  in  the  North  East.  Face  East  and  announce:)  HEKAS,  HEKAS,  ESTE 
BEBELOI  (hay-kahs.  hay-kahs,  ess-tee  bee-ba-loy!) 

(Perform  banishing  ritual  of  the  Pentagram  first  and  then  the  banishing  ritual  of 
the  Hexagram. 

Go  to  South  of  altar.  Pick  up  incense  stick  or  fire  wand,  wave  it  thrice  in  front  of 
Fire  Tablet,  hold  it  above  head,  and  move  slowly  around  the  perimeter  of  temple, 
deosil,  vibrating:  ) 

And  when  after  all  the  phantoms  have  vanished,  thou  shalt  see  that  holy  and 
formless  fire,  that  fire  which  darts  and  flashes  through  the  hidden  depths  of  the 
Universe,  hear  thou  the  voice  of  tire. 

(On  reaching  South,  shake  fire  wand  three  times  before  the  Fire  Tablet.  Trace 
enclosing  circle.  Inscribe  within  it  the  invoking  Pentagram  of  Spirit  active.  Make  LVX 
signs.  Follow  it  with  the  invoking  Pentagram  of  Fire.  Salute  with  fire  sign.) 

OIP  TFAA  PEDOCE  (oh-ee-pay  tay-ah-ah  pay-doh-kay).  In  the  names  and  letters 
of  the  great  southern  quadrangle,  I invoke  ye,  ye  angels  of  the  watchtower  of  the  south. 

(Again  salute  Tablet.  Replace  fire  wand  on  altar.  Go  to  the  west,  pick  up  the 
water  cup,  sprinkle  a few  drops  in  front  of  the  Water  Tablet,  and  circumambulate 
clockwise,  saying:) 

So  therefore  first  the  priest  who  governeth  the  works  of  fire  must  sprinkle  with  the 
lustral  water  of  the  loud  resounding  sea. 

(On  returning  West,  sprinkle  a few  drops  of  water  in  front  of  Water  Tablet.  Trace 
enclosing  circle.  Inscribe  within  it  the  invoking  Pentagram  of  Spirit  passive.  Make  LVX 
signs.  Follow  it  with  invoking  Pentagram  of  Water.  Salute  with  water  sign.) 

EMPEH  ARSEL  GAIOL  (em-pay-hay  ar-sel-gah-ee-ohl).  In  the  names  and 
letters  of  the  great  western  quadrangle,  I invoke  ye,  ye  angels  of  the  watchtower  of  the 
West. 

(Again  salute  Tablet.  Replace  water  cup  on  altar.  Go  to  the  East,  clockwise,  and 
pick  up  air  dagger.  Shake  it  three  times  in  front  of  Air  Tablet,  then  circumambulate, 
saying:) 

Such  a fire  existeth,  extending  through  the  rushing  of  air.  Or  even  a fire  formless, 
whence  cometh  the  image  of  a voice.  Or  even  a flashing  light,  abounding,  revolving, 
whirling  forth,  crying  aloud. 

(On  returning  East,  shake  air  dagger  three  times  in  front  of  Air  Tablet.  Trace 
enclosing  circle.  Inscribe  within  it  the  invoking  Pentagram  of  Spirit  active.  Make  LVX 
signs.  Follow  it  with  invoking  Pentagram  of  Air.  Salute  with  air  sign.) 

ORO  I BAH  AOZP1  (oh-roh  ee-bah-hay  ah-oh-zohd-pee).  In  the  names  and 
letters  of  the  great  eastern  quadrangle,  I invoke  ye,  ye  angels  of  the  watchtower  of  the 
East. 


14 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


(Replace  air  dagger.  Walk  clockwise  to  north.  Pick  up  pentacle  or  dish  of  bread 
and  salt.  Sprinkle  salt  or  shake  pentacle  three  times  in  front  of  Earth  Tablet.  Then 
circumambulate  saying:)  Stoop  not  down  into  that  darkly  splendid  world,  wherein 
continually  lieth  a faithless  depth,  and  Hades  wrapped  in  gloom,  delighting  in 
unintelligible  images,  precipitous,  winding,  a black  ever-rolling  abyss,  ever  espousing  a 
body  unluminous,  formless  and  void. 

(On  returning  to  the  north,  shake  Pentacle  three  times  in  front  of  Earth  Tablet.  Trace 
enclosing  circle.  Inscribe  within  it  the  invoking  Pentagram  of  Spirit  passive.  Make  LVX 
signs.  Follow  it  with  invoking  Pentagram  of  Earth.  Salute  with  earth  sign.) 

E M O R DIAL  HECTEGA  (ee-mor  dee-ahl  hec-tay-gah).  In  the  names  and 
letters  of  the  great  northern  quadrangle.  1 invoke  ye,  ye  angels  of  the  watchtower  of  the 
north.  (Replace  pentacle.  Walk  around  altar  to  west  and  face  east. 

Either  with  wand  or  forefinger  of  right  hand  describe  enclosing  circle  in  air  over 
the  altar,  and  trace  four  Pentagrams  of  Spirit,  two  actives  and  two  passives,  saying:) 
EXARP  (ex-arpay),  BITOM  (bay-ee-toh-em),  NANTA  (en-ah-en-tah),  HCOMA  (hay- 
coh-mah).  In  the  names  and  letters  of  the  mystical  Tablet  of  Union,  I invoke  ye,  ye  divine 
forces  of  the  spirit  of  life. 

(Make  Portal  sign  of  the  rending  of  the  veil  over  the  altar.  Stretch  out  hands,  then 
separate  them  as  if  opening  a curtain.  At  this  point  vibrate  the  short  Enochian 
invocation  from  the  Portal  Ritual.  Follow  it  with:) 

I invoke  ye,  ye  angels  of  the  celestial  spheres,  whose  dwelling  is  in  the  invisible. 
Ye  are  the  guardians  of  the  gates  of  the  universe,  be  ye  also  the  guardians  of  this  mystic  sphere. 
Keep  tar  removed  the  evil  and  the  unbalanced.  Strengthen  and  inspire  me  so  that  I may  preserve 
unsullied  this  abode  of  the  mysteries  of  the  eternal  Gods.  Let  my  sphere  be  pure  and  holy  so  that 
I may  enter  in  and  become  a partaker  of  the  secrets  of  the  Light  divine.  (Go  to  northeast,  and 
announce:) 

The  visible  sun  is  the  dispenser  of  light  to  this  earth.  Let  me  therefore  form  a 
vortex  in  this  chamber  that  the  invisible  sun  of  the  spirit  may  shine  therein  from  above. 

(Circumambulate  three  times  clockwise,  beginning  at  east.  Make  the  projecting 
sign  (throw  arms  forward,  straight  from  the  shoulders,  head  bowed  between  them),  each 
time  you  pass  the  East.  Return  to  the  west  of  the  altar  and  utter  the  adoration.  Make  the 
projecting  sign  at  the  end  of  the  first  three  lines.  Make  the  sign  of  silence  at  the  end  of 
the  fourth  line,  right  arm  hanging  by  your  side,  raise  index  finger  of  left  hand  to  lips.) 

Holy  art  Thou,  Lord  of  the  universe. 

Holy  art  Thou,  whom  nature  hath  not  formed.  Holy  art  Thou,  the  vast  and  the 
mighty  One.  Lord  of  the  light  and  the  darkness. 

(At  this  point,  state  in  your  own  words  the  purpose  for  which  you  are  performing 
the  ceremony.  Sit  quietly  facing  the  East,  not  passively,  but  in  silence,  attempting  to 
feel  the  presence  of  the  spirit  above  you,  around  you  and  within  you.) 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


(When  you  feel  ready,  after  whatever  spiritual  exercise  you  feel  impelled  to  do, 
close  the  temple  by  reversing  the  circumambulations  (widdershins),  making  the 
projecting  sign  each  time  you  pass  the  East.  Then  perform  the  banishing  rituals  of  the 
Pentagram  and  Hexagram. 

An  alternate  method,  which  I use  fairly  frequently,  is  to  sit  on  a chair  in  the  east, 
facing  westwards,  and  assume  the  god  form  of  Tahuti  while  slowly  reciting  the 
invocation  of  Thoth  in  Crowley's  Liber  Israfel.) 


16 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


THE  CONSECRATION  CEREMONY  OF  THE  VAULT  OF  THE  ADEPTI 

To  be  used  for  a new  Vault  or  on  each  Coipus  Christi  Day 

Members  assemble  and  wear  Regalia.  Three  Chiefs  robed  and  seated  as  in  opening  of  5- 
6.  Door  of  Vault  closed;  Pastos  remains  inside  Vault,  but  Circular  Altar  is  placed  in  the  Outer 
Chamber,  in  the  centre.  Upon  the  Altar  are  the  Cross,  Cup,  Dagger,  and  Chain  as  usual;  also  the 
crossed  Scourge  and  Crook.  Incense  is  also  placed  over  letter  Shin.  Water  is  placed  in  the  Cup. 

Chief: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  see  that  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  is  closed  and  guarded.  (Done. 
Chief  advances  to  Altar,  lifts  his  Wand  on  high,  and  says:) 

Chief: 

HEKAS  HEKAS  ESTE  BEBELOI!  (This  is  followed  by  the  Watchtower  Ceremony.) 

(After  the  Watchtower  ceremony,  the  Chief  Adept  changes  place  with  Third  Adept.  As 
the  Hierophant  Inductor,  Third  Adept  performs  the  ceremony  of  the  opening  of  Portal.  Any  other 
Adept  may  take  the  place  of  the  Associate  Officer  in  West.) 

Third: 

(Knocks  4,  1 ) 

Very  Honoured  Fratres  and  Sorores,  assist  me  to  open  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  of  the 
Adepti.  Give  the  Signs  of  a Neophyte,  Zelator,  Theoricus,  Practicus,  Philosophus.  Very 
Honoured  Associate  Adept,  what  is  the  additional  Mystic  Title  bestowed  on  a Philosophus  as  a 
link  with  the  Second  Order? 

Assoc: 

Phrath. 

Third: 

To  what  does  it  allude. 

Hodos: 

To  the  fourth  river  of  Eden. 

Third: 

What  is  the  Sign? 

Hodos: 

The  Sign  of  the  Rending  Asunder  of  the  Veil. 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Third: 

What  is  the  Word? 

Hodos: 

Peh. 

Third: 

Resh. 

Assoc: 

Kaph. 

Third: 

Tau. 

Hodos: 

The  whole  word  is  Paroketh,  meaning  the  veil  of  the  Tabernacle. 

Third: 

In  and  by  that  word,  I declare  the  Portal  of  this  Vault  of  the  Adepts  duly  open.  (Makes 
Qabalistic  Cross.  All  make  the  same  Sign  and  say  same  words.  Replace  Altar  within  Vault,  leave 
Cross,  Cup  and  Dagger  in  place  outside  for  use  in  Obligation.  Close  door  of  Vault.  Three  Adepts 
take  places  and  open  in  the  5-6  Grade.  The  Vault  door  is  thus  open  and  so  remains  until  close  of 
Consecration.) 

Second: 

Third: 

Chief: 

Second: 

(All  successively  knock  once.) 

Chief: 

Ave  Fratres  et  Sorores. 

Second: 

Roseae  Rubeae. 

Third: 

Et  Aureae  Crucis. 

Chief: 

Very  Honoured  Fratres  et  Sorores,  assist  me  to  open  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts.  (Knocks). 
Very  Honoured  Hodos  Chamelionis,  see  that  the  Portal  is  closed  and  guarded. 


18 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Hodos: 

(Does  so,  and  salutes.)  Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  the  Portal  of  the  Vault  is  closed  and 
guarded. 

Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Minor,  by  what  Sign  hast  thou  entered  the  Portal? 

Third: 

By  the  Sign  of  the  Closing  of  the  Veil.  (Gives  it.) 

Chief: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  by  what  Sign  hast  thou  closed  the  Portal? 

Third: 

By  the  Sign  of  the  Closing  of  the  Veil,  (gives  it.) 

Second: 

PEH. 

Third: 

RESH. 

Second: 

CAPH. 

Third: 

TAU. 

Second: 

PAROKETH. 

Third: 

Which  is  the  Veil  of  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum. 

Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  Mystic  Number  of  this  Grade? 

Second: 

Twenty  one. 

Chief: 

What  is  the  Password  formed  therefrom? 


19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Third: 

ALEPH. 

Chief: 

HEM. 

Third: 

YOD. 

Chief: 

HEM. 

Third: 

EHEIEH. 

Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts? 

Second: 

The  symbolic  burying  place  of  our  Founder  Christian  Rosenkreutz,  which  he  made  to 
represent  the  Universe. 

Chief: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  in  what  part  of  it  is  he  buried? 

Third: 

In  the  centre  of  the  heptagonal  sides  and  beneath  the  Altar,  his  head  being  towards  the 

East. 

Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Minor,  why  in  the  centre? 

Second: 

Because  that  is  the  point  of  perfect  equilibrium. 

Chief: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  does  the  Mystic  Name  of  our  Founder  signify? 

Third: 

The  Rose  and  Cross  of  Christ;  the  fadeless  Rose  of  Creation  - the  immortal  Cross  of 

Light. 


20 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  was  the  Vault  entitled  by  our  more  ancient  Fratres  and 
Sorores? 

Second: 

The  Tomb  of  Osiris  Onnophris,  the  Justified  One. 

Chief: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  of  what  shape  was  the  Vault? 

Third: 

It  was  that  of  an  equilateral  Heptagon  or  figure  of  Seven  Sides. 

Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  unto  what  do  these  seven  sides  allude? 

Second: 

Seven  are  the  lower  Sephiroth,  seven  are  the  Palaces,  seven  are  the  days  of  the  Creation; 
Seven  in  the  Height  above,  Seven  in  the  Depth  below. 

Chief: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  where  is  this  Vault  symbolically  situated? 

Third: 

In  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  in  the  Mountain  of  Caverns,  the  Mystic  Mountain  of  Abiegnus. 
Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Minor,  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  title  Abiegnus? 

Third: 

It  is  Abi-Agnus,  Lamb  of  the  Father.  It  is  by  metathesis  Abi-Genos,  born  of  the  Father. 
Bia-Genos,  Strength  of  our  Race,  and  the  Four  Words  make  the  sentence,  Mountain  of  the  Lamb 
of  the  Father,  and  the  Strength  of  our  Race.  IAO.  YEHESHUAH.  Such  are  the  words!  (All  salute 
with  5-6  Signs.) 

Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  the  key  to  this  Vault? 

Second: 

The  Rose  and  Cross  which  resume  the  Life  of  Nature  and  the  Powers  hidden  in  the  word 
I.N.R.I. 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Chief: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  is  the  Emblem  which  we  bear  in  our  left  hands? 

Third: 

It  is  a form  of  the  Rose  and  Cross,  the  ancient  Crux  Ansata  or  Egyptian  symbol  of  life. 
Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  its  meaning? 

Second: 

It  represents  the  force  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  in  Nature,  divided  into  a Hexad  and  a Tetrad. 
The  Oval  embraces  the  first  six  Sephiroth  and  the  Tau  Cross  the  lower  Four,  answering  to  the 
four  Elements. 

Chief: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  is  the  Emblem  which  I bear  upon  my  breast? 

Third: 

The  complete  symbol  of  the  Rose  and  Cross. 

Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  what  is  its  meaning? 

Second: 

it  is  the  Key  of  Sigils  and  of  Rituals,  and  represents  the  force  of  the  twenty  two  Letters  in 
Nature,  as  divided  into  a Three,  a Seven,  and  a Twelve.  Many  and  great  are  its  mysteries. 

Chief: 

Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  is  the  Wand  which  thou  bearest? 

Third: 

A simple  Wand  having  the  colours  of  the  twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  and  surmounted  by 
the  Lotus  Flower  of  isis.  It  symbolizes  the  development  of  Creation. 

Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  thy  Wand  and  its  meaning? 

Second: 

A Wand  terminating  in  the  symbol  of  the  Binary  and  surmounted  by  the  Tau  Cross  of 
Life,  or  the  Head  of  the  Phoenix,  sacred  to  Osiris.  The  seven  colours  between  Light  and 
Darkness  are  attributed  to  the  Planets.  It  symbolizes  rebirth  and  resurrection  from  death. 

Chief: 

My  Wand  is  surmounted  by  the  Winged  Globe,  around  which  the  twin  serpents  of  Egypt 


22 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


twine.  It  symbolizes  the  equilibriated  Force  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Four  Elements  beneath  the 
everlasting  Wings  of  the  Holy  One.  Associate  Adeptus  Minor,  what  are  the  words  inscribed  upon 
the  door  of  the  Vault,  and  how  is  it  guarded? 

Third: 

Post  Centum  Viginti  Annos  Patebo.  After  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  I shall  open,  and 
the  door  is  guarded  by  the  Elemental  Tablets  and  by  the  Kerubic  Emblems. 

Chief: 

The  120  years  refer  symbolically  to  the  5 Grades  of  the  First  Order  and  to  the  revolution 
of  the  Power  of  the  Pentagram;  also  to  the  five  preparatory  examinations  for  this  Grade.  It  is 
written  His  days  shall  be  120  years.  120  divided  by  5 yields  24,  the  number  of  hours  in  a day  and 
of  the  Thrones  of  the  Elders  in  the  Apocalypse.  Further  120  equals  the  number  of  the  Ten 
Sephiroth  multiplied  by  that  of  the  Zodiac,  whose  Key  is  the  working  of  the  Spirit  and  the 
Elements  typified  in  the  Wand  which  I bear. 

(Chief  knocks.  All  face  the  East.  Chief  Adept  opens  the  Vault  wide,  enters,  passes  to  the 
Eastern  end,  where  is  the  head  of  the  Pastos  of  C.  R.  C.,  and  then  faces  West.  Second  enters  and 
passes  to  the  South.  Third  to  the  North.  Other  members  remain  standing  as  before.  The  three 
Officers,  each  with  a special  Wand  in  his  right  hand  and  Crux  Ansata  in  left,  then  stretch  out 
their  Wands  to  form  a pyramid  above  the  Altar  and  also  the  Cruces  below.) 

Chief: 

Let  us  analyze  the  Keyword.  I. 

Second: 

N. 

Third: 

R. 

All: 

I. 

Chief: 

YOD. 

Second: 

NUN. 

Third: 

RESH. 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


All: 

YOD. 

Chief: 

Virgo,  Isis,  Mighty  Mother. 

Second: 

Scorpio,  Apophis,  Destroyer. 

Third: 

Sol,  Osiris,  slain  and  risen. 

All: 

Isis,  Apophis,  Osiris.  TAO. 

(All  then  simultaneously  separate  Wands  and  Cruces  and  say:) 

All: 

The  Sign  of  Osiris  Slain.  (Give  it.) 

Chief: 

(Giving  L Sign  with  bowed  head).  L.  The  sign  of  the  Mourning  of  isis. 

Second: 

(Giving  V Sign  with  head  erect.)  V.  The  Sign  of  Apophis  and  Typhon. 

Third: 

(With  bowed  head  gives  X Sign).  X.  The  Sign  of  Osiris  Risen. 

All: 

(Make  the  Saluting  Sign  with  bowed  head.) 

All: 

L.V.X. 

LUX  the  Light  of  the  Cross.  (All  quit  the  Vault  and  return  to  previous  places.) 

Chief: 

In  the  Grand  Word  YEHESHUAH,  by  the  Keyword  I.N.R.I.  and  through  the  concealed 
Word  LVX  I have  opened  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts.  (All  give  the  LVX  Signs). 

Second: 

Let  the  Cross  of  Obligation  be  set  in  its  place. 

Chief: 

Upon  this  Cross  of  Obligation  I,  freely  and  unasked,  on  behalf  of  the  Second  Order,  do 


24 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


hereby  pledge  myself  for  the  due  performance  and  fulfilment  of  the  respective  clauses  of  the 
Oath  taken  by  each  member  on  the  Cross  of  Suffering  at  his  admission  to  the  Grade  of  Adeptus 
Minor 

Second: 

It  is  written:  Whosoever  shall  be  great  among  you  shall  be  your  minister,  and  whosoever 
of  you  will  be  the  chiefest  shall  be  the  servant  of  all.  I,  therefore,  on  behalf  of  the  Second  Order, 
do  require  of  you  to  divest  yourself  of  your  robes  and  insignia  as  a Chief  Adept,  to  clothe 
yourself  with  the  black  robe  of  mourning,  and  to  put  the  chain  of  humility  about  your  neck. 
(Chief  disrobes,  puts  on  chain  and  is  fastened  to  the  Cross.  Second  recites  the  Obligation  adding 
after  do  this  day  spiritually  bind  myself  the  words  on  behalf  of  the  whole  Second  Order.) 

Chief: 

(While  still  bound).  I invoke  Thee,  the  Great  Avenging  Angel  HUA  to  confirm  and 
strengthen  all  the  Members  of  this  Order  during  the  ensuing  Revolution  of  the  Sun,  to  keep  them 
steadfast  in  the  path  of  rectitude  and  self-sacrifice  and  to  confer  upon  them  the  power  of 
discernment,  that  they  may  choose  between  the  evil  and  the  good,  and  try  all  things  of  doubtful 
or  fictitious  seeming  with  sure  knowledge  and  sound  judgment. 

Second: 

Let  the  Chief  Adept  descend  from  the  Cross  of  Suffering.  (He  is  released  and  the  cross 
removed.) 

Second: 

Merciful  Exempt  Adept,  I,  on  behalf  of  the  Second  Order,  request  you  to  re-invest 
yourself  with  the  insignia  of  your  high  office,  which  alone  has  entitled  you  to  offer  yourself  unto 
the  Higher  Powers  as  surety  for  the  Order.  (Chief  Adept  reclothes.  Three  Adepts  enter  the  Vault, 
roll  Altar  aside,  open  lid  of  Pastos,  put  Book  “T”  upon  the  table.  Chief  steps  into  the  Pastos,  and 
stands  facing  the  door.  The  three  Adepts  join  Wands  and  Cruces.) 

Chief: 

I invoke  Thee  HRU,  the  Great  Angel  who  art  set  over  the  operations  of  this  Secret 
Wisdom,  to  strengthen  and  establish  this  Order  in  its  search  for  the  Mysteries  of  the  Divine 
Light.  Increase  the  Spiritual  perception  of  the  Members  and  enable  them  to  rise  beyond  that 
lower  selfhood  which  is  nothing  unto  that  Highest  Selfhood  which  is  in  God  the  Vast  One.  (The 
three  Adepts  disjoin  Wands  and  lower  them  into  the  Pastos,  joining  them  together  at  the  black 
ends,  directing  them  towards  the  centre  of  the  floor.  They  hold  Cruces  as  before.) 

Chief: 

And  now,  in  the  tremendous  name  of  Strength  through  sacrifice,  YEHESHUAH 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


YEHOVASHAH.  I authorize  and  charge  ye,  ye  Forces  of  Evil  tkat  be  beneath  the  Universe,  that 
should  a member  of  this  Order,  through  will,  forgetfulness,  or  weakness,  act  contrary  to  the 
Obligation  which  he  hath  voluntarily  taken  upon  him  at  his  admission,  that  ye  manifest 
yourselves  as  his  accusers  to  restrain  and  to  warn,  so  that  ye,  even  ye,  may  perform  your  part  in 
the  operations  of  this  Great  Work  through  the  Order.  Thus  therefore  do  I charge  and  authorise  ye 
through  YEHESHUAH  YEHOVASHAH  the  name  of  Sacrifice.  (The  three  Adepts  disjoin 
Wands  and  Cruces.  Chief  steps  out  of  Pastos.)  Let  the  Pastos  be  placed  without  the  Vault  as  in 
the  third  point  of  the  Ceremony  of  Adeptus  Minor.  (Pastos  is  carried  out  into  the  outer  chamber. 
Lid  is  removed  and  placed  beside  it.  Chief  stands  between  Pastos  and  Lid  facing  door  of  Vault, 
his  arms  crossed.  Second  stands  at  head  of  Pastos  and  Third  at  foot.  Other  Adepts  form  a circle 
round,  join  Wands  over  head  of  Chief,  then  separate  Wands  from  head  and  give  signs  of  5-6 
Grade.) 

Chief: 

(Slowly  and  loudly.)  I am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  though 
he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live.  And  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  on  me  shall  never  die.  I am 
the  First  and  I am  the  Last.  I am  He  that  liveth  but  was  dead,  and  behold  I am  alive  for  evermore, 
and  hold  the  Keys  of  Hell  and  of  Death.  (Chief  quits  circle,  Second  follows,  then  the  other 
Members  with  Third  last.  All  enter  the  Vault  and  proceed  round  the  Altar  with  the  Sun.  Chief 
reads  the  sentences  following  and  all  halt  in  former  positions.  Chief  in  centre,  others  round.) 

Chief: 

For  I know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the 
Earth.  I am  the  Way,  the  Truth  and  the  Life.  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me.  I am  the 
Purified.  I have  passed  through  the  Gates  of  Darkness  unto  Light.  I have  fought  upon  Earth  for 
good.  I have  finished  my  work.  I have  entered  into  the  Invisible.  I am  the  Sun  in  his  rising.  I have 
passed  through  the  hour  of  Cloud  and  of  Night.  I am  Amoun  the  Concealed  One,  the  Opener  of 
the  Day.  lam  OSIRIS  ONNOPHRIS,  The  Justified  One.  I am  the  Lord  of  Life,  triumphant  over 
death.  There  is  no  part  of  me  which  is  not  of  the  Gods.  I am  the  Preparer  of  the  Pathway,  the 
Rescuer  unto  the  Light.  Out  of  the  Darkness,  let  the  Light  arise.  (At  this  point,  the  Chief  Adept 
reaches  the  centre  point  between  Pastos  and  Lid.  He  faces  towards  Vault,  other  Adepts  around 
him.  They  join  Wands  over  his  head.  He  raises  his  face  and  hands,  and  continues:) 

Chief: 

I am  the  Reconciler  with  the  Ineffable.  I am  the  Dweller  of  the  Invisible.  Let  the  white 
Brilliance  of  the  Divine  Spirit  descend.  (Chief  lowers  face  and  hands.  Other  Adepts  withdraw 
their  Wands.) 

Chief: 

(Raising  his  hand).  In  the  Name  and  Power  of  the  Divine  Spirit  I invoke  ye,  ye  Angels  of 


26 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


the  Watchtowers  of  the  Universe.  Guard  this  Vault  during  this  Revolution  of  the  Solar  Course. 
Keep  far  from  it  the  evil  and  the  uninitiated  that  they  penetrate  not  into  the  abode  of  our 
mysteries,  and  inspire  and  sanctify  all  who  enter  this  Temple  with  the  Illimitable  Wisdom  of  the 
Light  Divine.  (Chief  Adept  gives  Sign  of  5-6.  All  others  copy  them  and  take  their  places  as  in  the 
Opening  of  the  Vault.  Business  may  be  conducted.) 

CLOSING 

(Pastos  is  replaced  in  Vault.  Circular  Altar  is  put  over  it.  Door  open.) 

Chief: 

Second: 

Chief: 

Second: 

Third: 

(All  successively  knock  once.) 

Chief: 

Ave  Fratres. 

Second: 

Roseae  Rubeae. 

Third: 

Et  Aureae  Crucis. 

Chief: 

Very  Honoured  Fratres  and  Sorores,  assist  me  to  close  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts.  Associate 
Adeptus  Minor,  how  many  Princes  did  Darius  set  over  his  Kingdom? 

Third: 

It  is  written  in  the  Book  of  Daniel  that  they  were  120. 

Chief: 

Mighty  Adeptus  Major,  how  is  that  number  found? 

Second: 

By  the  continual  multiplication  together  of  the  first  five  numbers  of  the  decimal  scale. 

Chief: 

Post  Centum  Viginti  Annos  Patebo.  Thus  have  I closed  the  Vault  of  the  Adepts  in  the 
Mystic  Mountain  of  Abiegnus. 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Third: 

Ex  Deo  Nascimur. 

Second: 

In  Yeheshuah  Morimur. 

Chief: 

Per  Sanctum  Spiritum  Reviviscimus.  (All  present  give  LVX  signs  in  silence.) 

CONCERNING  THE  USE  OF  THE  VAULT 
By 

G.  H.  FRATER  FINEM  RESPICE 

The  Vault  of  the  Adepti  may  be  said  to  represent  or  symbolise  various  things. 
First,  of  course,  it  is  the  symbolic  burying  place  of  our  founder  C.R.C.  It  is  also  the 
mystic  Cavern  in  the  Sacred  Mountain  of  Initiation  - Abiegnus.  Therefore  it  is  the 
Chamber  of  Initiation  wherein,  after  passing  through  the  preliminary  training  of  the 
Outer,  we  are  received  into  the  Portal  of  the  Rose  of  Rubv  and  the  Cross  of  Gold. 

All  who  are  eligible  should  use  the  Vault  when  it  is  in  its  place.  When  working  it 
is  well  to  be  clothed  in  the  white  robe  and  yellow  sash,  yellow  slippers  and  yellow  and 
white  nemyss  on  your  head.  The  Rose  Cross  Lamen  should  be  upon  the  breast. 
Remember  that  within  the  Vault  you  never  use  a banishing  ritual.  The  chamber  is 
highly  charged  by  the  Ceremonies  which  have  been  held  there,  and  the  atmosphere 
thus  created  should  not  be  disturbed. 

At  first,  I do  not  recommend  you  to  fast  as  a preliminary.  Though  later  on, 
when  you  set  yourselves  to  attain  some  definite  point,  this  may  be  necessary.  Being 
then  clothed,  and  at  peace,  you  enter  the  Vault,  light  the  candle,  and  kindle  either  a 
pantile  in  the  small  censer  or,  if  you  prefer  it,  some  incense  in  the  larger  one. 

Place  a chair  as  near  East  as  you  can,  and  having  shut  the  door  stand  in  the  East 
facing  West,  the  door  by  which  you  entered,  the  wall  bearing  the  symbol  of  Venus. 
Now  cross  your  hands  upon  your  breast  in  the  Sign  of  Osiris  Arisen,  breathe  in  a 
fourfold  rhythm  regularly,  and  compose  your  mind. 

Then,  being  calm  and  collected,  make  the  full  LVX  Signs,  and  endeavour  to 
bring  down  the  Divine  White  Brilliance.  Having  done  this,  seat  yourself,  and  give 
yourself  up  to  meditation,  tranquil  and  without  fear.  At  first  try  to  feel,  it  may  be,  or  to 
see  the  play  of  the  colours  as  they  pass  and  repass  from  side  to  side  and  from  square 
to  square.  Then  await  with  serene  expectation  what  message  may  be  vouchsafed  you. 
When  you  are  used  to  the  vault  it  is  well  to  extinguish  the  light,  for  the  darker  the 
material  atmosphere  the  better  it  is.  Before  leaving  the  Vault  make  the  LVX  Signs,  and 
quit  it  with  arms  crossed  upon  the  breast  in  the  Sign  of  Osiris  Arisen. 


28 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


If  you  have  elected  to  work  in  a group  of  two  or  three,  proceed  in  the  same  manner,  but 
take  care  to  place  yourselves  in  balanced  disposition.  Let  me  warn  you  never  to  argue,  even  in 
a friendly  manner  while  in  the  Vault.  It  may  often  happen  that  one  of  you  sees  more  or  less 
differently  from  the  others.  In  this  case  make  an  audible  note  of  the  differences  but  do  not  go 
on  to  discuss  it  till  you  have  ended  the  sitting,  as  any  discussion  is  apt  to  disturb  the  delicate 
currents  and  so  break  the  thread  of  your  vision.  It  is  permissible  to  take  notes  in  writing  during 
the  sitting,  but  on  the  whole  it  is  perhaps  more  satisfactory  to  impress  everything  clearly  on 
your  mind,  and  write  it  down  immediately  afterward. 

The  next  seven  visits  should  be  devoted  to  a careful  study  of  each  side  of  the  vault  in 
turn,  recalling  all  you  know  about  each  before  you  begin,  and  having  your  queries  defined 
before  you  expect  replies. 

Another  time,  contemplate  the  roof,  and  if  you  feel  strong  enough,  the  floor.  But  it  is 
best  for  you  to  have  an  advanced  Adept  with  you  for  the  latter.  Again,  you  may  wish  to  draw 
aside  the  Altar,  lift  the  lid  of  the  Pastos  and  contemplate  the  figure  you  may  perceive  lying 
within  it.  For  this  you  should  have  a small  candle  lit  on  the  Altar.  Or  you  may  lie  down  in  the 
Pastos  yourself  and  meditate  there.  Sometimes  you  may  see  the  simulacrum  of  C.R.C.  in  the 
Pastos,  or  it  may  be  your  own  Higher  Self.  In  every  case  you  should  gain  knowledge,  power 
and  satisfaction.  If  you  do  not,  you  may  be  sure  you  are  either  acting  from  a wrong  motive,  or 
you  are  not  physically  strong  enough,  or  your  methods  are  at  fault.  No  normal  person  in  a good 
state  of  mind  can  possibly  spend  half  an  hour  in  this  way  without  feeling  better  for  it.  But  if 
you  should  happen  to  be  out  of  harmony  with  your  surroundings  or  at  variance  with  your 
neighbours,  leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  Altar,  and  go  thy  way,  first  be  reconciled. 

When  more  than  one  person  enters  the  Vault,  they  must  all  make  the  LVX  Signs 
together. 


MORE  ABOUT  THE  VAULT 
By 

G.H.  FRATER  SAPERE  AUDE 

The  Tomb  or  Vault  is  a small  seven  sided  chamber  with  a black  floor,  a white  ceiling. 

The  Pastos  lies  with  its  head  to  the  East;  over  it  is  the  Circular  Altar. 

The  accompanying  plan  (See  Adeptus  Minor  Ritual)  shows  this  position.  The  Altar 
bears  the  symbols  of  the  four  Elements  — a red,  a yellow,  a blue,  and  a black  disc  surrounded 

by  a white  Circle. 

In  the  red  Disc  is  a green  Lion.  In  the  yellow  Disc  is  a purple  Kerub  of  a man's  I-lead. 
In  the  blue  Disc  is  an  orange  Eagle.  In  the  Black  Disc  is  a white  Ox. 

These  four  discs  surround  the  letter  Shin  which  is  painted  in  white  in  the  centre,  exactly 
under  the  White  Rose  in  the  middle  of  the  ceiling. 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

Near  this  Shin  stands  a small  crucifix.  The  carved  ivory  figure  and  the  antique 
Florentine  workmanship  and  the  carved  rose  of  25  petals,  behind  the  head,  was  made 
for  this  purpose  in  Venice. 

The  colours  represent  the  interchanging  energies  of  the  Spirit  and  the 
Elements.  This  figure  of  Christ  surmounted  by  the  four  Elements  symbolises  the 
perfected  Adept  who  has  so  balanced  his  elemental  nature  that  the  Divine  Spirit  can 
manifest  in  him.  (This  is  not  a constant  element  in  the  symbolism  of  the  vault.  I.R.) 
The  Cup,  Dagger,  Chain  and  Burning  Lamp,  each  stationed  in  its  own  Element, 
simply  repeat  the  same  symbolism. 

It  should  be  observed  that  the  Four  elements  are  placed  according  to  the 
Zodiac.  That  is  to  say,  that  Fire,  Lion  Kerub  and  Aries  are  to  the  East.  Air,  Man 
Kerub  and  Libra  to  the  West.  Water,  Eagle  Kerub  and  Cancer  to  the  North.  Earth, 
Bull  Kerub,  and  Capricorn  to  the  South. 

This  is  the  direction  of  the  Enochian  Tablets  of  the  Elements  and  points  to  that 
to  which  the  Adept  should  look  when  he  wishes  to  visit  Elemental  or  Astral  regions.  For 
a planet,  it  is  better  to  find  the  actual  position  from  an  ephemeris  in  usual  work.  Sitting 
in  the  Tomb,  it  is  sufficient  to  astrally  rise  through  the  white  ceiling  with  the  correct 
names  and  symbols  and  vibrating  the  former  whilst  doing  so.  The  cubical  Altar  is  an 
outer  Temple  and  one  arranged  by  an  Adept,  bearing  the  four  implements  and  the 
four  elements  in  a different  order.  This  is  according  to  the  Winds. 

Incense  (or  Rose)  and  Dagger,  Air  to  the  East.  Water  in  Cup,  Water  to  the  West. 
Salt  and  Pentacle  to  the  North.  Lamp  and  Fire  Wand  to  the  South. 

The  Red  Cross  and  White  Triangle  in  the  middle  is  the  place  of  the  letter 

Shin. 

In  the  lesser  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram,  the  Archangels  are  arranged  in  the 
position  of  the  elements  in  the  Cubical  Altar. 

"Before  me  Raphael"  is  said  facing  East;  he  is  the  Archangel  of  Air.  "Behind  me 
Gabriel"  is  said  facing  West;  he  is  the  Archangel  of  Water.  This  arrangement  is  used  in 
the  invocation  of  any  force  in  a Temple,  or  ordinary  room.  The  Hierophant  follows 
this  rule  in  his  invocation  of  the  Elemental  Spirits  in  the  Outer  Ceremonies. 

For  the  Consecration  of  a Talisman,  the  Adept  must  look  towards  the  East  if  he 
wishes  to  invoke  the  Powers  of  the  Air.  Though  if  he  intends  to  visit  those  regions 
symbolised  by  the  Vayu  Tattwa  or  the  Air  Tablet,  he  must  astrally  fly  westwards.  This 
information  is  given  in  the  Lesser  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram  but  in  so  complex  a form 
that  it  is  difficult  to  comprehend  it  clearly. 

The  separate  clairvoyant  study  of  these  four  circles  on  the  Altar  over  the 
Tomb  is  extremely  interesting.  By  it,  the  forces  of  the  Elements  on  the  active  side  can 
be  observed  symbolically  and  contrasted  with  the  same  on  the  passive  side,  as  seen 
in  the  simple  Tattwas.  Instead  of  holding  a paper  symbol,  the  Adept  can  sit  in  the 
Tomb  and  feel  himself  pass  through  the  selected  disc  having  first  invoked  the  Divine 
Names  and  used  the  suitable  Pentagrams.  By  simply  using  the  Pentagrams  and 
vibrating  the  Deity  Names  allotted  to  it,  the  Blackness  of  the  atmosphere  of  the  Tomb 
can  be  so  charged  with  the  astral  colours  of  the  element,  that  it  seems  visible  to  the 
material  eyesight. 


30 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


It  is  necessary  to  balance  the  people  sitting  in  the  Tomb.  The  most  practised 
should  take  the  place  at  the  head  of  the  Pastos,  with  the  beginner  on  either  side.  But 
where  only  two  are  working  together,  they  should  sit  opposite  each  other  at  the  sides 
or  at  the  head  and  foot  of  the  Pastos. 

The  Lotus  Wand  should  be  held  by  the  white  portion  when  Spirit  is  being 
invoked.  When  an  Element  is  chosen,  a suitable  coloured  band  should  be  selected. 
After  some  practice,  it  is  not  difficult  to  find  the  correct  band  in  the  dark.  At  first  it 
is  better  to  hold  it  before  extinguishing  the  light. 

Even  when  first  sitting  in  the  Tomb,  strange  bluish  balls  of  floating  light, 
like  phosphorus,  will  be  seen  by  natural  clairvoyants.  These  are  not  to  be  confused 
with  the  ordinary  daylight  remaining  in  the  eyes  when  we  go  into  a dark  room. 

CONCERNING  THE  CROOK  AND  THE  SCOURGE 

The  Crook  therefore  is  divided  into  the  colours  symbolic  of  Kether,  Air, 
Chokmah,  Taurus,  Chesed,  Leo,  Tiphareth,  Aries,  Hod,  Capricorn.  The  Scourge  is 
divided  into  the  colours  symbolising  Netzach,  Tiphareth,  Gemini,  Binah,  Cancer, 
Geburah  and  Water. 

CONCERNING  THE  WALLS 

Each  Wall  of  the  Tomb  is  said  mystically  to  be  5 feet  in  breadth,  8 feet  in 
height,  thus  yielding  40  squares,  of  which  10  are  marked  and  salient  representing  the 
Ten  Sephiroth  in  the  form  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  acting  through  the  planets. 

(Note:  There  are  various  methods  of  colouring  the  sides.  That  here  described 
is  considered  the  best  and  most  effective.  But  it  requires  perfect  pigments  and  very 
great  artistic  skill  in  blending  them.  If  not  perfectly  done,  the  result  is  dull  and 
unluminous.  And  even  pigments  originally  perfect,  change  with  time.  N.O.M.) 

Another  method  and  that  used  in  the  Amen-Ka  Vault  (in  Edinburgh)  is  to 
form  the  symbol  in  its  own  colours  placed  on  the  square  of  its  own  color  --  the  planet 
on  its  own  side  being  expressed  in  its  complimentary  colour.  Thus  the  Venus  symbol  on 
the  door  side  is  red  on  a green  ground.  These  colours  cut  from  coloured  paper,  if 
accurate,  are  more  brilliant  than  pigments. 

Note  that  in  all  the  central  upper  squares  above  remain  white  and 
unchangeable,  representing  the  changelessness  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  thus 
developing  all  from  the  One  through  the  many  under  the  government  of  the  One. 

The  colour  of  the  varying  squares  may  either  be  represented  by  the  colour  of 
the  Planet  and  the  colour  of  the  force  therein  being  mixed  together,  or  by  these  colours 
being  placed  in  juxtaposition  or  in  any  other  convenient  manner,  but  the  foundation 
of  them  all  is  under  the  Minutum  Mundum  Diagram. 

The  Spirit  square  on  each  side  has  the  same  outward  appearance,  but  when 
studied  clairvoyantly  each  will  be  found  to  have  characteristics  in  harmony  with  the 
Planet,  (that  is,  of  the  particular  side.) 


31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

The  Zodiacal  squares  are  much  better  explained  when  the  actual  planet  of  that 
particular 

side  is  in  the  sign.  Such  as,  during  the  month  of  August,  Sol  is  in  the  sign  of  Leo. 
Then 

choose  the  Leo  Zodiacal  square  on  the  Solar  side,  or  any  other  planet  in  the  same 
manner. 

Those  who  are  not  familiar  with  pigments  should  be  careful  to  examine  the  colour  of 
the 

square  that  they  are  about  to  study  and  also  the  contrasting  colour  of  the  symbol 
therein.  It 

is  important  that  it  should  be  clearly  impressed  on  the  mind  before  the  Tomb  is 
darkened. 

(N.  B.  A great  deal  of  the  foregoing  is  unnecessarily  complicated.  The  most 
practical  plan  is  to  have  the  walls  of  the  Vault  coloured  as  in  the  Adeptus  Minor 
Ritual. 

Then  the  way  to  differentiate  between  the  various  planetary  sides  of  the  Vault  is 
simply  to  cover  any  particular  side  with  a large  sheet  of  strong  cellophane  or  other 
plastic.  So,  for  the  Venus  side,  the  painted  wall  could  be  covered  with  a Green  sheet 
of  plastic,  for  the  Jupiter  side  with  a blue  sheet  of  plastic.  For  the  Mars  side  with  dark 
red.  For  the  Saturn  side  with  very  dark  blue  or  indigo.  For  the  Solar  side,  use 
yellow  or  gold  plastic.  For  Mercury,  a yellow  orange  plastic,  and  for  Luna,  a 
lavender  or  light  violet  plastic. 

In  the  1890's  there  was  no  technology  whereby  this  could  be  done.  There  is  to- 
day. And  this  eliminates  the  fine  shading  of  colour  with  delicate  hues  which  requires 
a competent  artist  to  depict.  To-day,  plastic  sheets  can  be  obtained  in  almost  any 
color.  This  eliminates  all  the  artistic  difficulties  involved,  and  simplifies  the  task 
by  having  all  seven  walls  coloured  in  exactly  the  same  manner.  The  different  covering 
plastic  sheets  will  demonstrate  what  planetary  side  of  the  Vault  is  involved.  l.R.) 

THE  PASTOS 

The  Pastos  which  stands  under  the  Circular  Altar  has  no  bottom  but  a hinged 
lid  which  can  be  turned  hack  during  the  Second  Point  of  the  5-6  Ceremony. 

The  inner  surface  bears  the  Colours  of  the  Forces.  Both  the  inner  and  the 
outer  of  the  right  side  are  in  the  positive  Scale  of  Colours.  To  the  left,  they  are  in  the 
negative  Scale  of  Colours. 

The  head  is  white  inside  and  out.  Outside  it  bears  the  Red  Rose  of  49  petals  on 
a Golden  Greek  Cross.  Inside  the  10  Colours  of  the  Masculine  Scale  on  the  Sephiroth 
in  the  Tree  of  life.  The  foot  is  black  inside  and  out.  Outside  there  is  a calvary  Cross 
on  three  steps  with  a circle.  Inside,  the  10  children  Colours  in  the  Sephiroth  on  the 
Tree. 

(N.B.  Outside,  Red  Rose  on  golden  cross,  gold  centre  with  green  leaves. 
Foot:  outside,  white  cross  on  a black  ground.  The  coloured  diagram  of  the  Minutum 
Mundum  is  given  in  the  section  of  coloured  plates  in  this  book.  An  understanding 
of  Hodos  Chamelionis  is  absolutely  indispensable  when  considering  the  colouring 
of  the  Vault.  I.R.) 

THE  SEVEN  SIDES 

The  mere  arrangement  of  the  symbols  of  each  side  of  the  Tomb  is  at  first  sight 
difficult  to  comprehend  and  remember. 


32 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


The  first  diagram  given  in  the  5-6  ritual  shows  the  Sephiroth  alone,  so  as  clearly 
to  get  the  root  of  the  matter  into  the  memory.  The  second  is  a diagram  with  only  the 
Kerubic  rank,  the  Zodiac  and  the  Planets.  The  third  shows  all  the  symbols. 

The  coloured  diagram  (from  Hodos  Chamelionis)  is  the  key  to  every  side, 
though  it  is  not  like  any  of  them  since  the  colour  of  the  Planetary  attribution  of  any 
one  side  modifies  the  basic  pattern.  Compared  with  the  third  diagram  it  will  show  the 
natural  ground  colour  of  every  square. 

On  the  sides  of  the  Tomb  these  colours  are  each  mixed  with  that  of  the  Planet 
of  that  particular  side.  Every  symbol  is  formed  of  the  complementary  colour  of  the 
square  mixed  with  the  complementary  colour  of  the  Planet  of  the  side.  A careful  study 
of  the  diagrams  will  show  the  result  of  these  mixtures. 

These  is  some  difficulty  for  those  who  are  not  used  to  pigments  in 
comprehending  the  reason  for  the  particular  colours  used  on  the  sides  of  the  Tomb. 
To  make  this  clear,  the  seven  solar  squares  have  been  selected  as  examples.  In 
addition  to  this,  there  are  added  the  two  squares  from  the  Venus  side  bearing  the 
symbol  Aquarius.  The  first  is  that  in  the  Kerubic  rank  Air,  Vau  is  yellow;  the  second 
is  that  below  it,  the  fifth  from  the  top,  where  it  is  the  purple  Aquarius  of  the  Zodiac. 
Following  is  the  complete  side  of  Luna.  The  three  Alchemical  Principles  are  coloured 
thus:  Sulphur  is  Pink;  Salt  is  Pale  Blue;  Mercury  is  Pale  Yellow. 

These  are  blended  on  the  sides  of  the  Tomb  in  the  same  manner  as  the  other 
squares. 

The  complemantary  colours  of  the  Planets  Mars,  Sun,  Venus  and  Moon  are 
easily  understood.  Mars  red  is  the  complement  of  Venus  green.  Sun  orange  is  the 
complementary  colour  of  Moon  blue.  But  as  there  are  7 Planets,  the  exact 
complementary  colour  of  each  one  cannot  be  always  clearly  expressed  by  that  of 
another  planet.  Hence  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  indigo  and  purple,  both  have  yellow  for  a 
complementary  colour.  Yet  yellow.  Mercury,  is  not  exactly  that  of  either  of  them.  A 
careful  study  of  the  Zodiacal  colours  settles  the  question.  Capricorn  indigo  is  that  of 
Saturn.  Capricorn  is  opposite  of  Cancer,  so  that  amber  of  Cancer  is  the 
complementary  of  indigo.  Aquarius  purple  is  the  Jupiterian  colour,  Leo  is  opposite  to 
Aquarius  so  that  the  complement  of  purple  is  greenish  yellow.  The  Mercury  yellow  is 
not  found  in  the  Zodiac.  This  colour  is  the  complementary  of  a very  clear  purple 
amethyst,  neither  bluish  nor  reddish. 

The  'flash'  of  light  from  carefully  balanced  complementary  colours  is  a matter 
of  common  optics.  It  is  the  shining  from  the  blended  rays,  making  a whiteness  which 
in  pigments  would  be  blackness.  It  is  a sign  that  the  Talisman  bears  the  correct 
colours.  There  is  nothing  occult  about  such  a 'flash.'  It  is  often  seen  on  vulgarly 
effective  advertisements,  and  is  quite  different  from  the  Astral  flash  of  brilliancy 
which  shows  when  a Talisman  is  properly  charged  with  the  desired  Force. 


NOTES  ON  THE  DIAGRAMS 

The  Lid  of  the  Pastos.  The  upper  half  is  on  a white  ground,  flaming  red  sword, 
touches  of  red  in  glory.  Malkuth  in  red  and  white  circles;  the  rest  in  gold. 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

Lower  half  is  on  a black  ground.  The  cross  on  gold,  Sephiroth  in  white,  red 
surrounds,  glory  white  with  red  rim,  also  the  crown.  The  figure  flesh  coloured.  Letters 
IN  RI  red  on  white.  Dragon  red  and  black.  (These  will  be  found  in  the  colour  plate 
section.) 

CEILING  OF  VAULT 

Colours  pure  white.  Designs  outlined  in  black.  Rose  said  to  be  transparent  so 
that  light  could  shine  through  to  illumine  the  vault.  (N.B.  With  modern  technology, 
the  transparent  Rose  could  be  designed  from  lucite  or  some  other  plastic.  One  modern 
temple  is  already  experimenting  with  this  idea.  I.R.) 

FLOOR  OF  VAULT 

The  ground  is  black.  Letters  in  white  on  black  ground.  Triangle  and 
Heptagram  are  white.  Serpent  is  red.  Cross  gold.  Rose  red.  Leaves  green. 

CIRCULAR  ALTAR 

Black  ground.  Shin  is  painted  white,  Leo  Kerub  is  red  with  green  Lion.  Yod  in 
white.  Scorpio  blue  with  orange  Eagle.  Heh  white.  Aquarius  yellow  with  Man's  head. 
Vau  in  white.  Taurus  black,  white  Ox.  Final  Heh  in  white.  The  lettering  is  in  gold. 

On  the  YOD  should  stand  the  Cross,  and  behind  it  the  red  Lamp.  On  the  HEH 
should  stand  the  Cup  of  Water.  On  VAU  the  Dagger.  On  HEH  (f)  the  Chain.  On  White 
SHIN  the  Incense. 


THE  SYMBOLISM  OF  THE  SEVEN  SIDES 
By 

G.H.  Fra.  N.O.M. 

Among  those  characteristics  which  are  truly  necessary  in  the  pursuit  of  magical  knowledge 
and  power,  there  is  hardly  any  one  more  essential  than  thoroughness.  And  there  is  no  failing 
more  common  in  modern  life  than  superficiality. 

There  are  many  who,  even  in  this  grade  which  has  been  gained  by  serious  study,  after  being 
charmed  and  instructed  by  first  view  of  the  Vault  of  Christian  Rosencreutz,  have  made  no 
attempt  to  study  it  as  a new  theme.  There  are  many  who  have  attended  many  ceremonial 
admissions  and  yet  know  nothing  of  the  attribution  of  the  seven  sides,  and  nothing  of  the 
emblematic  arrangement  of  the  forty  squares  upon  each  side. 

Some  of  you  do  not  even  know  that  Venus  is  in  an  astrological  sense  misplaced  among  the 
sides,  and  not  two  in  five  have  been  able  to  tell  me  why  this  is  so,  or  what  is  the  basis  of 


34 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


the  arrangement  of  the  seven  colors  and  forces.  Many  have  told  me  which  element  out  of  the  four 
is  missing,  and  others  have  told  me  that  the  sign  Leo  occurs  twice,  but  very  few  can  tell  me  why 
the  two  forms  of  Leo  are  in  different  colours  en  each  case,  and  only  a few  can  tell  me  without 
hesitation  which  Three  Sephiroth  have  no  planet  attached. 

And  yet  even  in  the  1°=10°  grade  you  are  told  you  must  analyse  and  comprehend  that  light  or 
Knowledge,  and  not  only  take  it  on  personal  authority.  Let  us  then  be  Adepti  in  fact,  and  not  only 
on  the  surface;  let  our  investigations  be  more  than  skin  deep.  That  only  which  you  can 
demonstrate  is  really  known  to  you,  and  that  only  which  is  comprehended  can  fructify  and 
become  spiritual  progress  as  distinguished  from  intellectual  gain.  Unless  you  can  perceive  with 
the  soul  as  well  as  see  with  the  eye  your  progress  is  but  seeming,  and  you  will  continue  to 
wander  in  the  wilds  of  the  unhappy. 

Let  your  maxim  be  Multum  non  multa  — Much,  rather  than  many  things.  And  tremble  lest 
the  Master  find  you  wanting  in  those  things  you  allow  it  to  be  supposed  that  you  have  become 
proficient  in.  Hypocrisy  does  not  become  the  laity;  it  is  a fatal  flaw  in  the  character  of  the 
occultist.  You  know  it  is  not  only  the  teacher  in  this  Hall  before  whom  you  may  be  humiliated, 
but  before  your  higher  and  divine  Genius  who  can  in  no  wise  be  deceived  by  outward  seeming, 
but  judgeth  you  by  the  heart,  in  that  your  spiritual  heart  is  but  the  reflection  of  his  brightness  and 
the  image  of  his  person,  even  as  Malkuth  is  the  material  image  of  Tiphareth,  and  Tiphareth  the 
reflection  of  the  crowned  Wisdom  of  Kether,  and  the  concealed  One. 

There  is  but  a couple  of  pages  in  the  5-6  Ritual  which  refer  to  the  symbolism  of  the  seven 
sides  of  the  Vault.  Read  them  over  carefully,  and  then  let  us  study  these  things  together.  First,  the 
seven  sides  as  a group,  and  then  the  forty  squares  that  are  on  each  side. 

The  seven  sides  are  all  alike  in  size  and  shape  and  subdivision,  and  the  forty  squares  on  each 
side  bear  the  same  symbols.  But  the  colouring  is  varied  in  the  extreme,  no  two  sides  are  alike  in 
tint,  and  none  of  the  squares  are  identical  in  colour  excepting  the  single  central  upper  square  of 
each  wall,  that  square  bearing  the  Wheel  of  the  Spirit.  The  Seven  walls  are  under  the  planetary 
presidency,  one  side  to  each  planet.  The  subsidiary  squares  represent  the  colouring  of  the 
combined  forces  of  the  planet;  the  symbol  of  each  square  is  represented  by  the  ground  colour, 
while  the  symbol  is  in  the  colour  contrasted  or  complementary  to  that  of  the  ground. 

Now  these  planetary  sides  are  found  to  be  in  a special  order,  neither  astronomical  nor 
astrological.  The  common  order  of  the  succession  of  the  planets  is  that  defined  by  their  relative 
distances  from  Earth,  putting  the  Sun,  however,  in  the  Earth’s  place  in  the  series  thus:  Saturn, 
Jupiter,  Mars,  Sun,  Venus,  Mercury,  Moon.  Saturn  is  farthest  from  the  Earth,  and  the  Earth  is 
between  Mars  and  Venus.  Beginning  with  Saturn  in  the  case  of  the  Walls  of  the  Vault,  the  order 
is  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Sun,  Mercury,  Venus,  Moon.  Here  Mercury  and  Venus  are  transposed. 

But  there  is  something  more  than  this.  For  Saturn,  the  farthest  off,  is  neither  the  door  nor  the 
East,  nor  anywhere  else  that  is  obviously  intended.  For  it  is  the  corner  between  the  South  and  the 
South-West  sides.  Nor  is  Luna,  at  the  other  end  of  the  scale,  in  any  notable  position  on  the  old 
lines. 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


There  is,  then,  a new  key  to  their  order  to  be  found  and  used,  and  such  as  are  very  intuitive 
see  it  at  a glance.  The  planets  are  in  the  order  of  the  Rainbow  colours,  and  in  colours  because  this 
Adeptus  Minor  grade  is  the  especial  exponent  of  colours.  You  Adepti  are  in  the  Path  of  the 
Chamelion — Hodos  Chamelionis. 

If  now  you  take  the  planetary  colours  and  affix  the  planets  and  arrange  them  in  the  order  of 
the  solar  spectrum  and  then  bend  up  the  series  into  a ring  and  make  the  chain  into  a Heptagram, 
and  turn  the  whole  about  until  you  get  the  two  ends  of  the  series  to  meet  at  the  Eastern  point,  you 
will  have  this  mysterium: 

Violet — Jupiter  Indigo — Saturn  Blue — Moon 

Green — Venus  Yellow — Mercury  Orange — Sun 

Red — Mars 

Science  teaches,  and  has  rediscovered  a great  truth,  that  however  valuable  the  seven  colours 
of  the  prism  may  be,  there  are  rays  invisible  and  so  not  demonstrated  here  by  space.  Beyond  the 
red  end  of  the  spectrum  begins  the  violet,  and  these  have  a great  chemical  or  Yetsiratic  force. 
These  forces,  ever  present  and  unseen,  are  represented  by  the  Chief  Adept  standing  erect  at  the 
Eastern  angle,  the  most  powerful  person  in  the  group,  and  delegate  of  the  Chiefs  of  the  Second 
Order,  and  through  them  of  the  mystic  Third  Order.  He  it  is  who  has,  symbolically,  at  any  rate, 
passed  from  death  unto  life,  and  holds  the  Keys  of  all  the  creeds.  And  he  it  is  who  may  place  in 
our  hands  the  Keys  of  the  locked  Palace  of  the  King  if  we  are  able  to  make  our  knocking  heard. 
Representing  the  East,  coming  from  the  East,  he  faces  the  Western  world,  bringing  intuition  with 
him;  before  him  lies  the  symbolic  body  of  our  Master  C.R.C.,  our  grand  exemplar  and  founder — 
or  at  other  times,  the  empty  pastos,  from  which  he  has  arisen,  the  Chief  Adept. 

He  has  Mars  and  Geburah  at  his  right  hand,  and  Jupiter  and  Gedulah  at  his  left  hand.  He 
faces  Venus  in  the  West,  the  Evening  Star,  which  represents  the  entry  of  the  Candidate  who  has 
toiled  all  day  until  the  evening.  At  even  he  enters  the  Western  door  of  the  planet  Venus,  that  sole 
planet  unto  whose  symbol  alone  all  the  Sephiroth  are  conformed.  At  “evening  time  there  shall  be 
light,”  the  light  of  the  mixed  colours.  So  the  newly  admitted  Adept  comes  in  contact  with  a 
totality  of  the  planetary  forces  for  the  first  time.  A great  opportunity  opens  before  him;  let  him 
see  well  that  he  use  it  worthily.  He  enters  through  the  green  side  of  the  vault.  Green  is  the  colour 
of  growth;  let  him  see  that  he  grows. 

Upon  each  side  of  the  vault  are  forty  squares,  five  vertical  series  and  eight  horizontal,  the 
whole  being  symbolically  5’  x 8’.  Now  the  published  and  printed  Fama  Fraternatitas  says  these 
forty  feet  were  divided  into  ten  squares.  If  you  are  mathematicians  you  would  know  that  ten 
similar  squares  could  not  alone  be  placed  in  such  an  area  and  yet  fill  it.  Ten  squares  alone  to  fill  a 
rectangle  could  only  be  placed  in  an  area  of  the  shape  5’  x 6’.  Hence  in  the  Fama,  ten  squares  are 
marked  and  salient”  — they  are  the  Sephiroth. 


36 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Besides  the  Ten  Sephiroth,  there  are  the  following:  There  are  the  Four  Kerubim,  Three 
Alchemical  Principles,  Three  Elements,  Seven  Planets,  Twelve  Zodiacal  Signs,  One  Wheel  of 
the  Spirit — thus  40  in  all.  The  Spirit  Wheel  is  on  every  side  and  always  in  the  centre,  and  is 
always  depicted  unchanged  in  black  upon  white. 

Upon  the  side  there  are  always  the  4 Kerubic  emblems — zodiacal,  yet  different,  for  the  Eagle 
replaces  Scorpio.  (Scorpio  has  three  forms,  the  Scorpion,  the  Eagle,  and  the  Snake  for  the  evil 
aspect.) 

These  Kerubim  represent  the  letters  of  the  name  YHVH,  and  note  that  they  are  always 
arranged  in  the  Hebrew  order  of  the  letters.  Yod  for  the  Lion,  Heh  for  the  Eagle,  Vau  for  the 
Man,  Heh  final  for  the  Ox,  the  Tauric  Earth. 

Note  that  these  four  Zodiacal  signs  are  not  in  their  own  colours,  but  as  symbols  of  the 
elements  have  elementary  colours.  As  Zodiacal  signs,  then,  they  are  found  to  be  compounds  of 
the  zodiacal  and  planet  colours;  but  they  are  here  as  Kerubic  emblems  compounded  of  the 
Elemental  colour  and  the  Planetary  colour  of  the  side. 

The  Three  Principles  are  composed  of  the  colour  of  the  Principles,  and  the  colour  of  the 
Planet  of  any  particular  wall.  Mercury  being  fundamentally  blue,  Sulphur  red,  and  Salt  yellow. 

The  Three  Elements  have  fundamentally  the  usual  three  colours,  Fire  red,  Water  blue,  Air 
yellow.  Note  that  Earth  is  missing. 

The  Seven  planets  have  their  colours  as  are  often  stated,  and  note  that  each  of  the  seven  is  set 
beside  its  appropriate  Sephirah,  so  that  there  are  three  Sephiroth  which  have  no  Planet:  Kether, 
Chokmah,  and  Malkuth. 

The  12  Zodiacal  Signs  are  the  lower  portion  of  the  sides  of  the  vertical  column.  The  central 
one  has  none  of  the  twelve;  they  are  so  allotted  between  the  four  remaining  columns.  Further 
note  that  they  are  only  three  ranks,  the  5th,  7th,  and  8th;  none  are  in  the  6th  rank  from  above. 

This  arrangement  then  shows:  Four  Triplicities  and  three  Quaternaries.  Observe  well  the 
arrangement;  it  is  complex  but  not  confused. 


1.  Kerubic 

Fixed 

Shining  Rank 

2.  Cardinal 

Fiery 

Solar  Rank 

3.  Common  (mutable) 

Airy 

Subtle  Rank 

From  above  down,  or  in  columns  these  are:  Earthy  Signs.  Airy  Signs.  Watery  Signs.  Fiery 
Signs. 

Rank  5.  The  Kerubic  line  shows  the  signs  in  the  order  of  Tetragrammaton  read  in  Hebrew. 
Rank  7.  The  Cardinal  line  shows  the  signs  from  the  right  in  the  order  of  astronomical 
sequence  of  the  solar  course:  vernal  equinox,  summer  solstice,  autumn  equinox,  winter  solstice. 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

Rank  8.  The  common  line  shows  the  Signs  again  in  a different  position.  Here  the  earliest  in 
the  year  is  Gemini  on  the  left  of  Mem,  and  passing  left  to  Virgo,  you  then  go  round  to  extreme 
right  to  Sagittarius,  pass  centrewards  to  Pisces  close  to  Malkuth 

The  colouring  of  each  square  is  dual — a ground  colour,  and  the  colour  of  the  emblem.  The 
ground  colour  is  a compound  of  the  colour  of  the  Planet  of  the  side  tinting  the  colour  of  the 
Force  to  which  the  Square  is  allotted. 

Each  side  has  the  Square  of  its  own  planet  in  its  own  unmixed  colour,  and  with  this  exception 
all  the  coloured  grounds  are  compound.  The  emblem  colour  is  always  complementary  to  the 
ground  colour. 

The  ritual  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  gives  the  definite  colours  of  each  planet  and  sign  which  are 
to  be  used  in  this  system.  There  are  other  allotments  of  colour  to  each  of  these  symbols  and 
forces,  but  these  are  retained  as  mysteries  yet  to  be  evolved  and  revealed  when  you  have  become 
familiar  with  the  present  simple  and  elementary  system. 


38 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


REQUIESCAT  IN  PACE 

By 

V.H.  SOROR  S.I.A.A. 

Arrange  the  Temple  as  in  the  Neophyte  Grade,  save  that  the  four  elemental 
weapons  are  placed  in  their  respective  positions.  Perform  the  Ceremony  of  the  Opening 
by  Watchtower,  as  given  in  some  portion  of  this  book. 

1.  Announce  HEKAS  HEKAS  ESTE  BEBELOI. 

2.  Banish  first  by  Pentagram  and  then  by  Hexagram. 

3.  Open  by  Watchtower  in  full. 

4.  After  Adoration  perform  the  Invoking  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram,  using  the 
Unicursal  hexagram  of  the  planet  Saturn,  which  represents  the  entire  Supernal 
region. 

5.  When  doing  the  Ritual,  endeavor  to  evoke  as  much  emotion  as  possible  - 
although  as  a rule,  not  much  effort  will  be  found  necessary  as  the  Ritual  itself,  to  gain 
peace  for  the  departed,  will  produce  a great  deal  of  affect. 

6.  Proceed  with  the  following  Invocation  of  the  Higher: 

From  thine  hands,  0 Lord,  cometh  all  good.  From  Thine  hands  flow  down  all 
grace  and  blessing.  The  characters  of  Nature  with  Thy  finger  hast  Thou  traced,  but 
none  can  read  them  unless  he  hath  been  in  Thy  school.  Therefore,  even  as  servants  look 
unto  the  hands  of  their  masters,  and  handmaidens  unto  their  mistresses,  even  so  do  our 
eyes  look  up  unto  Thee,  for  Thou  alone  art  our  help,  0 Lord  of  the  Universe.  All  is 
from  Thee,  all  belongeth  unto  Thee.  Either  Thy  love  or  Thine  anger  all  must  again  re- 
enter. Nothing  canst  Thou  lose,  for  all  must  tend  to  Thine  honour  and  majesty.  Thou 
art  Lord  alone,  and  there  is  none  beside  Thee.  Thou  doest  what  Thou  wilt  with  Thy 
mighty  arm,  and  none  can  escape  from  Thee.  Thou  alone  helpest  in  their  necessity  the 
humble  and  meek-hearted  and  poor  who  submit  themselves  unto  Thee;  and  whoever 
humbleth  himself  in  dust  and  ashes  before  Thee,  unto  such  a one  art  Thou  propitious. 
Who  should  not  praise  Thee,  0 Lord  of  the  Universe,  unto  Whom  there  is  none  like, 
Whose  dwelling  is  in  the  Heavens  and  in  every  virtuous  and  god  fearing  heart. 

O God, the  Vast  One.  Thou  art  in  all  things.  0 nature,  Thou  Self  from  nothing, 
for  what  else  can  I call  Thee.  In  myself  I am  nothing,  in  Thee  I am  Self,  and  exist  in 
Thy  Selfhood  from  Nothing.  Live  Thou  in  me  and  bring  me  unto  that  Self  which  is  in 
Thee,  Amen. 

(Pause  to  become  aware  of  the  Higher.) 

The  purpose  of  this  Ceremony  of  Light  is  to  enable  our  Frater  (vel  Soror...give 
the  name  of  the  deceased)  who  has  shuffled  off  the  burden  of  this  earthly  body,  to  find 
his  proper  place  in  the  hereafter.  Suffer  thine  Angels,  and  all  those  higher  beings 
whom  we  have  invoked  in  this  ceremony,  to  take  him  (or  her)  under  their  wings  for 
safekeeping,  and  to  guard  him  (or  her)  so  that  no  harm  may  befall  him  (or  her).  Let 
them  guide  our  dear 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

departed  Frater  (vel  Soror)  to  a full  realization  of  the  clear  Light  of  the  Spirit 
so  that  in  his  post-mortem  state,  none  of  the  benefits  of  his  just  terminated  incarnation 
may  be  wasted,  but  that  the  essence  of  his  experience  may  be  incorporated  into  his 
divine  being  for  evermore.  Let  thine  Angels  take  charge  of  him  (or  her)  and  thus 
enable  him  to  fulfil  his  destiny  and  his  true  will. 

(At  West  of  Altar,  facing  East,  trace  Invoking  Unicursal  hexagram  of  Saturn 
with  appropriate  Sigil,  and  say:) 

0 all  ye  Angels  assembled  here  in  this  Temple  infuse  me  with  your  spiritual 
power  and  light,  and  let  a veil  be  drawn  between  my  heart  and  the  outer  and  lower 
world  - a veil  woven  from  a silent  darkness  as  a shrouded  night  bringing  a turbulent 
sea  to  a final  rest.  Envelop  this  Temple  of  the  divine  mystery  with  your  guidance  and 
protection  that  I may  concentrate  my  vision  upon  the  ineffable  glory  of  the  Supernals 
to  find  my  abiding  security  in  their  transcendent  foundation.  Grant  unto  me  the  power 
of  the  spirit  to  bring  the  brilliance  of  the  eternal  splendour  to  one  who  has  now  entered 
into  the  Invisible.  Lift  me  up,  I beseech  thee,  so  that  I may  become  the  divine 
messenger  of  peace  and  harmony  of  the  higher  spheres  to  our  departed  Frater  (vel 
Soror...  whose  name  should  now  be  given).  Wherever  he  (or  she)  may  now  be,  and 
on  whatever  plane  he  may  now  pursue  the  quest  of  his  (or  her)  Divine  Genius,  let 
him  be  blessed  with  a diviner  rest  and  a much  sought  after  peace.  (A  photograph  of  the 
deceased,  if  one  is  available,  should  be  placed  on  the  Altar,  resting  on  the  white 
triangle  and  cross.  If  not  available,  visualize  the  deceased  at  the  East  facing  the  West 
and  invoke): 

1 invoke  thee  by  the  divine  name  IAO,  thou  great  Angel  HRU  who  art  set  over 
the  operations  of  this  Secret  Wisdom.  Strengthen  and  establish..,  in  his  search  for  the 
divine  light.  Increase  his  spiritual  perception  so  that  he  may  accomplish  his  True 
Will,  and  that  thus  he  may  be  enabled  to  rise  beyond  all  limitations  unto  that  highest 
selfhood  which  is  the  Clear  Light  of  the  Spirit.  (Pass  to  the  East  of  the  Altar,  making 
Rose  Cross  over  the  instruments  adjacent  to  the  Elements,  vibrating  the  Enochian 
spirit  Invocation  first,  01  Sonuf  etc.  and  then  make  the  (kabalistic  Cross). 

For  Osiris  Onnophris  who  is  found  perfect  before  the  Gods  hath  said:  These 
are  the  elements  of  my  Body  perfected  through  suffering,  glorified  through  trial.  The 
scent  of  the  dying  Rose  is  as  the  repressed  sigh  of  my  Suffering.  And  the  flame-red  Fire 
as  the  energy  of  mine  undaunted  Will.  And  the  Cup  of  Wine  is  the  pouring  out  of  the 
blood  of  my  heart,  sacrificed  unto  Regeneration,  unto  the  newer  life.  The  bread  and 
salt  before  me  are  as  the  foundations  of  my  body  which  I destroy  in  order  that  it  may 
be  renewed.  ..I  am  triumphant  over  Death,  and  whosoever  partaketh  with  me  shall 
with  me  arise.  I am  the  Perfector  of  Matter,  and  without  me  the  Universe  is  Not. 

(Be  silent  for  now.  Visualize  Kether,  as  in  the  Middle  Pillar  technique,  as  a 
sphere  of  brilliant  white  Light  above  the  head.  Then  employ  the  speech  of  the 
Hierophant  in  the  Neophyte  Grade.  Follow  that  with  this  speech  from  the  Adeptus 
Minor  Grade.) 


40 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Buried  with  that  Light  in  a mystical  death.  Rising  again  in  a mystical  resurrection. 
Cleansed  and  purified  through  him  our  Master,  0 thou  dweller  in  the  Invisible.  Like  him,  0 
pilgrim  of  the  ages,  hast  thou  toiled.  Like  him  hast  thou  suffered  tribulation.  Poverty,  torture, 
and  death,  have  you  passed  through.  They  have  been  but  the  purification  of  thy  heart.  In  the 
alembic  of  thine  heart,  through  the  athanor  of  affliction,  seek  thou  the  clear  light  of  thy  higher 
and  Divine  Genius.  (Pass  from  the  Altar,  deosil,  to  the  place  of  the  Hierophant  in  the 
Neophyte  Grade.)  Go  in  peace,  0 beautiful  and  divine  one,  to  a Body  Glorified  in 
resurrection  and  perfecta  in  Light.  Be  the  herald  of  the  divine  ones,  knowing  their  speech 
among  the  living!  Hesitate  not  before  any  region  of  the  Invisible  through  which  you  must  pass 
to  attain  to  nearness  of  your  Divine  Genius,  for  it  is  only  in  that  communion  which  is  provided 
for  thee,  that  a secure  peace  and  an  unknowable  wealth  may  be  found.  Dwell  thou  in  that 
sacred  land  that  far-off  travellers  call  Naught.  0 land  beyond  the  milk  of  nature's  breasts  and 
the  honey  of  her  nurturing  lips,  that  land  beyond  all  perfection!  Dwell  thou  therein  with  thy 
Lord  Adonai  forever! 

0 Lord  of  the  Universe,  the  Vast  and  the  Mighty  One,  ruler  of  the  Light  and  the 
Darkness,  we  adore  Thee  and  we  invoke  Thee.  Look  with  favor  upon  this  wanderer  of  the 
universe  who  is  now  before  Thee,  and  grant  Thine  aid  unto  the  highest  aspirations  of  his 
Soul,  to  the  glory  of  thine  Ineffable  Name. 

(Slowly  walk  to  the  Altar,  visualizing  the  brilliance  of  the  White  Light  descending 
upon  the  photograph  or  the  image  of  the  deceased  in  the  place  of  the  Neophyte.)  I come  in 
the  Power  of  the  Light.  I come  in  the  Light  of  Wisdom.  I come  in  the  Mercy  of  the  Light. 
The  Light  hath  healing  in  its  Wings.  (Name  deceased.)  I tell  you,  Frater  (vel  Soror.  . .)  that  as 
the  Light  can  manifest  from  the  darkness  so  by  this  ceremony  shall  the  Light  descend  upon 
thee.  Long  hast  thou  dwelt  in  darkness.  Quit  the  darkness  and  seek  the  Light.  (Return  to 
between  the  two  Pillars,  and  visualize  the  deceased  enveloped  in  the  Clear  Light.) 
(Circumambulate  deosil,  very  slowly,  intoning  the  speech  of  the  Chief  Adept  in  the  Adeptus 
Minor  Ritual). 

1 am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.  Whosoever  believeth  in  me  though  he  were  dead, 
yet  shall  he  live,  and  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  me,  the  same  shall  never  die.  I am  the 
First  and  I am  the  Last.  I am  He  liveth  and  was  dead,  and  behold!  I am  alive  for  evermore  and 
hold  the  keys  of  death  and  of  hell. 

For  I know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth  and  that  He  shall  stand  at  the  latter  days  upon  the 
earth.  I am  the  Way,  the  Truth  and  the  Life.  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  save  by  me.  I am 
the  Purified.  I have  passed  through  the  Gates  of  Darkness  unto  Light.  I have  fought  upon 
Earth  for  Good,  and  have  finished  my  Work.  I have  entered  into  the  invisible. 

(Vibrate  YEHESHUAH  YEHOVASHAH  by  the  formula  of  the  Middle  Pillar. 
Circulate  the  energy  before  proceeding  with  the  slow  circumambulation  around  the  Temple.) 

I am  the  Sun  in  his  rising,  passed  through  the  hour  of  cloud  and  of  night.  1 am  AMOUN 
the  concealed  One,  the  Opener  of  the  Day.  I am  OSIRIS  ONNOPHRIS  the  Justified  One, 
Lord  of  Life  triumphant  over  Death.  There  is  no  part  of  me  which  is  not  of  the  Gods.  I am 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

the  preparer  of  the  pathway,  the  Rescuer  unto  the  Light.  Out  of  the  darkness, 
let  the  Light  arise.  (Pass  between  the  Pillars,  facing  East.) 

I am  the  Reconciler  with  the  Ineffable,  the  Dweller  of  the  Invisible.  (Raise 
arms  skywards,  and  vibrate  the  four  Names  from  the  Tablet  of  Union  - silently,  and 
then  say:) 

Let  the  White  Brilliance  of  the  Divine  Spirit  descend.  (Stand  West  of  the 
Altar,  facing  East.  There  visualize  the  deceased  standing,  clothed  in  white,  and 
address  him  (or  her)  thus:) 

Frater  (vel  Soror.  . .)  whosoever  thou  art  in  reality,  and  wheresoever  thou  now 
mayest  be,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  devolving  upon  me  by  my  Grade  as  Adeptus 
Minor  of  the  R.  R.  et  A.  C.  and  by  this  commemorative  ceremony,  I do  project  upon 
thee  this  ray  of  the  divine  white  Brilliance  that  it  may  bring  thee  peace  and  joy  and  the 
ultimate  rest  in  God.  (Make  the  sign  of  the  Enterer  three  times  to  project  the  Light). 

Be  thy  mind  open  to  the  Higher. 

Be  thy  heart  a centre  of  the  Light. 

Be  thy  body  a temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

(Pause.  Make  the  Qabalistic  Cross,  and  then  give  thanks  as  follows.)  Unto 
Thee,  Sole  Wise,  Sole  Eternal  and  Sole  Merciful  One,  be  the  praise  and  the  glory 
forever,  who  has  permitted  our  departed  Frater  (vel  Soror.  . .)  who  now  standeth 
silently  and  humbly  before  Thee,  to  enter  thus  far  into  the  sanctuary  of  Thy 
mystery. 

Not  unto  us  but  unto  Thy  Name  be  the  Glory.  Let  the  influence  of  Thy  angels 
whom  we  have  called  upon  in  Thy  name  descend  upon  his  head  so  they  may  teach 
him  the  value  of  self-sacrifice  that  he  shrink  not  in  the  hour  of  trial.  But  that  thus  his 
name  may  be  written  upon  high  and  his  Genius  stand  in  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ones, 
in  that  hour  when  the  Son  of  Man  is  invoked  before  the  Lord  of  Spirits  and  his  name  in 
the  presence  of  the  Ancient  of  Days. 

(Go  to  the  Altar)  And  now  in  the  Name  and  Power  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  I 
invoke  ye,  ye  Angels  of  the  Watchtowers  of  the  Universe,  and  charge  ye  by  the 
divine  name  YEHESHUAH  YEHOVASHAH  to  guard  this  sphere  of  our  dearly 
beloved  Frater  (vel  Soror.  . .)  Keep  far  removed  the  evil  and  the  unbalanced  that 
they  penetrate  not  into  his  spiritual  abode.  Inspire  and  sanctify  him  so  that  he  may 
enter  in  to  the  centre  of  his  being  and  there  receive  the  vision  of  the  Clear  Light  and 
thus  accomplish  his  True  Will. 

(Pause  for  some  time  meditating  on  bringing  the  Light  to  the  deceased,  and  then 
close  by  the  usual  formulae  of  the  Watchtower  Ceremony.) 


42 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


AN  ALCHEMICAL  RITUAL 

By 

PERMISSION  OF  MR.  FRANCIS  KING 

The  Temple  is  arranged  as  in  the  Neophyte  grade  of  the  G.D.  in  the  Outer.  The 
Alchemist  announces  'Hekas,  Hekas  este  Bebeloi.'  Then  open  the  Temple  by 
Watchtower. 

The  Alchemist  then  places  the  material  basis  in  a flask  and  after  the 
invocation  of  a blind  Jupiterian  force,  leaves  it  sealed,  in  a gentle  heat  for  three  days. 
At  the  end  of  this  period  he  evokes  a Jupiterian  spirit  and  then  fastens  a Liebig 
condenser  to  the  flask.  After  distillation  he  grinds  the  solid  left  in  the  flask  to  a 
powder,  replaces  it  in  its  original  container  and  pours  on  to  it  the  distilled  fluid.  He 
then  reseals  the  flask. 

The  Alchemist  places  the  flask  upon  a Flashing  Tablet  of  Jupiter  and, 
standing  at  the  East  of  the  Altar,  places  his  left  hand  upon  it.  Holding  his  Lotus 
Wand  by  the  Aries  band,  in  his  right  hand,  the  Alchemist  conjures  the  general  forces 
of  Chesed  to  act  within  the  flask,  making  the  required  signs  and  sigils  with  the 
Wand.  When  finished  he  raises  the  flask  in  the  air  with  both  hands  saying  'Arise 
herein  to  action,  ye  Forces  of  the  Light  Divine.' 

The  Alchemist  now  lets  the  sealed  flask  remain  at  a gentle  heat  in  a 
waterbath  until  the  material  basis  turns  completely  black  and,  when  this  has  been 
achieved,  he  places  the  flask  upon  the  North  of  the  Altar  and  invokes  Saturn.  Then 
he  takes  his  Lotus  Wand  by  the  black  band  and  says:  'The  Voice  of  the  Alchemist 
said  unto  me,  let  me  enter  the  Path  of  Darkness  for  thus  may  1 achieve  the  Realm 
of  Light.1 

The  Alchemist  then  again  gently  distils  the  material  basis  and,  once  again, 
returns  the  liquid  to  the  solid,  re-sealing  the  flask  and  placing  it  in  a waterbath 
until  all  is  re-dissolved.  The  Alchemist  then  takes  the  flask  to  the  West  of  the 
Altar  and  invokes  Cauda  Draconis  and  the  Waning  Moon.  He  places  the  flask 
upon  a Flashing  Tablet  of  Luna  and  places  it  exposed  to  the  moonlight  for  nine 
nights,  the  first  night  being  that  of  the  full  Moon.  The  material  basis  is  then 
distilled  and  re-dissolved  as  before. 

The  Alchemist  then  takes  the  flask  to  the  East  of  the  Altar  and  invokes  the 
waxing  Moon  and  Caput  Draconis,  then  he  replaces  the  flask  on  the  Tablet  of  Luna 
and  leaves  it  exposed  to  the  moonlight  for  nine  nights,  this  time  the  last  night  being 
that  of  the  full  moon.  Again  the  material  basis  is  distilled  and  re-dissolved. 

The  Alchemist  takes  the  flask  to  the  South  of  the  Altar  and  invokes  the 
forces  of  Tiphareth  and  Sol,  after  which,  the  Sun  being  in  Leo,  the  flask  is  exposed 
to  the  Sun  for  six  days  from  8:30  a.m.  to  8:30  p.m.,  while  standing  upon  the 
appropriate  Flashing  Tablet.  Afterwards  the  flask  is  stood  again  upon  the  Altar  and 
the  Alchemist  says:  'Child  of  Earth,  long  hast  thou  dwelt  in  Darkness,  quit  the  Night 
and  seek  the  Day.'  He  then  takes  the  Lotus  Wand  by  the  white  band,  making  the 
correct  signs  and  sigils  and  says:  'I  formulate  in  thee  the  Invoked  Forces  of  Light' 
reciting  the  Words  of  Power  from  the  Great  Enochian  Watchtowers. 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

The  Alchemist  now  evokes  an  elemental  from  the  material  basis  and  checks  by  the 
nature  of  its  colouring  whether  the  material  basis  has  reached  the  correct  condition.  If  it  has  not 
done  so  he  repeats  the  lunar  and  solar  workings. 

The  Alchemist  now  holds  the  Lotus  Wand  over  the  flask  and  draws  the  Qabalistic 
Flaming  Sword  so  that  its  point  descends  into  the  material  basis.  After  this  he  stands  the  flask 
on  the  East  of  the  Altar  and  invokes  Mars.  When  the  invocation  is  successfully  completed, 
the  flask  is  placed  between  the  black  and  white  Pillars  of  the  Temple  of  the  G.D.  in  the  Outer, 
and  remains  there  for  five  days  upon  a Flashing  Tablet  of  Mars. 

The  Alchemist  again  distills,  but  this  time  does  not  re-dissolve  the  solid  which  is,  for 
the  moment,  kept  separate.  The  fluid  is  taken  and  into  it  is  invoked  the  forces  of  Mercury  after 
which  it  is  placed  upon  a Flashing  Tablet  and  exposed  to  the  Sun  for  eight  days.  The  solid  is 
ground  up  into  a powder  and  into  it  is  invoked  the  forces  of  Jupiter,  after  which  it  is  left  in  the 
darkness  upon  the  Flashing  Tablet  for  four  days. 

Upon  the  Altar  of  the  Double  Cube  the  Alchemist  places  Flashing  Tablets  of  Earth,  Air. 
Fire  and  Water  together  with  the  Pantacle  of  Earth,  the  Wand  of  Fire,  the  Cup  of  Water,  and 
the  Dagger  of  Air.  He  then  carries  out  the  Greater  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram,  firstly  invoking 
Fire  with  the  Wand  to  act  upon  the  powder,  secondly  invoking  Water  with  the  Cup  to  act 
upon  the  liquid,  thirdly  invoking  active  and  passive  spirit  with  the  White  Band  of  the  Lotus 
Wand  to  act  upon  both  the  powder  and  the  liquid,  fourthly  invoking  Air  with  the  Dagger  to  act 
upon  the  liquid,  and  fifthly  invoking  Earth  with  the  Pantacle  to  act  upon  the  powder.  The 
vessels  are  now  left  upon  the  Altar  for  five  days. 

The  Alchemist  then  leaves  the  vessels  untouched  but  removes  the  Elemental  Tablets, 
replacing  them  with  a white  and  gold  Tablet  of  Kether.  He  identifies  himself  with  his  own 
Holy  Guardian  Angel  and  invokes  Kether. 

The  powder  and  the  liquid  are  now  again  joined  together  and  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the 
Sun  for  ten  days.  The  flask  is  then  replaced  upon  the  Altar,  standing  upon  a Flashing  Tablet 
of  Venus  and  the  Alchemist  invokes  the  forces  of  Venus.  He  then  leaves  the  flask  for  seven 
days  upon  the  Tablet,  at  the  end  of  which  period  he  places  it  in  a water  bath  for  a similar 
length  of  time. 

The  Alchemist  again  distils,  the  liquid  being  placed  aside  to  serve  as  a medicine.  The 
powder  is  placed  by  the  Alchemist  in  a crucible  and  heated  to  white  heat  and  allowed  to 
slowly  cool  seven  times,  on  seven  consecutive  days. 

(Mr.  King  finally  closes  this  ritual  with  the  statement  that  "it  only  remains  to  add  that 
according  to  the  'Book  of  Results'  the  end  product  was  'like  unto  a glittering  powder'  and  that 
its  use  produced  'many  and  wonderful  results.") 


44 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


EVOCATION  OF  THE  ANGEL  CHASSAN  TO  VISIBLE  APPEARANCE 

By 

V.H.  FRATER  E.  CINERE  PHOENIX 
PREREQUISITES 

Before  attempting  this  Evocation,  the  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor  should  have  experience  in 
the  consecration  of  Talismans,  Skrying  and  Traveling  in  the  Spirit  Vision,  and  the  Assumption 
of  God  forms. 

MATERIALS  REQUIRED 


Double  Cubical  Altar 
Hermetic  Pillars 

Magic  Circle  and  Triangle  of  Evocation 
Earth  Pentacle 
Red  Rose 

Yellow  Rose  Petals 

Four  Flashing  Tablets  of  the  Archangels 

Galbanum  Incense 
Vestments  of  Hierophant 
Cross  and  Triangle  for  Altar 
Air  Dagger 
Yellow  Rose 
Fire  Censer 
Peppermint 
Fire  Wand 

Gold  Glitter  (optional) 

Seven  Yellow  Lamps 
Aspen  Leaves 


Red  Lamp 
Water  Cup 
Goblet  of  Red  Wine 
Paten  of  Bread  and  Salt 
Four  Elemental  Angelic  Tablets 
Throne  of  Hierophant 
Dittany  of  Crete  Incense 
Two  Pantacles  (4-4V2  in.) 
Lamen(4-4%  in.) 

Green  modeling  clay  (6  cubic  in.) 
Air  Fan 

Yellow  Ribbon  (length  60  in.) 
Square  Black  Cloth  (10x10  in.) 
White  Cord  (18  in.) 

Four  Censers 
Tripod  (optional) 

Yellow  Feather 


..."Foi  by  names 
and  images  are 
all  powers 
awakened  and  re 
awakened." 

OFverse 


Averse 

This  is  one  possible 
design  foi  the  leveise 
thought  it  is  preferable 
that  the  Adept 
develop  his  own 
design  for  the  leveise. 
This  vertion  uses  a 
basic  key  of  Solomon 
foi  mat  with  various  ait 
glyphs  and  Chassan 
Initial  fiom  two  different 
magikal  Cyplieis. 


45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Enlargement  of  Triangle 


Square. 

Note:  The  circle  and  triangle  may  be  made  from  or  painted  on  a sheet  of  linoleum, 
or  plastic,  coloured  tape  and  chalk,  etc. 

TIME 

(The  Evocation  of  the  Angel  CHASSAN  should  be  worked  when  the  Moon  is  waxing 
in  an  Air  Sign.  If  feasible,  the  Sun  should  also  be  in  an  Air  Sign,  and  as  Spring  is  the  season 
most  conducive  to  works  of  Elemental  Air,  the  month  of  the  Sun  in  Gemini  would  be  ideal. 

Wednesday  is  the  day  most  appropriate  to  Air  Operations,  though  Sunday  is  always 
appropriate  to  the  workings  of  Adepti  Minores. 

If  the  Magician  wishes  to  follow  the  doctrine  of  the  magical  hours  prescribed  in  the 
HEPTAMERON  and  other  texts,  he  should  divide  the  times  of  sunrise  and  sunset  into  twelve 
equal  magical  hours  of  the  day,  and  likewise  the  time  from  sunset  to  sunrise  into  twelve 
equal  magical  hours  of  the  night.  On  Wednesday,  the  magical  hours  of  Mercury  are 


46 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


the  first  and  eighth  hours  of  the  day  and  the  third  and  tenth  hours  of  the  Night.  On  Sunday,  the 
hours  of  Mercury  are  the  third  and  tenth  hours  of  the  Day  and  the  fifth  and  twelfth  hours  of 
the  Night. 

If  the  Magician  chooses  to  take  the  Tattwic  tides  into  account,  the  Evocation  should 
obviously  coincide  with  the  course  of  the  Vayu  Tattwa. 

PREPARATION 

For  a week  prior  to  the  Evocation,  the  Magician  should  prepare  himself  in  every  way 
for  the  working.  His  meditations  should  every  day  include  the  contemplation  of  Elemental 
Air.  He  should  be  keenly  aware  of  those  Correspondences  of  Air  which  he  encounters  in  his 
daily  life.  Once  during  the  week  he  should  utilize  the  Spirit  Vision  to  Skry  or  Travel  in  the 
sphere  of  Elemental  Air. 

The  Magician  should  prepare  two  Flashing  Pantacles,  a Lamen,  and  a Material  Basis. 
The  Pantacles  should  be  identical  in  design,  but  different  in  colour.  Both  should  bear  on  the 
obverse  side  the  Sigil  from  the  Rose  of  the  Angel  CHASSAN  enclosed  in  three  concentric 
circles,  between  which  are  inscribed  the  hierarchic  Names  of  Elemental  Air,  and  on  the 
reverse  side  a second  symbol  of  the  Angel  CHASSAN  devised  by  the  Magician.  One  of  the 
Pantacles  should  be  painted  in  the  Yetziratic  Colour  Scale  of  the  Prince,  and  the  other  in  the 
Assiatic  Colour  Scale  of  the  Princess. 

The  Lamen  should  bear  on  the  obverse  the  design  of  the  great  Lamen  of  the  Hierophant, 
and  on  the  reverse  the  same  design  as  on  the  obverse  of  the  Pantacles,  though  painted  in  the 
Briatic  Colour  Scale  of  the  Queen.  For  the  Material  Basis,  clay  is  excellent,  both  symbolically 
and  practically.  As  a type  of  Earth,  it  is  a symbol  of  the  Assiatic  manifestation  to  which  the 
Magician  calls  the  Spirit.  It  is  also  reminiscent  of  the  Adamic  Clay  into  which  the  Elohim 
breathed  Life,  and  of  the  Golem  of  the  Ashkenazic  Qabalists.  From  a practical  perspective,  the 
Clay  (preferably  'modeling  clay’  which  doesn't  harden)  is  eminently  adaptable,  for  its  receptive 
nature  allows  it  to  contain  many  other  materials.  It  should  have  embedded  in  it  the  Elements  of 
the  Mystic  Repast,  or  Magical  Eucharist,  which  is  partaken  of  in  the  final  moments  of  the 
Neophyte  Grade.  It  should  also  contains  as  many  materials  sympathetic  to  the  nature  of  the  Spirit 
to  be  evoked  as  are  available  to  the  Magician;  in  this  case  appropriate  ingredients  would  include 
Galbanum,  Peppermint,  Aspen  leaves,  a small  Topaz,  a yellow  feather  and  possibly  a lodestone. 
For  the  Material  Basis  in  the  Evocation  of  an  Air  Spirit,  the  clay  must  be  kept  warm  and  moist. 
The  Material  Basis  may  be  made  in  the  colour  of  Air  in  the  Assiatic  Princess  Scale  by  using 
an  emerald  green  modeling  clay  sprinkled  with  gold  'glitter.'  If  the  Magician  is  preparing 
for  a particularly  difficult  operation,  or  if  he  intends  for  the  Assiatic  manifestation  to  continue 
for  more  than  an  hour,  he  may  further  charge  the  Material  Basis  by  adding  to  the  Clay  an 
appropriate  Powder  prepared  in  an  Alchemical  process  according  to  the  Z-3  formulae. 

On  the  day  preceding  the  Evocation  or  earlier  on  the  day  of  the  operation,  the 
Magician  should  bind  together  the  Lamen,  the  two  Pantacles,  and  the  Material  Basis  with  a 
yellow  ribbon  on  which  is  embroidered  or  written  in  purple  Hebrew  letters  the  name 
CHASSAN, 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

and  should  consecrate  them  together  as  Air  Pantacles  of  CHASSAN  according  to  the 
Formula  of  the  Magic  of  Light  contained  in  the  Z.A.M.  document  Z-2  taking  care  that  the 
Lamen  is  on  top,  beneath  it  the  Yetziratic  Pantacle,  then  the  Assiatic  Pantacle,  and  finally 
the  Material  Basis.  After  consecration,  the  Pantacles  and  Material  Basis  should  be  wrapped 
in  a yellow  silk  cloth  embroidered  in  purple  Hebrew  letters  with  the  names  SHADDAI  EL 
CHAI  and  YHVH,  along  with  the  Kerubic  symbol  of  AQUARIUS  in  an  encircled 
Pentagram  (invoking  Air  and  Spirit  Active).  The  Lamen  should  be  kept  with  the 
Hierophantic  vestments. 

The  Magic  Circle  and  Triangle  of  Evocation  should  be  prepared  in  conformity  with 
the  diagram  provided.  The  area  between  the  inmost  and  the  middle  concentric  circles  should 
be  white,  and  inscribed  in  black  with  the  four  Divine  Names  attributed  to  the  Four  Quarters 
separated  by  four  TAU  crosses.  The  area  between  the  middle  and  the  outermost  circles 
should  be  yellow  and  inscribed  in  purple  with  four  Hexagrams  and  Names  of  the  powers  of 
Air  - SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  YHVH,  RAPHAEL, " ARIAL,  CHASSAN,  RUACH, 
MIZRACH,  HIDDEKEL. 

In  the  middle  of  each  Hexagram  should  sit  a censer.  The  area  between  the  outermost 
circle  and  the  enclosing  square  should  be  yellow  and  inscribed  in  purple  with  four 
Pentagrams.  In  the  middle  of  each  Pentagram  should  burn  a yellow  lamp.  The  area  in  the 
four  circles  located  at  the  angles  of  the  square  may  be  either  white  or  in  the  Queen  Scale 
colours  attributed  to  the  Elements.  In  each  of  the  Elemental  Circles  should  be  placed  a 
Flashing  Tablet  of  the  appropriate  Archangel.  In  the  midst  of  the  Magic  Circle  should  be  a 
TAU  cross  of  Ten  squares.  On  the  TIPHARETH  square  should  be  the  Altar  of  the 
Universe,  and  on  the  MALKUTH  square  the  Throne  of  the  Hierophant.  The  Throne  is 
recommended  largely  due  to  the  potentially  exhausting  nature  of  Evocation.  The  Magician 
may  choose  to  avail  himself  of  an  Assistant  to  care  for  the  Lamps  and  Censers  and  to  keep 
the  Implements  available  for  the  different  stages  of  the  Working.  If  so,  he  may  provide  the 
Assistant  with  a small  side  table  on  the  HOD  Square. 

The  Triangle  of  Evocation  should  be  in  the  East  between  the  Pillars  of  Hermes,  and 
the  apex  of  the  Triangle  should  touch  the  Circle  of  RAPHAEL.  The  area  between  the  inner 
pair  of  concentric  triangles  should  be  yellow,  and  inscribed  in  purple  Enochian  letters  with 
the  Three  Great  Secret  Names  of  God  borne  on  the  Banners  of  the  East.  In  each  angle 
should  sit  a yellow  lamp.  The  Area  between  the  outer  pair  of  triangles  should  be  white,  and 
inscribed  in  black  Greek  letters  with  the  three  Holy  Words  PRIMEUMATON, 
ANEPHEXETON,  and  TETRAGRAMMATON.  The  area  in  the  parallelograms  located  at 
the  angles  of  the  Triangle  should  be  sky-blue  and  the  letters  of  the  name  RAPHAEL  therein 
should  be  dark  orange.  In  the  midst  of  the  innermost  Triangle  should  stand  a Tripod  to 
elevate  the  Material  Basis. 

Before  beginning  the  Evocation,  the  Magician  places  the  Material  Basis  in  the 
Triangle  with  the  Assiatic  Pantacle  planted  in  the  front  top  of  the  Material  Basis  so  that  it 
will  be  clearly  visible  to  him  from  the  Circle.  He  then  places  the  Yetziratic  Pantacle  on  the 
Altar. 


48 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Finally  he  should  be  absolutely  certain  that  all  that  he  will  need  is  in  the  Magic 
Circle,  for  once  he  begins  the  actual  Evocation,  he  MUST  NOT  leave  the  Circle  until  the 
working  is  completed. 

Now  may  the  Magician  begin  the  Evocation  of  the  Angel  CHASSAN  to  Visible 
Appearance. 

(N.B.  Those  NAMES  which  are  rendered  in  all  capital  letters  are  to  be  vibrated 
according  to  the  Vibratory  Formula  of  the  Middle  Pillar.) 

THE  WORKING 

(The  Magician  opens  by  Watchtower,  taking  care  that  he  not  proceed  until  each 
portion  of  the  Opening  is  successful,  for  without  a proper  Opening,  the  remainder  of  the 
Ritual  is  at  best  useless  and  at  worst  dangerous.  He  then  faces  East  and  states  the  Purpose 
of  the  Ceremony.) 

The  purpose  of  this  Operation  of  the  Theurgic  Arts  is  four  fold.  One  (knock):  that 
there  may  be  enhanced  within  me  the  virtues  governed  by  the  Powers  of  Air  - keenness  of 
mind,  clearness  of  perception  in  intuition  and  psychism,  and  accuracy  in  divination  - that  I 
may  better  labour  in  the  Great  Work. 

Two  (knocks):  That  I may  be  strengthened  in  the  Power  NOSCERE  that  I may  have 
knowledge  to  aid  the  ignorant. 

Three  (knocks):  That  I may  receive  guidance  to  further  the  Work  of  the  Order  in  the 
Aquarian  Age. 

Four  (knocks):  That  I may  obtain  the  obedient  service  of  that  worthy  and  laudable 
Angel  CHASSAN,  that  there  may  be  peace  between  him  and  me,  and  that  he  may  always 
come  promptly  to  my  call  when  summoned.  So  mote  it  be!  (Knocks). 

In  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  Who  works  in  Silence  and  whom  naught  but 
Silence  can  express,  I declare  this  Temple  of  the  Magic  of  Light  duly  open.  (A  battery  of 
knocks  4,  3,  and  3.) 

(The  Magician  assumes  the  Sign  of  Osiris  Slain.) 

I invoke  Thee,  the  great  avenging  Angel  HUA  to  confirm  and  strengthen  me  during 
the  ensuing  Ritual,  to  keep  me  steadfast  in  the  Path  of  the  Magic  of  Light,  and  to  confer 
upon  me  the  Power  of  Discernment,  that  I may  choose  between  the  evil  and  the  good,  and  try 
all  things  of  doubtful  or  fictitious  seeming  with  sure  knowledge  and  sound  judgment. 

(The  Magician  circumambulates  three  times  deosil,  vibrating  HUA  and  saluting  in 
the  East.  He  then  returns  West  of  the  Altar,  faces  East  and  assumes  the  Sign  of  Osiris 

Risen.) 

I invoke  Thee,  HRU,  Thou  great  Angel  who  art  set  over  the  Operations  of  this 
Secret  Wisdom,  to  strengthen  and  establish  me  in  my  search  for  the  Mysteries  of  Divine 
Light.  Increase  my  spiritual  perception  and  enable  me  to  rise  beyond  that  lower  selfhood 
which  is  nothing  unto  that  highest  Selfhood  which  is  in  God  the  Vast  One. 

(The  Magician  circumambulates  three  times  deosil,  vibrating  HRU  and  saluting  in 
the  East.  He  then  returns  to  the  West  of  Altar  and  faces  East.) 


49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

Be  my  mind  open  to  the  Higher. 

Be  my  heart  a centre  of  the  Light. 

Be  my  body  a Temple  of  the  Rosy  Cross. 

(The  Magician  performs  the  Qabalistic  Cross.  He  then  assumes  the  Sign  of  Osiris 
Slain,  maintaining  a firm  formulation  of  a sphere  of  brilliant  white  Light  overhead.) 

0 Thou  great  and  blessed  Augueides,  mine  own  Angelic  Guardian  vouchsafe  to 
descend  from  Thy  lofty  Sanctum  of  Light,  bringing  Thy  holy  influence  and  presence  into 
this  magical  Temple,  that  I may  behold  Thy  glory  and  enjoy  Thy  society  and  aid  both  now 
and  evermore.  0 Thou  that  resides  in  the  holy  Palace  of  the  Neschamah,  Thou  who  knowest 
the  innermost  truths  of  my  soul,  Thou  art  my  true  link  with  the  Divine,  do  Thou  descend  and 
be  present.  Indwell  this  my  body  that  I have  dedicated  as  a Temple  unto  Thee.  0 thou  inner 
Sun  that  illumines  all  my  being,  Thou  sacred  Star  that  has  guided  my  steps  through  the 
centuries,  if  ever  I have  merited  Thy  society,  if  ever  my  Work  has  found  favor  in  Thy  sight, 
bring  hither  Thy  resplendent  presence,  0 my  beloved  eternal  Companion,  Guardian  of  my 
sacred  birthright  I beseech  Thee  in  the  Great  Name  YEHESHUAH:  Move!  Descend!  And 
fill  this  Vessel  with  Thy  manifest  Light.  Let  the  white  Brilliance  of  the  Divine  Spirit 
descend! 

(The  Magician  then  performs  the  Middle  Pillar.  If  he  has  entered  the  Collegium 
Spiritus  Sancti,  he  assumes  the  Form  of  his  Genius;  if  not,  he  assumes  the  generic  Form  of  a 
Mighty  Angel  in  white  and  gold  robes  wearing  a hexagram  crown.  The  *Magician  reaches 
both  hands  towards  the  East,  saying:) 

Stretch  unto  Me  your  Hands,  0 Ye  Divine  Ones,  for  I am  transformed  to  a God  in 
Your  midst.  (The  Magician  assumes  the  Sign  of  Osiris  Risen.) 

1 am  the  First  and  the  Last.  I am  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead,  and  behold!  I am-alive 
for  evermore,  and  hold  the  Keys  of  Death  and  of  Hell.  I am  the  Sun  in  His  rising.  I have 
passed  through  the  Gates  of  Darkness  unto  the  Golden  Dawn  of  Light.  I am  He  who  liveth 
and  triumpheth,  Whose  beginning  is  not  nor  end  cannot  be,  Who  shineth  as  a flame  in  the 
midst  of  your  palaces  and  reigneth  amongst  you  as  the  balance  of  righteousness  and  truth.  I 
am  enthroned  in  the  Neschamah  where  the  mortal  and  immortal  are  united  in  the  Presence  of 
the  Ancient  of  Days.  I have  passed  the  Eternal  Gate  to  the  marriage  of  Heaven  and  Earth. 

I am  Truth  and  I am  Life;  through  Me  Man  liveth.  I am  Father  and  Mother,  the 
Father  of  Fathers,  the  Mother  of  Mothers.  I am  AMOUN,  the  Concealed  One,  the  Opener 
of  the  Day.  I am  ASAR-UN-NEFER,  the  Justified  One.  I am  He  Who  is  clothed  with  the 
Body  of  Flesh  yet  in  Whom  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Great  Gods.  I am  the  Lord  of  Life 
triumphant  over  Death.  There  is  no  part  of  Me  which  is  not  of  the  Gods.  I am  the  Preparer 
of  the  Way,  the  Rescuer  unto  the  Light. 

(The  Magician  circumambulates  deosil  vibrating  KHABS  AM  PEKHT.  He 
circumambulates  a second  time  vibrating  KONX  OM  PAX.  He  circumambulates  a third 
time  vibrating  LIGHT  IN  EXTENSION.  He  returns  to  the  West  of  the  Altar,  faces  East, 
and  makes  the  LVX  signs  in  silence.  The  Magician  elevates  the  Fan  in  his  left  hand  and  the 
Dagger  in  his  right.) 


50 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Let  the  Names  and  Symbols  of  the  Powers  of  Air  be  proclaimed,  that  these  Powers 
may  be  re-awakened  in  the  Spheres  of  those  present  and  in  the  Sphere  of  this  Order  - for  by 
Names  and  Images  are  all  Powers  awakened  and  re-awakened.  (Trace  Invoking  Pentagrams 
of  Spirit  Active  and  of  Air  to  the  East.)  YHVH.  the  Vast  and  Mighty  One,  (Inscribe  Sigil 
from  the  Rose  to  the  East.)  Thy  Glory  flows  out  rejoicing  to  the  ends  of  the  Universe. 

SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  Almighty  and  Everlasting  God.  (Inscribe  Sigil  from  Rose  to  the 

East.) 

Everliving  be  Thy  Name,  ever  magnified  in  the  Life  of  All. 

RAPHAEL,  Healing  Hand  of  God.  (Inscribe  Sigil:)  Blessed  be  Thy  Name  unto  the 
countless  Aeons. 

ARIEL,  noble  Lion  of  God.  (Inscribe  Sigil:)  Ruler  of  the  Winds  and  of  the  Angels  of 
the  Air. 

CHASSAN,  worthy  Angel  of  the  Orders  of  the  Air.  (Inscribe  Sigil:)  Who  ridest  upon 
the  Zephyr. 

PARALDA,  King  of  the  Elementals  of  Air.  (Inscribe  Sigil:)  Majestic  Master  of  the 
aerial  hosts  of  the  Sylphs. 

RUACH,  Element  of  Air.  (Inscribe  Sigil:)  Thou  Wind,  Spirit,  and  Breath  of  Life. 
HIDDIKEL,  River  of  Wisdom.  (Inscribe  Sigil:)  Rushing  Torrent  of  Paradise.  MIZRACH, 
the  Eastern  Quarter.  (Inscribe  Sigil:)  The  Place  of  the  Powers  of  Air.  (The  Magician 
circumambulates  thrice  deosil,  while  invoking:) 

Come  near,  ye  Gods,  to  hear;  and  hearken,  ye  Angels  and  Spirits.  Let  the  Heavens 
hear,  and  all  that  are  therein.  I invoke  ye,  Ye  Powers  of  Air,  in  the  mighty  names  YHVH 
and  SHADDAI  EL  CHAT,  to  lend  Your  aid  to  the  servant  of  the  Highest  in  this  Evocation 
of  the  Angel  CHASSAN  to  Visible  Appearance.  (The  Magician  returns  to  the  West  of  the 
Altar,  faces  East,  and  assumes  the  Sign  of  Osiris  Slain.) 

I,  E CINERE  PHOENIX,  a Frater  of  the  Rose  of  Ruby  and  the  Cross  of  Gold,  a 
faithful  and  devoted  servant  of  that  blessed  Order  which  extends  even  unto  the  foot  of  the 
Throne  of  the  Highest,  do  before  Ye  all  bind  myself  by  this  my  Oath,  that  Ye  may  know  my 
purpose  to  be  worthy. 

I swear  that  this  Work  of  Evocation  is  not  undertaken  for  the  purposes  of  evil  or 
self-seeking,  nor  low  material  gain,  nor  earthly  pleasure,  but  is  undertaken  as  a joyous 
labour  in  that  Great  Work  to  which  I am  most  solemnly  pledged.  I swear  and  affirm  that  I 
shall  evoke  the  Angel  CHASSAN  for  the  purposes  of  enhancement  of  the  Virtues  of  Air, 
strengthening  of  the  Power  NOSCERE  to  aid  the  ignorant,  reception  of  guidance  to  further 
the  Work  of  the  Order  in  the  Aquarian  Age,  and  retention  of  the  service  of  the  Angel  for 
the  future  workings  of  a kindred  nature. 

So  do  I swear  by  the  Firmament  of  Heaven.  Let  the  Powers  of  Air  witness  my  pledge. 
(Continuing  to  be  aware  of  the  energies  invoked  into  the  vortex  of  the  Circle,  the 
Magician  faces  the  Quarter  in  which  the  Triangle  of  Evocation  is  located.  In  his  left  hand  he 


51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

holds  the  Yetziratic  Pantacle  of  CHASSAN,  and  in  his  right  hand  the  open  Fan.  With 
the  Fan,  he  wafts  the  billows  of  incense  towards  the  East  between  the  Pillars.)  CHASSAN, 
CHASSAN,  CHASSAN. 

I seek  Thee,  CHASSAN,  Thou  Angelic  Dweller  in  the  sphere  of  Elemental  Air. 
(Close  the  Fan,  and  with  it  trace  a deosil  circle  of  yellow  light  to  the  East.) 

I seek  Thee  by  the  mighty  Tetragrammaton,  in  the  Most  Holy  Name  YHVH.  (In  the 
Circle,  trace  the  equilibriating  Pentagram  of  Spirit  Active:) 

I seek  Thee  in  the  Everliving  Name  of  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI  (Trace  the  Invoking 
Pentagram  of  Air.  Raise  the  Fan  on  high  and  open  it.) 

I seek  thee  CHASSAN,  in  Thy  Yetziratic  abode  in  the  Names  of  Those  who  govern 
Thy  Works  - in  the  name  of  the  blessed  Archangel  RAPHAEL,  (Shake  Fan  towards  the 
East.)  and  of  the  Ruler  of  the  Angels  of  the  Air,  the  mighty  ARIEL.  (Shake  Fan  once 
towards  the  East.) 

I seek  Thee,  0 Angel  CHASSAN,  by  the  power  symbolized  in  the  Sign  of  Kerubic 
Air,  the  ancient  Glyph  named  in  Hebrew  ADAM  and  in  Coptic  PHRITITHI. 

(With  closed  Fan,  trace  the  Kerubic  Sign  of  Aquarius  in  yellow  light  in  the  circled 
Pentagram.  At  this  point,  the  Magician  should  visualize  the  area  of  the  Gateway  between  the 
Pillars  growing  dark  and  cloudy  with  swirling  mists.  Replace  the  Fan  on  the  Altar,  and  hold 
the  Yetziratic  Pantacle  in  both  hands.  Look  into  the  swirling  mists  of  the  Gate  and  focus 
your  Will  on  the  purpose  of  the  Evocation.  Charge  your  Middle  Pillar  Centres  once  more 
with  a ray  of  Kether  brilliance.  Visualize  and  feel  the  deosil  current  of  yellow-glowing 
energy  throbbing  in  the  Magic  Circle.) 

I have  sought  Thee  CHASSAN,  and  by  virtue  of  this  consecrated  Pantacle  (Hold  the 
Yetziratic  Pantacle  on  high  in  both  hands.  See  the  yellow  Light  playing  about  it.)  and  by 
virtue  of  this  Thy  Sigil,  (With  the  Pantacle  trace  the  Sigil  from  the  Rose  of  CHASSAN  in 
the  Circled  Pentagram  to  the  East.  The  swirling  mists  between  the  Pillars  should  grow 
lighter.)  and  by  virtue  of  Thine  own  true  Name  which  I vibrate  through  the  Gate  of  the  East 
into  the  Yetziratic  Realm  of  RUACH,  I have  found  Thee  CHASSAN!  (Make  Projecting 
Sign.)  CHASSAN!  (Projecting  Sign.)  CHASSAN!  (Projecting  Sign.) 

(Make  Sign  of  Silence.  The  three  projections  of  force  from  the  highly  charged 
Magic  Circle  will  disperse  the  mists  and  a landscape  will  become  visible  through  the 
Gateway.  The  Magician  assumes  the  Sign  of  Osiris  Risen.) 

O Lord  of  the  Universe-Thou  art  above  all  things 
And  Thy  Name  is  in  all  things;  and  before  Thee, 

The  Shadows  of  the  Night  roll  back  and  the  Darkness  hasteth  away. 

(The  landscape  through  the  Gate  should  now  be  clearly  visible.  It  is  a hilly 
countryside  beneath  a sky  of  scudding  clouds  lit  from  beneath  with  the  rosy  and  golden 
tints  of  dawn.  The  hill  in  the  foreground  is  surmounted  by  an  ivy-decked  tower  rising 
above  the  evergreens.  High  on  a tower,  a large  cut-glass  window  bearing  the  Air  Glyph 
catches  and  reflects  the  light  of  dawn.  On  closer  inspection,  one  sees  that  several  hills  in  the 
distance  are 


52 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


also  crowned  with  towers,  and  one  sees  against  the  sky  the  silhouettes  of  large  birds  - no, 
they  are  Angels  and  Sylphs  - flying  gracefully  from  tower  to  tower.  The  Magician  should 
have  a strong  sense  that  the  tower  in  the  foreground  is  the  abode  of  CHASSAN.  The 
Magician  should  now  test  the  Vision  with  the  Signs  of  the  Lords  who  Wander.  Once  sure  of 
contact,  the  Magician  wraps  the  Yetziratic  Pantacle  in  black  cloth,  binds  it  with  a white 
cord  passed  around  it  thrice,  and  places  it  on  the  white  triangle  on  the  Altar.) 

O Thou  Angel  CHASSAN,  in  the  Names  of  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI  and  YHVH,  I 
wrap  Thee  in  Darkness  and  bind  Thee  with  bonds  of  Light.  Thine  eyes  are  blind  save  to  this 
Gate  to  the  Hall  of  Maat.  Thine  ears  are  deaf  save  to  my  Call.  Thy  tongue  is  mute  save  to 
answer  this  Evocation.  Thy  feet  are  lame  save  to  bear  Thee  to  the  Triangle  of  Art  prepared 
to  receive  Thee.  By  all  the  Powers  of  Air,  I evoke  Thee,  Thou  mighty  Angel  CHASSAN,  to 
manifest  in  a physical  form  in  the  Triangle  without  this  Magic  Circle!  SHADDAI  EL 
CHAI!  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI!  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI! 

Spirit  of  Life.  Spirit  of  Wisdom,  Whose  breath  giveth  forth  and  withdraweth  the 
form  of  all  things.  Thou  Who  before  Whom  the  life  of  beings  is  but  a shadow  which 
changeth  and  a vapour  which  passeth.  Thou,  who  mountest  upon  the  clouds  and  who 
walkest  upon  the  wings  of  the  Wind.  Thou,  Who  breathest  forth  Thy  breath  and  endless 
space  is  peopled.  Thou,  Who  drawest  in  Thy  breath  and  all  that  cometh  from  Thee 
returneth  unto  Thee.  Ceaseless  Motion  in  eternal  Stability,  be  thou  eternally  blessed! 

We  praise  Thee  and  we  bless  Thee  in  the  changeless  empire  of  created  light,  of 
shades,  of  reflections,  and  of  images.  And  we  aspire  without  cessation  unto  Thine 
immutable  and  imperishable  brilliance.  Let  the  ray  of  Thine  intelligence  and  the  warmth  of 
Thy  love  penetrate  even  unto  us!  Then  that  which  is  volatile  shall  be  fixed;  the  shadow 
shall  be  a body;  the  Spirit  of  Air  shall  be  a soul;  the  dream  shall  be  a thought.  And  no  more 
shall  we  be  swept  away  by  the  tempest,  but  we  shall  hold  the  bridles  of  the  winged  steeds  of 
dawn.  And  we  shall  direct  the  course  of  the  evening  breeze  to  fly  before  Thee!  0 Spirit  of 
Spirits!  0 Eternal  Soul  of  Souls!  0 imperishable  Breath  of  Life!  0 creative  Sign!  0 Mouth 
which  breathest  forth  and  withdrawest  the  life  of  all  beings,  in  the  flux  and  reflux  of  Thine 
eternal  Word,  Which  is  the  divine  Ocean  of  movement  and  of  truth! 

(The  Magician  circumambulates  thrice  deosil  while  saying:) 

In  Thy  most  Holy  Name  of  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  I invoke  and  beseech  Thee  to  look 
with  favour  upon  this  Work  of  Sacred  Magic  and  to  grant  Thine  aid  unto  the  higher 
aspirations  of  my  soul.  I beseech  Thee  to  charge  Thy  great  Archangel  RAPHAEL,  and  the 
Ruler  of  the  Angels  of  Air,  ARIEL,  to  aid  in  the  successful  culmination  of  this  work  that  I 
may,  with  the  Divine  aid,  truly  evoke  Thine  Angel  CHASSAN  to  visible  manifestation. 

(The  Magician  stands  West  of  the  Altar,  and  performs  the  Qabalistic  Cross.  He  then 
strikes  the  Pantacle  with  the  flat  of  the  blade  of  the  Dagger,  and  speaks  toward  the  Tower 
visible  beyond  the  Gate.) 

O CHASSAN!  I evoke  Thee  in  the  most  Puissant  Name  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI! 

Move!  Appear  and  show  Thyself! 


53 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

(It  is  possible  that  CHASSAN  may  begin  to  manifest  at  this  point.  Regardless,  the 
Magician  must  continue.  He  should  also  bear  in  mind  that  the  appearance  of  CHASSAN 
beyond  the  Gate  does  not  fulfil  the  conditions  of  the  Evocation.  The  Angel  must  pass 
through  the  Gate  and  manifest  physically  in  the  Triangle.) 

" RAPHAEL!  RAPHAEL!  RAPHAEL! 

(The  Magician  circumambulates  once  deosil  while  saying:) 

O Thou  sublime  and  resplendent  Archangel  RAPHAEL,  I invoke  Thee  in  the 
Everliving  Name  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI  to  send  a ray  of  Thy  Briatic  Glory  into  this  Circle, 
that  I may  be  empowered  to  compel  Thine  Angel  CHASSAN  to  visible  appearance.  I 
invoke  Thee  also  to  charge  ARIEL,  Angelic  Ruler  of  Air,  to  aid  in  this  Work  of  the 
Evocation  of  CHASSAN. 

(The  Magician  stands  West  of  the  Altar  and  faces  East.  He  strikes  the  Pantacle  with 
the  flat  of  the  Dagger  blade  and  speaks  towards  the  tower.) 

CHASSAN!  In  the  Name  of  the  Blessed  Archangel  of  Air,  RAPHAEL,  I evoke  Thee 
into  this  Triangle  of  Art  which  awaits  Thee!  Move!  Appear  and  show  Thyself!  ARIEL! 
ARIEL!  ARIEL! 

(The  Magician  circumambulates  once  deosil  while  saying:) 

O Thou  illustrious  Ruler  of  Air,  I invoke  Thee  in  the  sacred  Name  SHADDAI  EL 
CHAI  and  in  the  Archangelic  Name  RAPHAEL,  to  uphold  this  Work  and  to  grant  unto 
Thine 

Angel  CHASSAN  the  Power  of  perfect  physical  manifestation  in  the  Evocatory 
Triangle.  (The  Magician  stands  West  of  the  Altar,  faces  East,  and  strikes  the  Pantacle  with 
the  flat 

of  the  Dagger  blade.  He  then  speaks  towards  the  tower.) 

CHASSAN!  In  the  Name  of  Thine  Angelic  Ruler,  ARIEL,  I evoke  Thee  to  true  and 
, perfect  manifestation  in  the  Triangle  without  this  circle  of  Art!  Move!  Appear  and  show 
Thyself! 

CHASSAN!  CHASSAN!  CHASSAN! 

(The  Magician  circumambulates  once  deosil  while  saying:) 

Thou  potent  Angel  of  Air,  I evoke  Thee  in  the  mighty  Names  of  the  Powers  of  Air, 
SHADDAI  EL  CHAT,  RAPHAEL,  ARIEL! 

(The  Magician  stands  West  of  the  Altar  and  Faces  East.  He  then  strikes  the  Pantacle 
with  the  flat  of  the  Dagger  blade,  and  speaks  towards  the  tower.) 

CHASSAN!  Move!  Appear  and  show  Thyself! 

(The  wrapped  Pantacle  is  now  borne  to  the  Four  Quarters  and  barred,  purified,  and 
consecrated  as  in  the  Neophyte  Ritual.  During  this  procedure,  the  Angel  will  become 
visible  through  the  Gate  if  He  has  not  appeared  previously.  When  the  Pantacle  is  returned  to 
the  Altar,  the  blackcloth  is  removed,  as  the  Magician  says:) 

Too  long  hast  Thou  dwelt  in  Darkness  - Quit  the  Night  and  seek  the  Day. 

(This  is  a very  likely  point  for  the  physical  manifestation  in  the  Triangle  to  begin. 
The  Magician  stands  West  of  the  Altar  facing  East,  taking  the  Fan  in  his  left  hand  and  the 
Dagger  in  his  right.) 

CHASSAN,  Thou  Mighty  Angel,  I call  Thee  - I adjure  Thee  - I evoke  Thee!  Come 


54 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Thou  forth  from  Thine  Airy  abode  in  the  Yetziratic  Realm  of  Ruach!  Come  Thou  forth 
and  assume  a physical  form!  The  Material  Basis  hath  been  prepared  and  consecrated  for 
Thee  in  the  Triangle  of  Evocation  without  this  Magic  Circle.  I evoke  Thee  CHASSAN  in 
the  Names  and  letters  of  the  Great  Eastern  Quadrangle  revealed  unto  Enoch  by  the  Great 
Angel  Ave! 

(The  Magician  uses  the  Projecting  Sign  to  focus  a projection  of  his  Will  and  of  the 
energies  in  the  Circle  on  the  Material  Basis  and  the  Assiatic  Pantacle  in  the  Triangle.  He 
then  makes  the  Sign  of  Silence.) 

I evoke  Thee  CHASSAN  in  the  Three  Great  Secret  Holy  Names  of  God  borne  on  the 
Banners  of  the  Watchtower  of  the  East:  ORO  IB  AH  AOZODPI! 

(Projecting  Sign  followed  by  Sign  of  Silence.  The  Magician  should  be  reaching  a 
level  of  ekstasis  by  this  point.) 

I evoke  Thee  CHASSAN,  in  the  name  of  BATAIVAH,  great  King  of  the  East! 
(Projecting  Sign,  and  then  Sign  of  Silence.  The  area  defined  by  the  Triangle  should,  to  the 
clairvoyant  eye,  be  pulsating  with  yellow  light.) 

I evoke  Thee  CHASSAN,  by  virtue  of  this  Pantacle  consecrated  in  thy 
Name  according  to  the  Hermetic  Formula  of  the  Enterer!) 

(The  Magician  strikes  the  Pantacle  with  the  flat  of  the  dagger  blade.) 

And  by  my  knowlege  of  Thine  own  true  Name  whose  number  is  one  thousand  and 

eight,  I evoke  Thee 

CHASSAN!  CHASSAN!  CHASSAN! 

(Projecting  Sign,  and  then  Sign  of  Silence.) 

In  the  name  of  YHVH!  In  the  name  of  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI!  (Projecting  Sign,  and 

then  Sign  of  Silence.) 

In  the  Names  of  RAPHAEL  and  ARIEL!  (Projecting  Sign,  and  then  Sign  of 
Silence.)  In  the  names  of  RUACH,  HIDDIKEL,  and  MIZRACH!  (Projecting  Sign  and 
then  Sign  of  Silence.) 

In  the  name  of  PARALDA,  King  of  the  Sylphs!  (Projecting  Sign,  and  then  Sign  of 

Silence.) 

In  the  name  of  CHASSAN,  Angel  of  Air!  (Projecting  Sign,  and  then  Sign  of 
Silence.)  ZODACARE  OD  ZODAMERANU!  ZODAMERANU!  ZODAMERANU! 
(Projecting  Sign  and  Sign  of  Silence.) 

CHASSAN!  CHASSAN!  CHASSAN!  (Projecting  Sign,  and  then  Sign  of  Silence.) 

(If  the  Angel  has  not  attained  complete  manifestation  at  this  point,  the  Magician 
should  repeat  the  Invocation  of  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI  up  to  three  times,  if  necessary.  Once 
CHASSAN  is  fully  materialized,  the  Magician  should  test  the  manifestation  with  the  Signs 
of  the  Lords  who  Wander  and  with  the  LVX  Signs.  If  it  is  truly  CHASSAN  who  has 
appeared,  He  will  return  the  LVX  Signs.  If  it  is  not,  the  manifesting  Spirit  will  vanish, 
flee,  or  metamorphose  into  another  form.  If  any  of  these  results  occur,  banish  the  Spirit 
thoroughly  and  begin  again.  If  the  Angel  responds  correctly  with  the  LVX  Signs,  the 
Magician  should  greet  Him  with:) 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

In  the  Grand  Word  YEHESHUAH,  by  the  Key  Word  INRI,  and  through  the 
concealed  Word  LVX,  I greet  and  salute  Thee,  0 CHASSAN;  and  by  those  same  words  of 
Power  I require  Thee  to  bind  Thyself  by  this  Oath.  (In  an  Evocation,  do  not  hold 
conversation  with  any  Spirit  until  he  has  pledged  himself  to  the  Oath  prepared  for  him.) 

I,  CHASSAN,  an  Angel  of  Air,  in  the  Presence  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  Who 
Works  in  Silence  and  Whom  naught  but  Silence  can  express,  do  solemnly  swear  to  do 
naught  to  harm  E CINERE  PHOENIX  nor  any  other  Man,  nor  this  Temple  of  the  Magic  of 
Light.  I undertake  to  answer  any  questions  put  to  Me  truthfully  and  without-deception.  I 
pledge  to  do  all  in  my  power  to  aid  the  Magician  that  the  Virtues  of  Air  may  be  enhanced 
within  him  that  he  may  better  labour  in  the  Great  Work.  I vow  to  strengthen  the  Magician  in 
the  Power  NOSCERE  that  he  may  have  knowledge  to  aid  the  ignorant.  I promise  that  I shall 
guide  him  to  further  the  Work  of  the  CHEVRAH  ZERACH  AUR  BOQER  and  the  Ordo 
Rosae  Rubeae  et  Aureae  Crucis  in  the  Aquarian  Age.  Further,  I pledge  to  serve  this  Son  of 
the  Lineage  of  Adam  faithfully,  and  that  I shall  always  come  promptly  to  his  Call  when 
summoned.  I swear  to  uphold  all  these  things  without  evasion,  reservation,  or  equivocation. 
Such  is  my  Oath,  whereunto  I pledge  Myself  in  the  Presence  of  the  most  High  YHVH  and 
the  Everliving  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI;  in  the  Presence  of  the  wise  and  puissant  Archangel 
RAPHAEL;  and  in  the  Presence  of  the  Angelic  Ruler  of  the  Sphere  of  Ruach,  ARIEL.  So 
mote  it  be!  (The  Magician  replies:)  So  mote  it  be. 

(The  Magician  may  then  converse  with  the  Angel.  When  all  is  concluded,  the 
Magician  should  address  the  Angel  thus:) 

O Thou  true  and  faithful  Angel  CHASSAN,  Thou  hast  complied  with  the  charge  set 
before  Thee  and  pledged  Thyself  to  the  Oath  prepared  for  Thee.  Therefore  I pray  that  Thou 
mayest  be  nourished  and  elevated  by  that  ray  of  the  Divine  Power  which  thou  hast  borne  as 
messenger  to  me  this  day. 

(With  the  Dagger,  the  Magician  inscribes  a Cross  before  CHASSAN  and  draws  a 
ray  of  the  White  Brilliance  down  on  the  Angel  in  the  Triangle.  The  Magician  allows  the 
Angel  to  experience  the  Light  for  a few  moments,  then  grants  Him  license  to  depart.) 

O CHASSAN,  I now  bid  Thee  depart  in  peace  unto  Thine  Abode,  and  may  the 
blessing  of  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI  go  with  Thee.  Be  there  always  peace  between  Thee  and  me, 
and  be  Thou  ready  to  come  when  Thou  art  called  unto  me  by  Word  or  Will. 

(The  Magician  inscribes  the  Banishing  Pentagrams  of  Spirit  Active  and  Air  to  the 
East  while  vibrating  YHVH  and  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  then  inscribes  in  the  midst  of  the 
Pentagram  the  Sigil  of  CHASSAN  while  vibrating  the  name  CHASSAN.  The  Magician 
then  circumambulates  once  widdershins,  returns  to  the  West  of  the  Altar  and  faces  East. 
Knocks)  So  mote  it  be. 

Ye  Powers  of  Air,  Who  have  lent  Your  aid  unto  this  Working,  depart  Ye  in  peace 
unto  Your  Abodes  and  Habitations,  and  go  with  my  humble  gratitude  and  with  the 
blessings  of  YHVH. 

(The  Magician  inscribes  the  Banishing  Pentagram  of  Spirit  Active  and  Air  to  the  East 
while  vibrating  YHVH  and  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI,  then  inscribes  in  the  midst  of  the 


56 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Pentagram  the  Glyph  of  Aquarius,  vibrating  RUACH.  The  Magician 
circumambulates  once  widdershins,  returns  to  the  West  of  the  altar,  and  faces  East.  Knocks). 
So  mote  it  be. 

I now  release  any  spirits  that  may  have  been  accidentally  imprisoned  by  this 
ceremony.  Depart  in  peace  to  your  Abodes  and  habitations,  and  go  with  the  blessings  of 
YEHESHUAH  YEHOVASHAH. 

(The  Magician  performs  the  Banishing  Rituals  of  the  Pentagram  and  Hexagram. 
Knocks).  So  mote  it  be. 

(The  Magician  faces  East  and  assumes  the  Sign  of  Osiris  Slain.) 

Unto  Thee,  sole  wise  and  eternal  One,  be  the  praise  and  the  glory  forever,  Who  hath 
permitted  me  to  enter  thus  far  into  the  Sanctuary  of  Thy  Sacred  Mysteries.  Not  unto  me  but 
unto  Thee  be  the  Glory. 

(The  Magician  performs  the  Qabalistic  Cross.) 

TETELESTAI!  It  is  finished. 

(The  Magician  gives  one  knock  and  concludes  with:) 

I now  declare  this  Temple  of  the  Magic  of  Light  to  be  duly  closed. 


57 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 
THE  CANOPIC  GODS 

THE  SYMBOLISM  OF  THE  FOUR  GENII  OF  THE  HALL  OF  THE 

NEOPHYTES 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  SUB  SPE 

In  a Temple  of  the  Grade  of  Neophyte,  the  Four  Gods,  Ameshet,  Ahephi, 
Tmoumathph,  Kabexnuf,  said  also  to  be  Vice-gerants  of  the  Elements,  and 
answering  to  the  Rivers  of  Eden  as  drawn  in  the  Warrant  of  the  Temple,  are  said  to 
rule  in  the  four  Corners  of  the  Hall  between  the  Stations  of  the  Kerubim. 

In  Egyptian  mythology,  these  Gods  are  also  said  to  be  the  Children  of  Horus, 
and  to  partake  of  his  symbolism.  If  now,  we  regard  the  Neophyte  Ceremony  as 
representing  the  entrance  into  a new  life,  Regeneration  - Mors  Janua  Vitae  - the 
Egyptian  symbolism  wherein  that  idea  was  so  clearly  and  exactly  worked  out 
becomes  important.  Bear  in  mind  that  a new  life  means  a new  plane  or  a higher 
world,  a passing,  say,  from  the  Kether  of  Assiah  to  the  Malkuth  of  Yetzirah. 

Now  as  behind  Kether  depend  the  Veils  of  the  Negative  Existence,  Ain,  Ain 
Soph  and  Ain  Soph  Aour,  so  through  Negative  Existence  must  pass  the  Soul  that  goes 
from  Assiah  to  Yetzirah,  or  vice-versa.  This  process  is  illustrated  by  the  Neophyte 
Ceremony  as  described  in  Z-3,  and  as  seen  by  the  clairvoyant  eye.  In  Egyptian 
mythology,  the  Dead,  when  the  Ceremonies  are  complete,  the  Soul  weighed  and 
passed,  the  Body  mummied  and  preserved  from  corruption,  became  one  with  Osiris, 
and  is  called  an  Osirian.  Hence,  the  Hierophant,  who  represents  Osiris  when  the 
Candidate  is  placed  in  the  North,  speaks  to  him  in  the  character  of  his  Higher  Soul 
- "The  Voice  of  my  Higher  Self  said  unto  me"  etc. 

Osiris,  however,  is  a mummied  form,  and  the  body  of  the  Egyptian  dead  was 
mummied  at  this  part  of  the  Ceremony.  Let  us  now  consider  the  nature  of  the  body 
which  is  mummied.  The  body  itself  may  be  considered  as  a vehicle  whereby  the  life 
forces  act,  and  the  medium  whereby  these  life-forces  act  is  what  are  termed  the  Vital 
organs.  Withdraw  or  destroy  any  of  these,  and  the  life  ceases  to  function  in  that  body. 
Not  less  important,  then,  than  the  body  itself,  the  vehicle  of  the  Soul,  are  the  Organs, 
the  media  for  the  action  of  organic  life,  and  it  is  equally  important  to  preserve  these 
from  corruption,  yet  not  together  with  the  body.  For  as  the  body  of  Osiris  was  broken 
up,  so  must  the  body  of  the  Osirian  be  divided.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  viscera 
being  preserved  apart  from  the  body. 

The  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  has  other  symbolisms  and  the  teachings 
belong  to  a higher  Grade.  Let  none  therefore  object  that  His  Body  was  laid  in  the 
Tomb  entire. 

The  Body  of  Osiris  was  first  laid  in  the  Chest  or  Pastos  whole.  The  division 
into  14  parts  was  subsequent.  Note  that  I plus  4 equals  5,  the  five  wounds. 

For  even  as  Yod  Heh  Vav  Heh  must  be  known  before  Yod  Heh  Shin  Vav  Heh 
can  be  comprehended,  and  as  Moses  must  precede  Christ,  so  must  the  Mysteries  of 
Osiris  first  be  known. 


58 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Now  the  Guardian  of  the  Hall  and  of  the  Neophytes  against  the  Qlippoth 
(whose  Kether  is  Thaumiel,  the  Dual  or  Two-headed  One,  the  Demons  of  corruption 
and  disintegration)  is  the  Hiereus  or  Horus,  and  to  the  Children  of  Horus,  who  partake 
of  his  symbolism,  are  the  viscera  committed,  to  guard  them  against  the  demons  of 
disintegration  and  corruption.  As  the  elements  and  the  forces  of  the  Elements  are  to 
the  world,  so  are  the  vital  organs  and  the  Life  which  animates  them  to  the  human 
body.  Appropriately,  then,  are  the  vital  organs  and  the  life  which  animates  them, 
placed  under  the  charge  of  the  Vice-gerents  of  the  Elements,  the  Children  of  Horus, 
the  Great  Gods  Ameshet,  Ahephi,  Tmoumathph  and  Kabexnuf,  who  regulate  their 
functions  in  material  life,  and  guard  them  after  so-called  death,  when  the  man  that  was 
has  become  an  Osirian. 

Consider  then,  what  are  these  vital  organs  and  their  functions.  Broadly  they 
may  be  divided  into  the  alimentary  system  and  the  circulatory  system,  for  in  this 
classification  we  take  no  account  of  the  brain  or  reproductive  organs  which  belong  to 
another  classification,  and  are  not  Elemental  nor  concerned  in  the  maintenance  of  the 
life  of  the  material  body. 

Each  of  these  divisions  may  be  further  divided  into  that  which  divides  or 
distributes  to  the  body  - that  which  is  needed  for  life,  and  that  which  casts  out  from  the 
body  and  renders  to  the  Qlippoth  that  which  is  unnecessary  or  pernicious.  From  this 
arises  a four-fold  division  as  in  the  following: 

A.  is  the  receptive  aspect  of  the  Alimentary  system. 

B.  is  the  excretory  aspect  of  the  Alimentary  system. 

C.  is  the  receptive  aspect  of  the  Circulatory  system. 

D.  is  the  excretory  aspect  of  the  Circulatory  system. 

With  this  Key,  the  division  becomes  easy,  for  in  the  Alimentary  System,  the 
stomach  and  the  upper  intestines  divide  the  food  taken  into  the  system  by  a process 
called  digestion,  and  by  assimilation  retain  what  is  necessary.  This  therefore  is  "A"  in 
the  above.  But  the  lower  intestines  receive  and  cast  out  that  which  is  rejected.  These 
therefore  will  be  represented  by  "13."  In  the  circulatory  system,  the  heart  is  the  organ 
which  distributes  the  blood  which  it  receives  washed  and  purified  by  the  lungs. 

Hence  the  lungs  and  heart  are  represented  by  "C."  The  matter  rejected  from  the 
circulatory  system  is  rejected  and  cast  forth  by  the  liver  and  gall-bladder,  which 
therefore  will  be  represented  by  "D." 

Now  as  to  the  treatment  of  these  vital  organs  in  the  process  of  mummification. 
Insofar  as  during  life  they  were  under  the  guardianship  of  the  Great  Gods  mentioned, 
so  in  death  they  were  dedicated  each  to  one  of  these,  who  were  the  four  Genii  of  the 
Underworld  or  the  Lesser  Gods  of  the  Dead. 

These  vital  organs  then,  being  taken  out  and  separately  embalmed,  were 
placed  in  egg-shaped  receptacles,  symbolic  of  Akasa.  They  were  under  the  care  of 
Canopus,  the  Pilot  of  Menelaus,  and  the  God  of  the  Waters  of  Creation,  the  Eternal 
Source  of  Being,  whose  symbol  was  a jar.  These  were  under  the  protection  of  that 
one  of  the  Genii  of  the  Underworld  or  Vice-gerents  of  the  Elements  to  whom  that 
particular  organ  was  dedicated.  Hence  each  egg-shaped  package  was  enclosed  in  a jar 
whose  lid  was  shaped  like  the  head  of  that  God. 


59 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

Now  Ameshet  was  also  termed  "The  Carpenter"  for  he  it  is  who  by  the 
medium  of  his  organ,  the  Stomach,  frames  the  rough  materials  and  builds  up  the 
structure  of  the  body;  to  him  the  Stomach  and  Upper  Intestines  were  dedicated  (A). 

Ahephi  was  also  termed  "The  Digger"  or  "Burier"  for  he  puts  out  of  sight  or 
removes  that  which  is  useless  or  offensive  in  the  body,  and  to  him  the  Lower 
Intestines  or  Bowels  were  dedicated  (B). 

Tmoumathph  was  also  called  "The  Cutter"  or  "Divider"  for  he  divides  and 
distributes  the  blood  bearing  with  it  the  Prana  and  the  Subtle  Ether  by  the  Holy 
Science  of  Breath  brought  into  the  body,  and  to  him  were  the  lungs  or  heart 
dedicated  (C). 

Kabexnuf  was  termed  "The  Bleeder"  for  as  a stream  of  blood  is  drawn  from  the 
body,  so  is  a stream  of  impurity  drawn  from  the  blood,  and  cast  out  into  the  draught 
by  the  action  of  the  Liver  and  Gall-Bladder.  To  him  therefore,  these  organs  were 
dedicated  (D). 

These  jars  were  called  Canopic  Jars  and  were  arranged  in  a certain  order 
round  the  Mummy.  Consider  now,  the  points  of  the  compass  to  which  they  would 
naturally  be  attributed.  Reason  itself  will  insist  that  the  organs  of  the  Alimentary 
System,  the  most  material  and  earthy,  should  be  in  the  North.  The  warm  and  vital 
heat  of  the  Circulatory  System  should  be  to  the  South.  In  the  following  tables,  the 
Receptive  and  Distributive  organs  should  be  placed  to  the  East,  the  source  of  Life  and 
Light,  and  the  organs  that  purify  and  cast  out  should  be  to  the  West  that  borders  on 
the  Qlippoth. 

This  gives  us  the  following  arrangement: 

Ameshet  --  Northeast  quadrant.  (Stomach  and  Upper  Intestines).  Ahephi  -- 
Northwest  quadrant.  (Bowels). 

Tmoumathph  --  Southeast  quadrant.  (Heart  and  Lungs).  Kabexnuf  — Southwest 
quadrant.  (Liver  and  Gall-Bladder). 

Yet  this  arrangement,  would,  as  it  were,  symbolise  the  entire  separation  of 
the  Alimentary  System  and  the  Circulatory  System,  which  is  contrary  to  Nature,  for 
they  continually  counterchange,  and  thus  arises  Life.  Wherefore  in  the  Hall  of  the 
Two  Truths,  the  portions  of  Ahephi  and  Kabexnuf  are  reversed,  and  the  order 
becomes. 

EAST  --  Ameshet. 

SOUTH  - Tmoumathph.  NORTH  - Kabexnuf.  WEST  - Ahephi. 

Now  these,  being  thus  arranged,  do  partake  of  the  symbolism  of  the  elements 
to  which  they  belong.  For  Ameshet  being  to  the  East,  the  quarter  of  Air,  has  the 
head  of  a Man.  Tmoumathph,  to  the  South,  has  the  head  of  a Jackal  who  is  the 
purveyor  of  the  Lion  (for  these  are  the  Vice-Gerents  of  the  Elements,  while  the 
Kerubim  are  the  Lords  thereof);  so  Tmoumathph  is  properly  a jackal.  Kabexnuf  in 
the  West,  in  the  region  of  Water,  has  the  form  of  a Hawk,  the  subordinate  form  to 
the  Alchemic  Eagle  of  Distillation,  and  the  form 


60 


VOLUME  EIGHT 

also,  of  Horus,  the  Hiereus,  beside  whom  is  his  station,  and  of  whose 
symbolism  he  partakes. 

Ahephi  in  the  North,  has  the  head  of  an  Ape.  The  symbolism  of  the  Ape  in 
ancient  Egypt  is  very  complex.  Here  it  may  be  taken  that  while  Apis,  the  Bull, 
represents  the  Divine  Strength  of  the  Eternal  Gods,  the  Ape  represents  the  Elemental 
Strength  which  is  far  inferior  and  blended  with  cunning.  Ahephi,  however,  has  other 
symbolism  and  other  attributes.  For  by  reason  of  the  fertilising  qualities  of  the  Nile 
and  of  the  fact  that  what  is  brought  down  by  the  Nile  as  refuse  from  the  Land  of  the 
Sacred  Lakes  is,  to  Egypt,  its  life  and  the  source  of  its  fertility,  so  there  arises  a 
correspondence  between  the  Nile  and  the  lower  intestines.  Both  are  under  the  care  of 
Ahephi  (Hapi)  who  thus  was  worshipped  as  Nilus,  and  in  this  connection  he  has  for 
his  symbol,  a head-dress  of  Lotus  Flowers. 

Now,  further,  the  Alimentary  System  is  under  the  special  guardianship  of  Isis 
and  Nephthys.  Isis  who  conquers  by  the  power  of  Wisdom  and  the  forces  of  Nature, 
guards  Ameshet.  And  Nephthys  who  hides  that  which  is  secret,  guards  Ahephi  - 
whence  also,  until  recent  days,  in  the  fulness  of  Time,  the  sacred  sources  of  Ahephi, 
the  Nile,  were  kept  secret  from  the  whole  world. 

Tmoumathph  is  under  the  guardianship  of  Neith,  the  Dawn.  This  is  the 
Celestial  Space,  who  makes  the  Morning  to  pass  and  awakes  the  Light  of  a Golden 
Dawn  in  the  Heart  of  Him  whom  the  Eternal  Gods  shall  choose,  by  the  Sacred 
Science  of  the  Breath. 

Kabexnuf  is  guarded  by  Sekhet,  the  Sun  at  the  Western  Equinox,  the  Opening 
of  Amenti,  who  wears  the  Scorpion  on  her  head.  These  guardianships  were  often 
painted  on  the  Canopic  jars. 

When,  therefore,  the  Candidate  kneels  at  the  foot  of  the  Altar,  or  where  the 
Corpse  lies  on  the  Bier  preparatory  to  the  passing  over  the  River  towards  the  West, 
there  the  Soul  stands  before  Osiris,  and  the  Goddesses  stand  by  and  watch  while  the 
Beam  sways  and  the  decision  is  taken.  Then,  the  body  of  the  Candidate  is,  as  it  were, 
broken  up  as  the  body  of  Osiris  was  broken,  and  the  Higher  Self  stands  before  the 
place  of  the  Pillars,  but  the  lower  self  is  in  the  invisible  station  of  the  evil  persona. 
Then  is  the  Candidate  nigh  unto  death,  for  then,  symbolically,  his  Spirit  passes 
through  the  Veils  of  the  Negative  Existence,  passing  from  the  Kether  of  Assiah  to  the 
Malkuth  of  Yetzirah.  Therefore,  unless  the  Genii  of  the  Underworld  were  then  present 
and  directing  their  forces  on  the  vital  organs,  he  must  inevitably  die. 

Let  their  symbols  then  be  represented  in  all  operations  and  formulae  drawn 
from  the  symbolism  of  the  Hall  of  the  Two  Truths,  for  they  are  of  the  utmost 
importance,  but  as  their  stations  are  Invisible,  so  shall  their  symbols  be  astral  and  not 
material. 

Thus  shall  perfect  health  of  body  be  preserved,  which  is  of  utmost  importance 
in  all  magical  working,  and  thus  shall  the  lessons  of  the  Hall  of  the  Neophytes  be  duly 
carried  out  in  our  daily  life. 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

The  stations  of  the  God-forms  used  in  our  symbolism  come  under  two  heads: 

1.  Visible  Stations. 

2.  Invisible  Stations. 

The  Visible  Stations  are  the  places  of  the  Officers,  each  of  whom  has  a 
special  astral  shape  suitable  to  the  forces  he  represents. 

On  the  Dais  are  places  for  the  Three  Chiefs,  the  Past  Hierophant  and  the 
Hierophant.  The  order  in  which  they  sit  (as  you  face  East)  is: 

Imperator-Nephthys 

Cancellarius-Thoth 

Hierophant-Osiris 

Past  Hierophant-Aroueris  Praemonstrator-lsis 

These  names  are  those  of  the  God-forms  they  represent.  The  following  are  the 
descriptions  of  the  God-forms  of  the  seven  Officers  of  the  Neophyte  Grade. 

Hierophant:  Osiris  in  the  Underworld.  Expounder  of  the  Mysteries  in  the  Hall 
of  the  Dual  Manifestation  of  the  Goddess  of  Truth. 

Hierophant  is  represented  by  two  God-forms,  the  passive  and  active  aspects  of 
Osiris.  Seated  on  the  Dais  as  Hierophant,  he  is  clothed  in  the  God-form  of  Osiris.  He 
wears  the  tall  white  crown  of  the  South,  flanked  by  feathers  striped  white  and  blue. 
His  face  is  green,  the  eyes  blue,  and  from  his  chin  hangs  the  royal  beard  of  authority 
and  judgment,  blue  in  colour  and  gold  tipped.  He  wears  a collar  in  bands  of  red,  blue, 
yellow,  and  black  - and  on  his  back  is  a bundle  strapped  across  his  chest  by  scarlet 
bands.  He  is  in  mummy  wrappings  to  the  feet,  but  his  hands  are  free  to  hold  a golden 
Phoenix  Wand,  a Blue  Crook  and  Red  Scourge.  The  hands  are  green.  His  feet  rest  on 
a pavement  of  black  and  white. 

The  God-form  of  Osiris  never  moves  from  the  Dais.  When  the  Hierophant  has 
to  move  from  the  Dais,  he  is  covered  by  the  form  of  Osiris  in  action  - Aroueris,  which 
is  built  up  by  the  Past  Hierophant,  seated  on  Hierophant's  left.  If  no  one  is  seated  as 
Past  Hierophant,  then  inner  Order  Members  help  the  Hierophant  to  formulate  the 
second  God-form. 

Aroueris,  Horus  the  Elder,  is  very  lively  to  look  upon  - like  pure  flames.  He 
wears  the  Double  Crown  of  Egypt,  the  cone  shaped  crown  in  red  inside  the  white 
crown  of  the  North,  with  a white  plume.  His  nemyss  is  purple  banded  with  gold  at  the 
edges.  His  face  and  body  are  translucent  scarlet.  He  has  green  eyes  and  wears  a purple 
beard  of  authority.  He  wears  a yellow  tunic  with  a waist  cloth  of  yellow  striped  with 
purple,  from  which  depends  a lion's  tail.  In  common  with  all  Egyptian  Gods,  he  has  a 
white  linen  kilt  showing  like  an  apron  under  the  coloured  waist  cloth. 


62 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


His  armlets  and  anklets  are  of  gold.  He  carries  in  his  right  hand,  a blue 
Phoenix  Wand  and  in  his  left,  a blue  Ankh.  He  stands  on  a pavement  of  purple  and 
gold. 

Hierus:  Horus  in  the  Abode  of  Blindness  unto  and  Ignorance  of  the  Higher. 
Avenger  of  the  Gods. 

He  wears  the  Double  Crown  of  the  South  and  North,  red  and  white,  over  a 
nemyss  of  scarlet  banded  with  emerald  green.  His  face  is  that  of  a lively  hawk  - tawny 
and  black  with  bright  piercing  eyes,  his  throat  is  white.  His  body,  like  that  of 
Aroueris,  is  entirely  scarlet.  He  wears  collar,  armlets,  and  anklets  of  emerald;  a waist 
cloth  of  emerald  striped  red,  from  which  depends  a lion's  tail.  He  carries  in  his  right 
hand  an  Emerald  Phoenix  Wand,  and  in  his  left  a blue  Ankh.  He  stands  on  a 
pavement  of  emerald  and  scarlet. 

Hegemon:  Thmaa-Est  "Before  the  Face  of  the  Gods  in  the  Place  of  the 
Threshold." 

Thmaa-est  wears  a black  nemyss  bound  at  the  brow  with  a purple  band  from 
which  rises,  in  front,  a tall  ostrich  feather  of  green  striped  with  red  in  equal  bands. 
She  wears  a banded  collar  of  red,  yellow,  blue  and  black.  Her  tunic  is  emerald  green 
reaching  to  the  feet  where  it  is  banded  to  match  the  collar.  She  has  purple  and  green 
shoulder  straps  and  a purple  girdle  also  bordered  in  the  colours  mentioned  above.  Her 
face  and  body  are  natural  colour  - i.e.,  a light  Egyptian  red-brown.  She  wears  armlets 
of  emerald  and  red,  and  carries  a combined  form  of  Lotus  and  Phoenix  Wand.  It  has 
an  orange  flower  - a blue  stem,  and  ends  in  an  orange  Sign  of  the  Binary.  In  her  left 
hand  she  carries  a blue  Ankh,  and  she  stands  on  a pavement  of  yellow  and  purple, 
bordered  with  blocks  of  red,  blue,  yellow,  black,  in  succession. 

Kerux:  Anubis  of  the  East.  Watcher  of  the  Gods. 

Anubis  has  the  head  of  a black  jackal,  very  alert,  pointed  ears  well  pricked 
up.  His  nemyss  is  purple  banded  with  white;  he  wears  a collar  of  yellow  and  purple 
bands,  and  a tunic  of  yellow  flecked  with  tufts  of  black  hair.  His  body  is  red.  His 
waist  cloth  is  yellow  striped  with  purple  and  from  it  hangs  a lion's  tail.  His 
ornaments  are  purple  and  gold.  His  Phoenix  Wand  and  Ankh  are  blue.  He  stands  on 
a pavement  of  purple  and  yellow. 

Stolistes:  Auramo-ooth:  "The  Light  shining  through  the  Waters  upon 
Earth. ""Goddess  of  the  Scales  of  the  Balance  at  the  Black  Pillar." 

Auramo-ooth  is  mainly  in  blue.  Her  face  and  body  are  natural.  She  wears  a 
blue  Crown  of  the  North  from  which  springs  a delicate  gold  plume,  over  a vulture 
head-dress  of  orange  and  blue.  Her  collar  is  orange  and  blue  also.  She  carries  a blue 
Ankh  and  a Lotus  Wand,  having  an  orange  lotus  on  a green  stem.  Her  plain  blue  tunic 
reaches  to  the  feet.  She  stands  on  black. 

Dadouchos:  Thaum-Aesch-Niaeth.  "Perfection  through  Fire  manifesting  on 
Earth."  "Goddess  of  the  Scales  of  the  Balance  at  the  White  Pillar." 

Thaum-aesch  is  mainly  in  red.  Her  face  and  body  are  natural.  She  wears  a red 
Crown  of  the  South,  flanked  by  two  feathers  in  green  barred  black,  over  a vulture 
head-dress  in  red  and  green.  Her  collar  is  red  and  green  and  she  carries  a green  Ankh 
and  a Lotus  Wand  with  a red  flower  and  a green  stem.  Her  simple  red  tunic  reaches 
to  the  feet  and  she  stands  on  black. 


63 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

Sentinel:  Anubis  of  the  West. 

His  form  is  the  same  as  that  of  Kerux  but  his  nemyss,  ornaments,  and  dress  are 
black  and  white.  He  has  a lion's  tail  and  carries  a black  Phoenix  Wand  and  Ankh.  He 
stands  on  black. 

THE  THREE  CHIEFS 

Imperator:  Nephthys. 

Nephthys  has  a face  and  body  of  translucent  gold.  She  is  crowned  with  a Cap 
over  a vulture  head-dress  of  black  and  white,  the  vulture  head  being  red.  Her  collar 
and  ornaments  are  black  and  white,  and  she  wears  a black  robe  to  the  feet.  It  is 
bordered  in  black  and  white.  She  carries  a blue  Ankh  and  a Lotus  Wand  with  a green 
flower  and  a blue  stem.  She  stands  on  black  and  white  pavement. 

Praemonstrator:  Isis. 

Isis  has  a face  and  body  of  translucent  gold.  She  is  crowned  with  a Throne  over 
a vulture  head-dress  of  blue  and  orange.  The  vulture  head  is  red.  Her  robe  is  of  blue 
bordered  with  gold.  Her  ornaments  are  blue  and  orange,  and  she  carries  a blue  Ankh 
and  a Lotus  wand  with  a green  flower  and  a blue  stem.  She  stands  on  blue  and 
orange. 

Cancellarius:  Thoth. 

The  God-form  of  Thoth  is  built  up  by  the  Cancellarius  or  the  officer  seated  on 
the  right  of  Hierophant.  This  is  his  visible  station,  but  during  a Neophyte  Grade,  he 
also  has  an  invisible  station  in  the  East  while  the  Obligation  takes  place. 

He  has  an  Ibis  head,  black  beak  and  white  throat.  His  nemyss  is  yellow 
bordered  with  mauve.  His  collar  yellow  with  a middle  band  of  squares  in  mauve  and 
green.  His  tunic  is  mauve  with  yellow  stripes,  and  he  has  a lion's  tail.  His  limbs  are 
natural  colour,  his  ornaments  are  red  and  green.  He  carries  a blue  Ankh,  and  a stylus 
and  writing  tablet.  He  stands  on  mauve  and  yellow. 

THE  INVISIBLE  STATIONS 

These  fall  naturally  into  four  groups  given  below  in  order  of  their  importance. 

1.  Stations  in  the  Path  Samekh  in  the  Middle  Pillar  - Hathor  - Harparkrat  - 
Evil  Persona. 

2.  Kerubim. 

3.  Children  of  Horus. 

4.  The  Forty-Two  Assessors. 

First,  Hathor:  This  Great  Goddess  formulates  behind  Hierophant  in  the  East. 
Her  face  and  limbs  are  of  translucent  gold.  She  wears  a scarlet  Sun  Disc,  resting 
between  black  horns  from  the  back  of  which  rise  two  feathers  in  white,  barred  blue. 
She  has  a black  nemyss  - a collar  of  blue,  red,  blue;  and  blue  bands  which  support 
her  robe  of  orange,  bordered  with 


64 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


blue  and  red.  Her  ornaments  are  blue  and  orange.  She  carries  a blue  Ankh  and 
Lotus  Wand  with  a green  flower  and  a blue  stem.  She  stands  on  black  bordered  with 
blue. 

Harparkrat:  He  formulates  in  the  centre  of  the  Hall  between  Hegemon  and 
the  Altar,  where  he  sits  or  stands  on  a Lotus,  facing  East.  His  face  and  body  are 
translucent  emerald  green.  He  has  blue  eyes,  and  a curl  of  blue  hair,  denoting  youth, 
comes  round  his  face  on  the  right  side.  He  wears  the  double  crown,  red  and  white.  His 
collar  is  yellow  and  blue;  his  waist  cloth  is  yellow  and  blue  with  a mauve  girdle, 
whence  depends  a lion's  tail.  His  Lotus  has  leaves  alternately  blue  and  yellow,  and 
rests  on  a pavement  of  mauve  and  orange.  He  has  no  insignia.  His  left  forefinger  is  on 
his  lips. 

Omoo-Sathan.  Typhon,  Apophis,  Set.  The  Evil  Persona  is  a composite  figure 
of  the  powers  arising  from  the  Qlippoth.  It  rises  from  the  base  of  the  Altar  standing 
East  of  the  Altar  facing  West,  in  the  Sign  of  Typhon.  He  is  black,  and  has  an 
animal,  somewhat  lizard-like,  head,  a black  body  and  tail,  and  he  stands  on  black.  His 
nemyss  is  of  olive  green  decorated  with  russet,  his  collar  of  russet  and  citrine.  He  has  a 
white  apron  and  a waist  cloth  of  dull  red  striped  with  russet.  He  has  no  ornaments. 

Second,  the  Kerubim.  The  Kerub  of  Air  is  formed  behind  Hathor  and  she  is  a 
power  of  Hathor,  and  has  the  same  general  colouring.  She  has  a young  girl's 
countenance  and  behind  her  are  spread  large  and  shadowing  wings. 

The  Kerub  of  Fire  is  in  the  South  beyond  the  seat  of  Dadouchos.  It  is  a power  of 
the  great  Goddess  Tharpesh,  and  has  the  face  and  form  of  a Lion  with  large  and 
clashing  wings.  The  colouring  is  very  lively  and  flashing  Leo  green  with  ruby  and 
flame-blue  and  Emerald  green. 

The  Kerub  of  Water  is  formed  behind  Hiereus  and  is  a power  of  the  great  God 
Toum  or  Tmu.  It  has  the  face  and  form  of  a great  Eagle  with  large  and  glistening 
wings.  The  colours  are  mostly  blue  and  orange  with  some  green. 

The  Kerub  of  Earth  is  in  the  North  behind  the  Seat  of  Stolistes.  It  is  a power  of 
the  great  God  Ahapshi  and  has  the  face  and  form  of  a Bull  with  heavy  darkening 
wings,  and  the  colours  are  black,  green,  red,  with  some  white. 

These  forms  are  not  described  in  detail,  but  see  the  paintings  in  the  colour  plate 
section.  We  are  to  imagine  them  there  as  great  stabilising  forces  whose  forms  vary 
according  to  circumstances. 

Third,  the  Children  of  Horus.  These  have  their  invisible  stations  in  the  corners 
of  the  Hall.  They  are  the  guardians  of  the  viscera  of  the  human  being  - every  part  of 
whom  comes  up  for  judgment  in  its  right  time  and  place. 

Ameshet:  The  man-faced  is  in  the  North  East.  He  has  a blue  nemyss  banded 
with  red,  blue  and  black.  His  face  is  red  and  he  has  a black  ceremonial  beard.  Round 
the  shoulders  of  his  white  mummy  shape  are  bands  of  red,  blue  and  black,  three  times 
repeated.  He  stands  on  red,  blue  and  black  with  a border  of  green,  white  and 
yellow. 

Tmoumathph:  The  Jackal-faced,  is  in  the  South  East.  He  has  a black  face  with 
yellow  linings  to  his  pointed  ears.  He  wears  a blue  nemyss  with  borders  of  black, 
yellow  and  blue 


65 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 

the  same  colours  appearing  threefold  at  his  shoulders.  He  has  a white  mummy 
shape  and  stands  on  blue,  yellow  and  black,  with  a border  of  green,  yellow,  mauve. 

Kabexnuv:  The  Hawk-faced,  is  in  the  North  West.  He  has  a black  and  tawny 
face,  and  a nemyss  of  black  bordered  with  red,  yellow,  black.  The  same  colours 
appear  three  fold,  at  his  shoulders.  He  has  a white  mummy  shape  and  stands  on  red, 
yellow,  and  black  with  a border  of  green,  mauve,  white. 

Ahephi:  The  Ape-faced,  is  in  the  South  West.  He  has  a blue  nemyss  bordered 
with  red,  blue  and  yellow  bands.  These  colours  appear  on  his  shoulders  in  the  same 
order.  His  face  is  red;  and  he  stands  on  red,  blue,  and  yellow,  with  a border  of  green, 
orange,  and  mauve. 

Tmoumathph  is  sometimes  written  Duamutef.  Kabexnuv  is  sometimes  written 
Qebhsenef.  Ahephi  is  sometimes  written  Hapi.  Ameshet  is  sometimes  written  Mesti. 

Fourth,  the  Forty-Two  Assessors.  These  are  not  described  at  all  save  to  say 
that  they  make  the  Sign  of  the  Enterer  as  the  Candidate  is  passed  by  them.  They  are 
Witnesses  in  the  Judgment  Hall  of  Osiris.  (This  paper  originated  in  the  early  days  of 
the  Stella  Matutina.  l.R.) 


66 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


LAMENS  AND  EXAMINATION  FOR  THE  GRADE 
OF  PRACTICUS  ADEPTUS  MINOR 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 

(The  Opening  of  this  document  was  addressed  originally  to  four  T.A.M.'s 
dated  1st  of  November  1894  by  Mathers.  It  includes  an  instruction  on  some  Lamens 
of  Egyptian  Gods.  Following  this  there  is  a paper  describing  the  content  of  an 
examination  to  be  taken  by  the  T.A.M.  before  the  next  sub-grade  of  Practicus 
Adeptus  Minor  Grade  could  be  attained.  I.R.) 

As  shown  in  the  one  of  the  Flying  Rolls  addressed  to  members  of  the  Second 
Order,  you  were  appointed  under  the  symbols  of  certain  Egyptian  Divinities  to 
exercise  certain  authority  as  laid  down  in  the  aforesaid  notice.  Herewith  I give  you 
the  necessary  instructions  for  properly  employing  those  particular  symbols. 

The  Lamen  of  the  God  or  Goddess  in  question  is  to  be  of  any  convenient  or 
preferred  size,  and  is  to  worn  suspended  from  a Ribbon  of  the  colour  of  the  element 
required. 

The  figure  of  the  Divinity  is  to  be  painted  thereon  in  any  convenient  colours 
(not  necessarily  those  of  its  element,  as  the  Gods  contain  many  of  its 
correspondences  in  their  formula,  but  copied  from  any  good  Egyptian 
representation.) 

The  figure  is  to  be  within  a double  circle  of  the  colour  of  the  element  and  on  a 
white  ground.  It  may  be  represented  either  standing  or  seated.  Within  the  double  circle 
its  name  is  to  be  written  in  Coptic  letters.  This  is  to  be  worn  at  all  meetings  with 
other  Regalia. 

When  the  member  in  question  is  exercising  his  or  her  authority  or  judgement 
in  the  matter  pertaining  to  the  God  or  Goddess,  let  him  or  her,  keeping  the  mind  as 
pure  as  possible,  assume  the  colossal  form  of  the  God  or  Goddess  as  taught  in  the 
Ritual  Z and  vibrate  its  name. 

Thus  let  him  or  her  judge  the  question  as  detached  from  his  ordinary  human 
personality.  To  this  end  let  him  be  sure  to  formulate  himself  as  the  figure  of  the  God 
as  colossal  and  not  simply  as  an  ordinary  size  figure.  Though  this  at  first  might  be 
difficult  it  will  gradually  become  easier  of  performance. 

These  symbols  of  the  Gods  are  given  to  you  that  you  may  have  greater  wisdom 
and  power  in  the  resolution  of  difficult  matters,  than  the  symbols  of  the  Theoricus 
grade  could  give  you. 

RITUAL  B 

Each  T.A.  M.  shall  make  or  adapt  and  consecrate  for  himself  unassisted  the 
Ring  and  the  Disc  of  a Theoricus  for  use  in  divination  and  consultation.  The  same 
Ring  or  a similar  one  is  to  be  worn  as  badge  of  his  grade  suspended  from  a collar  of 
one  or  all  colours  of  Malkuth. 


67 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


He  should  carefully  study  and  practice  himself  with  the  following  subjects  in 
which  a rigid  examination  will  have  to  be  passed  before  the  grade  of  P.A.M.  can  be 
attained. 

1.  Careful  study  of  the  symbolism  contained  in  the  Zelator  ritual  of  the  first 
Order  so  as  to  be  able  to  explain  any  part  thereof.  A lecture  on  this  subject  will  be 
available. 

2.  Development  of  the  sense  of  Clairaudience  in  the  Spirit  Vision. 

3.  The  knowledge  of  the  Ritual  of  the  12  Gates  in  Astral  Projection. 
Skrying  and  travelling  in  the  Spirit  Vision  answering  to  the  diagram  of  the  Table  of 
Shew  Bread. 

4.  The  method  of  bringing  the  Divine  White  Brillance  into  action  by  a 
certain  ritual  of  Ascent  and  Descent. 

5.  Careful  and  elaborate  Clairvoyant  study  and  analysis  of  the  four 
squares  above  the  Calvary  Crosses  in  each  lesser  angle  of  the  Four  Enochian  Tablets, 
and  of  their  influence  when  combined  with  a Servient  Squares  in  each  lesser  angle. 

6.  Development  of  the  employment  and  uses  of  Telesmata  and  Symbols. 

7.  Of  the  combination  of  various  forces  so  as  to  reconcile  their  action  in 
the  same  symbol  or  Telesma. 

8.  The  Egyptian  art  of  the  formation  of  a combined  series  of  images  of 
Gods  or  Forces  so  as  to  have  the  effect  of  a continuous  prayer  or  invokation  for  the 
Power  desired. 

9.  The  knowledge  of  SHADDAI  EL  CHAI  in  the  art  of  taking  in  any 
working,  the  God  Form  which  would  govern  the  same  by  means  of  identification 
with  a Telesmatic  figure. 

10.  The  true  system  of  astrological  divination. 

11.  Of  the  correspondences  existing  between  each  of  the  16  geomantic 
figures  and  each  of  the  16  lesser  angles  of  the  Enochian  Tablets  treated  as  a whole. 

12.  Tarot  divination  translated  into  magical  action. 

13.  The  knowledge  of  the  secret  rituals  of  the  symbolism  of  the  order  of  the 
Week  of  Creation  answering  to  the  diagram  of  the  7 branched  Candlestick. 

14.  The  thorough  elementary  knowledge  of  the  formulae  of  Awakening  of 
the  Abodes  by  means  of  the  playe  or  raying  of  the  chequers  of  the  lesser  angles  of  the 
Enochian  Tablets.  (Chess). 

15.  The  opening  of  the  knowledge  of  the  masculine  and  feminine  potencies 
necessary  unto  the  manifestation  of  all  things,  as  symbolized  in  the  diagram  of  the 
Flaming  Sword  between  Metatron  and  Sandalphon. 


68 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


THE  RING  AND  THE  DISC  WITH  THE  WORKING  OF  THE  TRIPOD 

The  especial  magical  implements  of  a Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor  are  the  Ring  and  the 
Disc.  Of  these,  the  Ring  should  be  worn  in  all  second  Order  meetings  in  the  manner  of  a Jewel, 
as  a badge  of  rank,  suspended  by  a ribbon  either  of  citrine,  olive,  russet,  or  black  color,  or  of  all 
four  colours  combined.  Also  this  Ring  may  be  used  for  the  purposeof  decoration  only,  reserving 
another  Ring  for  practical  use. 

The  Ring,  represented  in  the  diagram  below  is  shown  as  somewhat  larger  than  is 
convenient  for  practical  work. 


Letters  of  Names  in  black  on  white 

rrns 

in  white  on  the  colored  segments 


THE  RING 


The  Disc  should  be  of  fair  size,  somewhat  larger  than  the  diagram,  but  not  too  large.  It 
can  be  classified  in  three  parts: 

1.  The  White  Center. 

2.  The  Coloured  Rays. 

3.  The  Letters. 

The  White  Center  hath  upon  it  in  black  the  Letters  of  the  name  YHShVH  arranged  as 
shewn,  and  also  the  Motto  of  the  Theoricus  Adept.  The  first  is  to  keep  the  working  pure  and  to 
control  astral  action.  The  second  is  to  identify  the  Theoricus  with  the  working. 


69 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


East 


I 


THE  DISK 


70 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


The  Rays  should  be  of  the  colours  of  the  letters  to  which  they  are  attributed,  as  to 
represent  the  White  Light  of  the  Center  operating  through  the  colours. 

The  Letters  may  be  of  one  or  of  several  Alphabets,  and  the  numerical  values  and 
Yetziratic  attributions  may  be  also  added.  In  all  cases  care  should  be  taken  that  the  proper 
coloured  Ray  leads  from  the  White  Center  to  the  Letter  to  which  that  colour  is  attributed. 

The  Ring  should  be  made  of  convenient  size,  and  may  be  made  (like  the  Disc)  of  any 
convenient  material;  thick  pasteboard  will  do.  It  should  not  be  too  light,  or  the  elasticity  of  the 
thread  employed  may  vitiate  its  action.  In  the  diagram  the  Ring  is  represented  too  large.  It  should 
be  coloured  appropriately,  having  the  letters  of  EHEIEH  in  White  upon  both  sides.  Within  the 
inner  circle  upon  one  side  should  be  written  in  black  upon  the  white  ground  the  Motto  of  the 
Theoricus,  and  on  the  other  side  the  title  “Pereclinus  de  Faustis.”  The  thread  may  be  of  linen, 
silk,  or  of  cotton,  and  preferably  White,  though  for  a particular  purpose  a special  colour  may  be 
used,  as  for  working  a Fire  invokation,  Red  thread  may  be  used.  (Hair  is  too  springy  and  has  a 
personal  element.  Iron  or  steel  wire  for  Martial  purposes.  Brass  or  Copper  wire  for  Venusian 
purposes.  N.  0.  M.)  But  usually  white  answers  all  purposes. 

The  part  of  the  Ring  to  which  the  thread  is  fastened  should  be  white,  and  is  considered  as 
the  top  of  the  Ring.  The  left  hand  line  of  the  “A”  ray  of  the  Disc  is  considered  as  the  top  of  the 
Disc,  and  not  the  Kether  segment,  because  this  working  is  more  naturally  allied  to  the  Paths  than 
to  the  Sephiroth. 


OF  THE  METHOD  OF  WORKING 

Now  when  the  Theoricus  Adept  shall  desire  to  employ  the  Disc  and  Ring  for  the  purposes 
of  Divination  or  of  Consultation,  let  him  - wearing  the  Insignia  and  having  his  necessary  magical 
implements  at  hand  - invoke  in  the  ordinary  manner  the  particular  Spirit,  Force  or  Elemental 
whom  he  wisheth  to  consult.  (Note  by  N.O.M.  “By  means  of  a Telesma  if  desired.  Put  names, 
seal  and  sigil  of  Force  on  one  side,  and  the  name  of  THMAH  on  the  other.”) 

Let  him  place  the  Disc  flat  upon  the  table  before  him.  The  Top  thereof,  i.e.,  the  left  hand 
line  of  the  “A”  ray  being  always  opposite  to  him,  then,  leaning  the  elbow  of  the  arm  of  the  hand, 
by  which  he  holds  the  thread  attached  to  the  Ring,  upon  the  table  for  the  sake  of  steadiness,  let 
him  so  hold  the  Ring  as  to  be  suspended  exactly  above  the  White  Center  of  the  Disc,  directing 
his  gaze  to  the  same  point. 

The  thread  by  which  the  Ring  is  suspended  should  be  passed  immediately  across  the 
exact  center  of  the  ball  of  the  first  joint  of  the  thumb,  (and  this  is  most  important)  being  there 
retained  by  the  pressure  thereon  of  the  center  of  the  ball  of  the  firstjoint  of  the  finger  selected  to 
hold  it  with;  (the  first  or  the  second  finger  will  be  found  most  convenient).  The  Ring  will  soon 
commence  to  oscillate  and  to  vibrate. 

The  mode  of  receiving  a communication  thereby  is  as  follows.  No  notice  is  to  be  taken  of 
a short  oscillation  that  does  not  pass  completely  beyond  the  circle  of  colored  rays  on  to  the  circle 
of  letters.  But  if  it  goeth  clearly  on  to  the  circle  of  letters,  such  letters  are  to  be  taken  in 


71 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


order,  as  spelling  out  a word  or  a sentence.  When  the  Ring  circleth,  or  oscillateth  to  the  right 
hand  (or  with  the  Sun’s  course)  it  meaneth  “Yes”;  but  if  it  circleth  to  the  left  hand  (against  the 
course  of  the  Sun)  it  meaneth  “No”:  and  if  it  continueth  to  oscillate  vaguely  it  meaneth 
“Doubtful”. 

The  point  of  suspension  of  the  Ring  must  be  carefully  maintained  exactly  above  the 
center  of  the  Disc.  To  avoid  self-deception,  and  until  facility  of  action  be  attained,  care  should  be 
taken  that  the  hand  should  be  kept  as  steady  as  possible;  and  every  communication  should  be 
carefully  tested  (as  in  Skrying)  to  avoid  either  automatic  self-deception  or  wilful  deception,  by 
either  the  Force  invoked,  or  by  a hostile  Force  endeavoring  to  cut  between,  and  thus  to  vitiate  the 
operation. 

Also,  it  should  be  clearly  understood  beforehand  what  language  is  being  employed,  and  if 
a numerical  value  be  intended  instead  of  the  Letter  thereto  belonging.  And  it  is  for  the  purpose  of 
protecting  against  deception,  and  of  identifying  the  Operator  with  the  operation,  that  the  Divine 
Names  and  the  Motto  of  the  Theoricus  are  placed  upon  the  Disc  and  the  Ring. 

OF  THE  CONSECRATION  OF  THE  DISC  AND  THE  RING 

A Golden  Dawn  Altar  being  prepared  in  the  usual  way,  the  Cross  and  Triangle  upon  it 
arranged  with  the  Cross  within  the  Triangle  as  in  the  Grade  of  Zelator,  the  room  is  purified  and 
consecrated,  etc.  (Note  by  N.O.M.  “Fire,  Air,  Water,  three  circles  on  altar,  or  the  three  elements. 
Open  as  in  the  1-10  Grade;  or  in  the  full  consecration  formula  as  given  in  the  Rituals  of  the 
Rose-Cross,  the  Lotus  Wand  and  Elemental  Implements.  Use  both  Lesser  Banishing  Rituals  of 
both  the  Pentagram  and  Hexagram.  The  four  magical  implements  might  be  put  on  the  Altar.  The 
Pentacle  is  placed  in  the  middle  as  the  synthesis  with  Dagger,  Cup  and  Wand  around  it.)  Lay  the 
Disc  upon  the  Cross  and  Triangle,  the  left  hand  line  of  the  Segment  corresponding  with  the 
Eastern  Arm  of  the  Cross;  lay  the  Ring  upon  the  exact  center  of  the  Disc,  its  point  of  suspension 
(where  the  thread  is  attached)  corresponding  with  the  left  hand  line  of  the  “A”  segment  of  the 
Disc.  Coil  the  thread  around  it  in  a spiral  form  in  the  direction  of  the  course  of  the  Sun,  laying 
upon  the  coloured  parts  of  the  Disc.  Place  the  Lesser  Magical  Implements  around  it  at  the  usual 
angles  or  sides. 

Stand  at  the  West  of  the  Altar,  The  Altar  and  places  of  the  Pillars  should  be  arranged  as 
for  the  1-10  Grade  of  Zelator.  Hold  the  Magical  Sword  in  the  left  hand  and  the  Lotus  Wand  by 
the  black  part  in  the  right  hand,  so  that  the  pommel  of  the  Sword  and  the  black  part  of  the  Wand 
shall  be  immediately  above  the  left  and  right  hand  outer  edges  of  the  Disc  respectively.  The  point 
of  the  Sword  and  the  Lotus  end  of  the  Wand  shall  bejoined  together  perpendicularly  above  the 
centers  of  the  Ring  and  the  Disc.  In  this  position,  rehearse  any  convenient  Oration  to  the  Divine 
Powers  ruling  the  Paths  and  the  Sephiroth,  asking  that  the  Power  of  Truth  may  be  conferred  upon 
the  Disc  and  the  Ring. 


72 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Lay  down  the  Lotus  Wand  on  the  right  side  of  the  Disc,  and  lay  the  Sword  down  upon  the 
left  of  the  Disc  and  Ring.  Give  then  the  Sign  of  the  Interposer,  namely  that  of  a Zelator,  and  then 
invoke  the  Great  Goddess  THMAH  to  manifest  the  forces  of  Truth  therein  by  the  virtue  of: 

/IEMETH  n as  SlGlLLUr\DEI. 

and  concluding  with  the  Threefold  Name  of  the  Goddess: 

0jiaHy  QjiaHf  0|*aH£  \ 

Thma-esh  Thma-eth  Thma-est 

When  the  ceremony  is  completed,  and  when  the  Disc  and  the  Ring  are  not  in  use,  wrap 
them  up  in  a clean  covering  of  White  Silk  or  White  Linen,  as  in  the  cases  of  the  Rose-Cross  and 
the  Lotus  Wand. 


THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  WORKING 
OF  THE  RING  AND  THE  DISC 

Let  the  Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor  recall  that  which  was  said  in  the  lecture  on  the 
Microcosm,  under  the  headings  of  “How  the  Spiritual  Consciousness  can  act  around  and  beyond 
the  Sphere  of  Sensation,”  and  “Of  Travelling  in  the  Spirit  Vision.” 

In  the  working  by  the  Ring  and  Disc  then,  the  Operator  buildeth  up  partly  from  his  own 
Nephesch  and  partly  from  the  surrounding  atmosphere  a species  of  truncated  cone  of  astral  light. 
The  Disc  is  its  base,  while  the  truncated  summit  thereof  is  at  the  point  of  suspension  of  the  Ring 
where  the  thread  thereof  passeth  between  the  thumb  and  finger  of  the  Operator.  The  action  of  the 
Will  of  the  Operator  in  formulating  his  desire  of  communication  buildeth  up  the  symbol  of  a 
receptacle  of  impressions.  This  will  take  the  form  of  another  inverted  cone  rising  from  the  point 
of  suspension  of  the  Ring.  So  that  upon  the  Disc  as  a base  there  will  be  built  up  in  the  astral  light 
a form  somewhat  resembling  an  hourglass  of  which  the  center  will  be  the  place  of  the  finger  and 
the  thumb  of  the  Operator,  holding  the  thread  of  suspension  of  the  Ring.  And  from  the 
impressions  received  by  the  conical  receptacle,  the  hand  will  translate  into  action  in  the  lower 
cone  the  expression  of  these  ideas,  in  words  and  sentences  spelled  out  by  the  movements  of  the 
Ring  over  the  letters  of  the  Disc. 

But  were  it  an  uninitiated  person  who  attempted  this  form  of  Divination  or  of 
consultation,  he  or  she,  being  ignorant  of  the  formulas  involved,  would  almost  to  a certainty  open 
a conical  receptacular  funnel  in  the  sphere  of  sensation  (of  him  or  her)  thus  preparing  a ready 
path  unto  obession.  Therefore,  it  is  not  entirely  the  Force  invoked  which  actually  spells  out  the 
words,  but  to  a great  extent  it  is  the  Operator  himself  who  translates 


73 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


his  own  impressions  thereof.  And  for  this  reason  it  is  that  this  form  of  Divination  is  not  taught 
unto  the  Zelator  Adept,  self-deception  therein  being  so  extremely  easy,  and  the  hand  being  liable 
to  translate  that  which  the  heart  wisheth. 

Therefore  it  is  also  that  the  language  wherein  the  communication  is  received  need  not 
necessarily  be  that  in  which  the  Force  invoked  would  speak,  supposing  it  to  be  endowed  with  the 
human  organs  of  speech,  but  the  impression  received  by  the  Operator  is  translated  according  to 
the  understanding  of  the  Operator.  And  all  this  is  in  accordance  with  the  degree  of  Force 
respectively  exercised  in  the  Upper  or  in  the  Lower  Cone. 

CONCERNING  THE  USE  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  A VACUUM 
IN  THE  ATMOSPHERE  TO  AID  SKRYING  AND  RECEIVING  OF 
IDEAS  IN  MAGICAL  WORKING 

The  first  and  most  important  point  is  the  formation  of  a cone,  and  from  that  a vortex,  the 
center  of  which  is  then  first  to  be  extended  upwards  and  downwards,  thus  forming  the  outline  of 
a sphere  enclosed  by  a Whorl,  increasing  at  the  circumference,  diminishing  towards  and 
terminating  at  the  Poles: 


From  the  Poles,  two  rays  of  communication  converge  to  a focus  on  the  Sphere  of 
Sensation.  This  Sphere  thus  artificially  constructed  enclosing  a vacuum  becometh  naturally  a 
reflection  of  the  Universe.  Therefore,  anything  that  the  Operator  may  will  to  see  clearly  is 
sympathetically  reflected  therein. 

Therefore,  let  the  Adept  then  command  that  which  he  is  to  see,  to  manifest  therein.  But  if 
it  be  an  Elemental  or  Spirit  of  a material  or  of  an  evil  nature,  let  him  guard  carefully  against 
being  obsessed  thereby  seeing  that  the  entering  of  it  into  that  Sphere  may  give  it  a certain  hold 
upon  his  own  Sphere  of  Sensation,  and  when  he  hath  gained  his  end,  let  him  banish,  command  or 
license  the  Force  summoned  to  depart,  then  reverse  the  process  of  construction  and  withdaw  the 
Whorl  into  his  Sphere  and  carefully  close  the  latter  at  that  point. 

OF  THE  OPERATION  KNOWN  ANCIENTLY  AS  THE  MAGICAL 

CONSULTATION 

BY  MEANS  OF  THE  TRIPOD  (AND  WITHIN  RECENT  YEARS  REVIVED 
IN  A MISTAKEN  FORM  AMONG  THE  UNINITIATED  UNDER  THE  TITLES 
OF  SPIRITUALISM  AND  TABLETURNING) 

Now  if  the  Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor  shall  wish  to  employ  the  Magical  Consultation  with 
the  Tripod  or  table  with  three  feet,  let  him  know  that  the  model  thereof  is  the  circular 


74 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


Altar  of  the  Vault  of  Christian  Rosenkreutz.  One  leg  of  the  table  should  coincide  with  the 
Eastern  point  of  the  top  which  later  should  be  coloured  in  exact  representation  of  the  Altar,  and 
the  legs  should  be  black.  (A  table  may  have  the  regular  painted  top,  and  others  removable, 
painted  for  special  purposes.  N.O.M.)  If  desired,  the  magical  Operator,  the  better  to  isolate  him 
or  herself,  may  trace  any  convenient  magical  circle  of  defence  upon  the  floor  (consonant  with  the 
force  he  desires  to  invoke)  wherein  to  sit  while  employing  the  working  of  the  Tripod.  (Note:  A 
circle  may  consist  of  a tape  and  on  it  at  certain  places,  Telesma  or  pentacles  may  be  placed.  N.O. 
M.)  The  mode  of  Operation  is  as  here  followeth. 

The  table  should  be  placed  with  the  same  orientation  as  the  Altar  in  the  Vault;  one  leg, 
which  we  will  call  the  apex  of  the  triangle  formed  by  the  legs,  being  placed  at  the  Eastern  point 
as  regards  the  design  upon  the  top  thereof.  The  Operator  will  usually,  if  working  alone,  find  it 
best  to  be  seated  either  at  the  Western  part  of  the  table,  or  at  the  point  immediately  opposite  to 
that  of  the  Force  to  be  evoked.  Let  him  then  place  his  hands  on  the  top  of  the  table  towards  each 
side  thereof.  After  a certain  time,  the  length  of  which  will  depend  upon  varying  conditions,  the 
Tripod  will  begin  to  tilt  up  and  down;  and  in  some  cases  even  a species  of  explosive  knocks  may 
be  heard,  which  ariseth  from  a more  sudden  transmission  of  astral  force  from  the  cone  of 
reception  to  the  table.  Now  remember  that  the  movements  of  the  table  should  be  really  the 
combined  product  of  the  Operator  and  the  communicating  Force,  always  supposing  that  the 
Operator  be  not  obsessed  by  the  Force  invoked,  nor  voluntarily  self-deceiving.  And  the 
philosophical  explanation  is  of  a similar  principle  to  that  of  the  Disc  and  Ring:  only  that  in  this 
instance  self-deception  is  even  yet  more  easy. 

For  the  reception  of  communications  by  the  Tripod  some  convenient  preconceived  plan 
of  correspondences  between  the  tilts  of  the  table  and  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  or  simple  words 
should  be  employed. 

This  form  of  magical  operation  is  usually  found  to  be  more  exhausting  than  the 
employment  of  the  Ring  and  Disc,  seeing  that  a greater  amount  of  astral  Force  has  to  be 
employed  in  the  operation.  Not  only  one  but  several  persons  may  take  part  in  this  operation  by 
the  Tripod,  but  in  such  cases  they  should  partition  among  them  the  points  of  the  table 
corresponding  either  to  their  natures,  or  to  the  Forces  with  which  each  intendeth  to  ally  himself. 
If  there  be  three  persons,  let  them  take  Air,  Fire  and  Water,  leaving  Earth  vacant.  If  five  persons, 
the  Spirit  and  the  four  elements,  the  Spirit  being  at  the  point  of  the  East.  If  six  or  seven  persons 
the  points  of  the  hexagram  and  so  on,  according  to  the  quarters  that  they  occupy,  so  as  always  to 
form  some  intentionally  and  not  accidentally  equilibrated  symbol.  Now  in  the  case  of  several 
persons  taking  part,  each  one  will  form  his  own  cone.  The  synthesis  will  form  together  another 
Great  Cone  enclosing  the  whole,  and  so  a large  amount  of  force  may  be  thus  obtained.  But  also, 
careful  watch  should  be  kept  against  both  obsession  and  self-deception. 

The  greatest  harmony  should  prevail  among  the  Operators  for  the  least  discordant  feeling 
will  produce  some  error  or  disruption.  And  remember  that  in  working  with  the 


75 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Tripod  the  cone  of  reception  will  attract  any  passing  Intelligence  or  Force.  Thus,  without  the 
greatest  care,  much  deception  could  arise,  and  even  against  the  intention  of  the  communicating 
Intelligence  deception  may  result  through  confused  mistranslations  by  the  Operator  or  Operators. 

Results  may  be  obtained  from  tables  not  circular  in  form,  and  having  four  or  more  legs. 
But  the  Tripod  is  the  best  form.  Also  the  Ring  and  the  Disc  may  be  used  in  conjunction  with  the 
Tripod.  In  invocation,  a flashing  Tablet  or  Tablets  of  the  nature  of  the  Force  to  be  invoked  may 
be  placed  upon  the  table.  Also  by  using  the  table  as  a physical  basis  of  strength,  and  sitting 
thereat,  even  physical  appearances  and  manifestations  may  be  produced.  In  such  a case  it  may 
advantageous  to  have  black  drapery  fastened  around  the  edge  of  the  table  (not  covering  the  table 
top,  for  this  would  hide  the  symbols.  S.R.M.D.)  and  reaching  to  the  ground,  so  as  to  form,  as  it 
were  a cylindrical  receptacle  of  force  extending  from  the  top  of  the  table  to  the  floor.  Such 
drapery  should  be  in  three  divisions.  Or  three  slits  may  be  cut,  one  by  each  leg  from  the  top  of 
the  table  to  the  floor,  so  that  the  three  are  united  only  along  the  edge  of  the  table  top. 

In  all  such  operations  let  the  greatest  care  be  taken  to  combat  obsession,  for  in  case  of  this 
arriving,  although  occasionally  striking  physical  results  may  ensue,  yet  there  will  be  danger 
therewith.  And  the  result  of  such  obsession  will  always  be  to  make  the  Operator  personate  and 
imitate  the  action  of  the  Force  evoked,  even  to  the  extent  of  attempting  to  deceive  both  himself 
and  those  who  may  be  with  him. 

But  the  Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor  hath  sufficient  knowledge  to  know  what  to  do,  and 
what  to  avoid  herein,  and  when. 

Now  the  Formula  of  this  operation  by  the  Tripod  will  be  closely  similar  to  that  contained 
in  the  Pyramid  and  Sphynx  Formula  of  the  Enochian  Tablets.  The  truncated  cone  will  answer  to 
the  Pyramid,  with  a cone  of  reception  above  opening  therefrom  to  attract  the  Force  which  shall 
act  through  the  top  thereof.  The  surface  of  the  table  will  answer  to  the  place  of  the  Sphynx. 

And  thus  thou  wilt  easily  see  how  particular  the  Operator  must  always  be  in  discerning 
the  Force  which  is  acting  through  the  vortex  above. 


76 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


77 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  NINE 


VOLUME  EIGHT 


79 


VOLUME  NINE 


VOLUME  NINE 

THE  TAROT 

THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  THE  TAROT 

This  includes  Documents  N,  O,  P,  Q,  R,  and  an  Unlettered 
Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor  Paper 


THE  GREAT  ANGEL  HRU  IS  SET  OVER  THE 
OPERATION  OF  THIS  SECRET  WISDOM 


“What  thou  seest  write  in  a Book,  and  send  it  unto  the  Seven  Abodes  that  are  in 
Assiah.” 

“And  I saw  in  the  right  hand  of  Him  that  sat  upon  the  Throne  a book  sealed  with 
Seven  Seals.  And  I saw  a strong  Angel  proclaiming  with  a loud  voice,  ‘Who  is  worthy  to 
open  the  Books  and  to  loose  the  seals  thereof?” 


1 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


BIOS* 


ANKH  OF  THE  TAROT 


2 


VOLUME  NINE 


THE  TITLES  OF  THE  TAROT  CARDS 

1.  Ace  of  Wands  is  called  the  Root  of  the  Powers  of  Fire. 

2.  Ace  of  Swords  is  called  the  Root  of  the  Powers  of  Air. 

3.  Ace  of  Pentacles  is  called  the  Root  of  the  Powers  of  Earth. 

4.  Ace  of  Cups  is  called  the  Root  of  the  Powers  of  Water. 

5.  The  King  of  Wands  is  called  the  Lord  of  Flame  and  Lightning.The  King  of  the  Spirits  of  Fire. 

6.  The  Queen  of  Wands  is  The  Queen  of  the  Thrones  of  Flames. 

7.  The  Knight  of  Wands  is  The  Prince  of  the  Chariot  of  Fire. 

8.  The  Knave  of  Wands  is  The  Princess  of  the  Shining  Flame,  and  The  Rose  of  the  Palace  of 
Fire. 

9.  The  King  of  Cups  is  The  Lord  of  the  Waves  and  the  Waters,  and  The  King  of  the  Hosts  of  the 
Sea. 

10.  The  Queen  of  Cups  is  The  Queen  of  the  Thrones  of  the  Waters. 

11.  The  Knight  of  Cups  is  The  Prince  of  the  Chariot  of  the  Waters. 

12.  The  Knave  of  Cups  is  The  Princess  of  the  Waters  and  the  Lotus. 

13.  The  King  of  Swords  is  The  Lord  of  the  Wind  and  the  Breezes,  The  Lord  of  the  Spirits  of  the 
Air. 

14.  The  Queen  of  Swords  is  The  Queen  of  the  Thrones  of  the  Air. 

15.  The  Knight  of  Swords  is  The  Prince  of  the  Chariots  of  the  Wind. 

16.  The  Knave  of  Swords  is  The  Princess  of  the  Rushing  Winds,  The  Lotus  of  the  Palace  of  Air. 

17.  The  King  of  Pentacles  is  The  Lord  of  the  Wide  and  Fertile  land,  King  of  the  Spirits  of  the 
Earth. 

18.  The  Queen  of  Pentacles  is  The  Queen  of  the  Thrones  of  Earth. 

19.  The  Knight  of  Pentacles  is  The  Prince  of  the  Chariot  of  Earth. 

20.  The  Knave  of  Pentacles  is  The  Princess  of  the  Echoing  Hills,  The  Rose  of  the  Palace  of 
Earth. 


3 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  FOLLOWING  ARE  THE  NAMES  AND  ATTRIBUTIONS 
OF  THE  TAROT  TRUMPS 


>AMLS 

im  es 

MlBKtW 

Ml'A’i 

Flk*l 

Tht  SpinF  «f  I'Tlur, 

Akpk 

Ajr 

Vftlltlin 

Hu  Mltm  of  PftIMf, 

W«ih 

Mwcarj 

PTIMtM 

Frifii™  .til  i hf  SiUtr  Slu. 

Chut 

Mimm 

EbuiXlff  ut  iki  Miglii}  Ohi 

liiltlh 

iMIfh 

I 

>uii  Jl  ibr  'Sue  nil  1^ . 

Chlrf  *npuK|  l hr  Sfl|hr^ 

HA 

trim 

llkruphj.pl 

Mi|H  Ik  b.lrml  iitrtJt 

Vio 

liimn 

Umrh 

< hlMrrn  nE  Ik  \ai Lhiln-r . 

Ilk  IHifht  if  Ihr  Mlthh 

Mfli 

( Jiirhil 

( hl4>a  of  f In  Pi>*fF  lif  flh  W aim. 

1 lid'll  at  Ik  trlufrtpb  at  h|M 

Owih 

f iMiH 

f inihudr 

lltnilu-tr  of  llhr  yiiniai  SpmJ. 

I*a*tr  id*  Uh. 

1-rih 

Uf 

IlifMM 

Ilw  'l  j(i«  i ■!  i h-r  U[ki, 

lilt  PrepArf  *1  Ilk  Im0> 

Vcri 

Vlffa 

WH.tr!  of 

Fwrlunt 

lk  l«(  *1  tk  him  *f  Ok 

C»ph 

JvpJdrr 

Mh 

I)ji  E*i"rr  irf  llW  1 cirri  ut  Imlh. 

Thr  HiWitc  4if  1 t>c  Rilanm 

l.irmri 

T jhni 

Mh 

Thr  ^pini  nf  Ihr  ^lijhlj  Wiity. 

Mrm 

Haiti 

Dnlh 

Thr  TUI  of  Eht  final  Trim' 

r ■ *r ram. T ord  uT iht  giErsul dnl h 

Nna 

Stwrpo 

TflPpfTBTirf 

iliufhErr  of  the  Kecnnrilrrv 

Thr  hiB|(r  Forth  of  Lift 

Siintth 

SafchliriiK 

hri 

Lur-J  h>T  thr  'Gilts  cif  >3iUrr, 

OHM  .>r  chv  lurm  at  Hp»- 

A|ia 

UlpKiifn 

Blutril  Tuwti 

1 turi  rtf  ilw  Hinlt  of  ihr 

r*h 

Man, 

T hr  Mir 

rKiufhirr  ml  rhc-  Tirmsiprn, 

Dn-eller  btlHetn  chr  WiIhv 

Tiirrtrii 

AqsiTiaft 

lht  Vloon 

Ruirr  nl  F; u t md  Flcl'lui  f hild 

of  the  nf  thr  Mi(hti . 

Qiipli 

Pi«H 

The  Swn 

[.cjrd  of  che  Ftrt  of  Ehr  ^ocU. 

Rerii 

Sun 

Jud  j.mE-nt 

The  Spiri:  of  ttu-  Priml  llrt. 

Sbria 

Tire 

LmtfTH 

The  Grrwl  Uth  of  Ehr  >i;fal  of 

lime 

lilt 

Solum 

THE  FOLLOWING  IS  A FULL  LIST  OF  THE  NAMES  AND  ATTRIBUTIONS 


4 


VOLUME  NINE 


OF  THE  REMAINING  MINOR  ARCANA 


Card 

Lord  of 

Decan 

Sign 

5 Winds 

Strife 

Saturn 

Leo 

6 Wands 

Victory 

Jupiter 

Leo 

7 Wands 

Valour 

Mam 

Ijbo 

8 Prntscks 

Prudence 

Sun 

Virgo 

9 Pm  lades 

Material  Gain 

Venus 

Virgu 

10  P* niacin 

Wealth 

Mercury 

; Virgo 

2 Swcifds 

Peace  FUstnred 

Moon 

Libra 

.1  Swc-Il  lK 

Sorrow 

Solum 

Libra 

4 .S^nfdv 

Ren  from  strife 

Jnpiler 

Libra 

5 Cu pi 

Lois  in  Plej^jre 

Mull 

1 Seorple 

6 Cups 

Pleasure 

Sun 

Scorpio 

7 Cups 

Illusion  ms  sucres* 

Yenm 

Scorpio 

8 Wand? 

S*  if  mess 

Mercury 

Sagittarius 

9 Wand? 

Great  Strength 

Moon 

Sagittarius 

10  Wands 

Oppress!  rrn 

Saturn 

Sagittarius 

2 Ppptarles 

Harmonious  Change 

Jupiter 

Capricorn 

3 PfOticIcs 

Material  W orlts 

Mars 

Capricorn 

4 Fmtarle* 

Earthy  Power 

Sun 

Capricorn 

5 Swords 

Defeat 

Venus 

AipirltHi 

6 St*urd^ 

, Lamed  Sue  cess 

Mercury 

A ciua  riiis 

7 Sword* 

t nsiablc  L.ftort 

Moon 

Aquarius 

$ Cup* 

\hindpneif  Sucrrsi 

Sn(urh 

Pl«rw 

9 Cupi 

Material  Happiness 

Juplitr 

Pbm 

10  Cups 

Perpetual  Surer** 

M*r» 

Pitfrt 

2 Wan«K 

Dominion 

Mars 

Aries 

J Wandi 

Fslahlished  Strength 

Sun 

Aries 

4 Viand* 

Perfected  Work, 

Venus 

Aries 

S Pcnlidrs 

Material  Trouble 

Mtrcury 

1 iwrus 

Is  PinlAtl^ 

Material  Success 

Mfiun 

Taurus 

7 Pent!  f lei 

Success  Unfulfilled 

Saturn 

Tiins 

8 Swords 

Shortened  Force 

Jupiter 

Gemini 

9 Swords 

Despair  and  Cruelly 

Mari: 

Gemini 

10  Swords 

Ruin 

Sun 

Gemini 

1 Cops 

I use 

Venus 

Cancer 

,t  C ups 

| Abundance 

Mercury 

Cancer 

4 Cups 

1 Blended  Pleasure 

SI  nod 

Cancer 

5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  78  TAROT  CARDS  THEIR  DESCRIPTION  AND  MEANING 

THE  ACES 

The  first  in  order  and  appearance  are  the  four  Aces,  representing  the  force  of  the  Spirit 
acting  in,  and  binding  together  the  four  scales  of  each  element  and  answering  to  the  Dominion  of 
the  Letters  of  the  Name  in  the  Kether  of  each.  They  represent  the  Radical  or  Root-Force  and  are 
said  to  be  placed  on  the  North  Pole  of  the  Universe,  wherein  they  revolve,  governing  its 
revolution,  and  ruling  as  the  connecting  link  between  Yetzirah  and  Assiah. 

THE  RADIX  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  FIRE 
ACE  OF  WANDS 

A white  radiating  Angelic  Hand  issuing  from  Clouds  and  grasping  a heavy  Club  which 
has  three  branches  in  the  colours  and  with  the  Sigils  of  the  Scales.  The  right  and  left  hand 
branches  end  respectively  in  three  Flames  and  the  centre  one  in  four  Flames,  thus  yielding  Ten 
the  number  of  the  Sephiroth.  Twenty  two  leaping  Flames  or  Yods  surround  it,  answering  to  the 
Paths.  Three  fall  below  the  right  branch  for  Aleph,  Mem  and  Shin.  Seven  above  the  central 
branch  for  the  double  letters.  And  between  it  and  that  on  the  right,  are  twelve  — six  above  and  six 
below  — about  the  left  hand  Branch.  The  whole  is  a great  and  Flaming  Torch,  symbolising  force, 
strength,  rush,  vigour,  energy,  and  it  governs  according  to  its  nature  various  works  and  questions. 
It  implies  natural  as  opposed  to  Invoked  Force. 

THE  RADIX  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  THE  WATERS 
ACE  OF  CUPS 

A Radiant  white  Angelic  Hand  issuing  from  clouds  and  supporting  on  its  palm  a Cup, 
resembling  that  of  the  Stolistes.  From  it  rises  a fountain  of  clear  and  glistening  Water;  and  spray 
falling  on  all  sides  into  clear  calm  water  below,  in  which  grow  Lotus  and  water  lilies.  The  great 
letter  Heh  of  the  Supernal  Mother  is  traced  in  the  spray  of  the  Fountain.  It  symbolises  Fertility, 
Productiveness,  Beauty,  Pleasure,  Happiness,  etc. 

THE  RADIX  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  AIR 
ACE  OF  SWORDS 

A white  radiating  Angelic  Hand,  issuing  from  clouds,  and  grasping  the  hilt  of  a Sword, 
which  supports  a white  radiant  celestial  Crown  from  which  depend,  on  the  right,  the  olive  branch 
of  Peace,  and  on  the  left,  the  Palm  branch  of  suffering.  Six  Vaus  fall  from  its  point. 

It  symbolises  invoked  as  contrasted  with  natural  Force;  for  it  is  the  Invocation  of  the 


6 


VOLUME  NINE 


Sword.  Raised  upward,  it  invokes  the  Divine  Crown  of  Spiritual  Brightness.  Reversed  it  is  the 
invocation  of  demoniac  force,  and  becomes  a fearfully  evil  symbol.  It  represents  therefore  very 
great  power  for  good  or  evil,  but  invoked.  And  it  also  represents  whirling  force,  and  strength 
through  trouble.  It  is  the  affirmation  of  justice,  upholding  Divine  authority;  and  it  may  become 
the  Sword  of  Wrath,  Punishment  and  Affliction. 

THE  RADIX  POWERS  OF  THE  EARTH 
ACE  OF  PENTACLES 

A white  radiant  Angelic  Hand,  holding  a branch  of  a Rose  Tree,  whereon  is  a large 
Pentacle,  formed  of  five  concentric  circles.  The  innermost  Circle  is  white,  charged  with  a red 
Greek  cross.  From  this  white  centre  12  white  rays  issue.  These  terminate  at  the  circumference, 
making  the  whole  something  like  an  astrological  figure  of  the  Heavens. 

It  is  surmounted  by  a small  circle,  above  which  is  a large  Maltese  Cross,  and  with  two 
white  wings;  four  roses  and  two  buds  are  shewn.  The  hand  issueth  from  the  clouds  as  in  the  other 
three  cases.  It  representeth  materiality  in  all  senses,  good  and  evil,  and  is  therefore  in  a sense 
illusionary.  It  shows  material  gain,  labour,  power,  wealth,  etc. 

THE  SIXTEEN  COURT  CARDS 
THE  FOUR  KINGS 

The  Four  Kings  or  Figures  mounted  on  Steeds.  (This  is  very  important  due  to  the  general 
confusion  even  in  these  papers  between  Kings  and  Knights;  all  Kings  should  be  on  horses  and  all 
Knights  should  be  on  thrones  or  chariots.)  They  represent  the  Yod  forces  of  the  Name  in  each 
suit,  the  Radix,  Father,  and  commencement  of  Material  Forces.  A Force  in  which  all  the  others 
are  implied  and  of  which  they  form  the  development  and  completion.  A force  swift  and  violent 
in  action,  but  whose  effect  soon  passes  away,  and  therefore  symbolised  by  a figure  on  a steed 
riding  swiftly,  and  clothed  in  complete  armour. 

Therefore  is  the  knowledge  of  the  scale  of  the  King  so  necessary  for  the  commencement 
of  all  magical  working. 

THE  FOUR  QUEENS 

Are  seated  upon  Thrones,  representing  the  Forces  of  Heh  of  the  Name  in  each  suit,  the 
Mother,  and  bringer  forth  of  material  Force,  a Force  which  develops,  and  realises  the  Force  of 
the  King.  A force  steady  and  unshaken,  but  not  rapid  though  enduring.  It  is  therefore  symbolised 
by  a figure  seated  upon  a Throne  but  also  clothed  in  armour. 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  FOUR  KNIGHTS 

These  Knights  (sometimes  called  Princes)  are  figures  seated  in  chariots,  and  thus  borne 
forward.  They  represent  the  Vau  forces  of  the  Name  in  each  suit;  the  Mighty  son  of  the  King  and 
the  Queen,  who  realises  the  influence  of  both  scales  of  Force.  A prince,  the  son  of  a King  and 
Queen,  yet  a Prince  of  Princes,  and  a King  of  Kings.  An  Emperor,  whose  effect  is  at  once  rapid 
(though  not  so  swift  as  that  of  a king)  and  enduring  (though  not  as  steadfast  as  that  of  a queen).  It 
is  therefore  symbolised  by  a figure  borne  in  a chariot,  and  clothed  with  armour.  Yet  is  his  power 
illusionary,  unless  set  in  motion  by  his  Father  and  Mother. 

THE  FOUR  PRINCESSES 

These  are  also  known  as  the  Knaves.  The  Four  Princesses  or  Figures  of  Amazons 
standing  firmly  by  themselves,  neither  riding  upon  Horses,  nor  seated  upon  Thrones,  nor  borne 
on  Chariots.  They  represent  the  forces  of  Heh  final  of  the  Name  in  each  suit,  completing  the 
influences  of  the  other  scales.  The  mighty  and  potent  daughter  of  a King  and  Queen:  a Princess 
powerful  and  terrible.  A Queen  of  Queens,  an  Empress,  whose  effect  combines  those  of  the 
King,  Queen  and  Prince.  At  once  violent  and  permanent,  she  is  therefore  symbolised  by  a figure 
standing  firmly  by  itself,  only  partially  draped  and  having  but  little  armour.  Yet  her  power 
existeth  not  save  by  reason  of  the  others,  and  then  indeed  it  is  mighty  and  terrible  materially,  and 
is  the  Throne  of  the  forces  of  the  Spirit.  Woe  unto  whomsoever  shall  make  war  upon  her  when 
thus  established! 

WHERE  THE  COURT  CARDS  OPERATE 

The  Princesses  rule  over  the  Four  Parts  of  the  Celestial  Heavens  which  lie  around  the 
North  Pole,  and  above  the  respective  Kerubic  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  and  they  form  the  Thrones  of 
the  Powers  of  the  Four  Aces. 

The  Twelve  Cards,  4 Kings,  4 Queens,  and  4 Knights  rule  the  Dominions  of  the  Celestial 
Heavens  between  the  realm  of  the  Four  Princesses  and  the  Zodiac,  as  is  hereafter  shown.  And 
they,  as  it  were,  link  together  the  signs. 

WANDS 

THE  LORD  OF  THE  FLAME  AND  THE  LIGHTNING 
KING  OF  THE  SPIRITS  OF  FIRE 
KING  OF  WANDS 

A winged  Warrior  riding  upon  a black  horse  with  flaming  mane  and  tail.  The  horse  itself 
is  not  winged.  The  Rider  wears  a winged  Helmet  (like  an  old  Scandinavian  and  Gaulish  Helmet) 
with  a royal  Crown.  A corselet  of  scale-mail  and  buskins  of  the  same,  and  a flowing  scarlet 
mantle.  Above  his  Helmet,  upon  his  cuirass,  and  on  his  shoulder  pieces  and 


8 


VOLUME  NINE 


buskins  he  bears,  as  a crest,  a winged  black  Horse’s  head.  He  grasps  a Club  with  Flaming  ends, 
somewhat  similar  to  that  in  the  symbol  of  the  Ace  of  Wands,  but  not  so  heavy,  and  also  the  Sigil 
of  his  scale  is  shown. 

Beneath  the  rushing  feet  of  his  steed  are  waving  flames  of  Fire.  He  is  active,  generous, 
fierce,  sudden  and  impetuous.  If  ill-dignified  he  is  evil-minded,  cruel,  bigoted,  brutal.  He  rules 
the  celestial  Heavens  from  above  the  20th  degree  of  Scorpio  to  the  first  two  Decans  of 
Sagittarius  and  this  includes  a part  of  the  constellation  Hercule  (who  also  carries  a club).  Fire  of 
Fire.  King  of  the  Salamanders. 

QUEEN  OF  THE  THRONES  OF  FLAME 
QUEEN  OF  WANDS 

A crowned  Queen  with  long  red-golden  hair,  seated  upon  a Throne,  with  steady  Flames 
beneath.  She  wears  a corselet  and  buskins  of  scale  mail,  revealed  by  her  robe.  Her  arms  are 
almost  bare.  On  the  cuirass  and  buskins  are  leopards’  heads  winged.  The  same  symbol 
surmounteth  her  crown.  At  her  side  is  a couchant  Leopard  on  which  her  hands  rest.  She  bears  a 
long  Wand  with  a very  heavy  conical  head.  The  face  is  beautiful  and  resolute. 

Adaptability,  steady  force  applied  to  an  object.  Steady  rule;  great  attractive  power,  power 
of  command,  yet  liked  notwithstanding.  Kind  and  generous  when  not  opposed.  If  ill-dignified, 
obstinate,  revengeful,  domineering,  tyrannical  and  apt  to  turn  suddenly  against  another  without  a 
cause.  She  rules  the  Heavens  from  above  the  last  Decan  of  Pisces  to  above  the  twentieth  degree 
of  Aries,  including  a part  of  Andromeda.  Water  of  Fire.  Queen  of  the  Salamanders  or 
Salamandrines. 

THE  PRINCE  OF  THE  CHARIOT  OF  FIRE 
KNIGHT  OF  WANDS 

A Kingly  figure  (but  not  a King)  with  a golden  winged  Crown,  seated  on  a Chariot.  He 
has  large  white  wings.  One  wheel  of  his  Chariot  is  shown.  He  wears  corselet  and  buskin  of  scale 
armour,  decorated  with  winged  Lions’  heads,  which  symbol  also  surmounts  his  crown.  His 
chariot  is  drawn  by  a lion.  His  arms  are  bare,  save  for  the  shoulder  pieces  of  the  corselet,  and  he 
bears  a torch  or  fire  wand,  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  the  Z.A.M.  Beneath  the  Chariot  are 
flames,  some  waved,  some  salient. 

Swift,  strong,  hasty,  rather  violent,  yet  just  and  generous,  noble  and  scorning  meanness. 

If  ill-dignified,  cruel,  intolerant,  prejudiced,  and  ill-natured.  He  rules  the  Heavens  from  above  the 
last  decan  of  Cancer  to  the  2nd  decan  of  Leo.  Hence  he  includes  most  of  Leo  Minor.  Air  of  Fire. 
Prince  and  Emperor  of  Salamanders. 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


PRINCESS  OF  THE  SHINING  FLAME  - THE  ROSE  OF  THE  PALACE  OF  FIRE 

KNAVE  OF  WANDS 

A very  strong  and  beautiful  woman,  with  flowing  red-golden  hair,  attired  like  an 
Amazon.  Her  shoulders,  arms,  bosom  and  knees  are  bare.  She  wears  a short  kilt,  reaching  to  the 
knees.  Round  her  waist  is  a broad  belt  of  scale  mail,  narrow  at  the  side,  broad  in  the  front  and 
back,  and  having  a winged  tiger’s  head  in  front.  She  wears  a Corinthian  shaped  helmet,  and 
Crown  with  a long  plume.  It  also  is  surmounted  by  a tiger’s  head,  and  the  same  symbol  forms  the 
buckle  of  her  scale-mail  buskins. 

A mantle  lined  with  tiger’s  skin  falls  back  from  her  shoulders.  Her  right  hand  rests  on  a 
small  golden  or  brazen  Altar,  ornamented  with  Ram’s  heads,  and  with  Flames  of  Fire  leaping 
from  it.  Her  left  hand  leans  on  a long  and  heavy  club,  swelling  at  the  lower  end,  where  the  sigil  is 
placed.  It  has  flames  of  fire  leaping  from  it  the  whole  way  down,  but  the  flames  are  ascending. 
This  Club  or  torch  is  much  longer  than  that  carried  by  the  King  or  Queen.  Beneath  her  firmly 
placed  feet  are  leaping  Flames  of  Fire. 

Brilliance,  courage,  beauty,  force,  sudden  in  anger  or  love,  desire  of  power,  enthusiasms, 
revenge. 

Ill-dignified,  superficial,  theatrical,  cruel,  unstable,  domineering.  She  rules  the  heavens 
over  one  quadrant  of  the  portion  round  the  North  Pole.  Earth  of  Fire.  Princess  and  Empress  of  the 
Salamanders.  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Wands. 

CUPS 

LORD  OF  THE  WAVES  AND  THE  WATERS 
KING  OF  THE  HOSTS  OF  THE  SEA 
KING  OF  CUPS 

A beautiful  youthful  winged  Warrior,  with  flying  hair,  riding  upon  a white  horse,  which 
latter  is  not  winged.  His  general  equipment  is  similar  to  that  of  the  King  of  Wands,  but  upon  his 
helmet,  cuirass  and  buskins  is  a peacock  with  opened  wings.  He  holds  a Cup  in  his  hand,  bearing 
the  sigil  of  the  Scale.  Beneath  his  horses  feet  is  the  sea.  From  the  cup  issues  a crab. 

Graceful,  poetic,  venusian,  indolent,  but  enthusiastic  if  roused.  Ill-dignified,  he  is  sensual, 
idle,  and  untruthful.  He  rules  the  heavens  from  above  20°  of  Aquarius  to  20°  Pisces  including  the 
greater  part  of  Pegasus.  Fire  of  Water.  King  of  Undines  and  of  Nymphs. 


10 


VOLUME  NINE 


QUEEN  OF  THE  THRONES  OF  THE  WATERS 
QUEEN  OF  CUPS 

A very  beautiful  fair  woman  like  a crowned  Queen,  seated  upon  a Throne,  beneath  which 
is  flowing  water,  wherein  Lotuses  are  seen.  Her  general  dress  is  similar  to  that  of  the  Queen  of 
Wands,  but  upon  her  Crown,  Cuirass  and  Buskins  is  seen  an  Ibis  with  opened  wings,  and  beside 
her  is  the  same  Bird,  whereon  her  hand  rests.  She  holds  a Cup,  wherefrom  a cray  fish  issues.  Her 
face  is  dreamy.  She  holds  a Lotus  in  the  hand  upon  the  Ibis. 

She  is  imaginative,  poetic,  kind,  yet  not  willing  to  take  much  trouble  for  another. 
Coquettish,  good-natured,  underneath  a dreamy  appearance.  Imagination  stronger  than  feeling. 
Very  much  affected  by  other  influences,  and  therefore  more  dependent  upon  good  or  ill-dignity 
than  upon  most  other  symbols.  She  rules  from  20°  Gemini  to  20°  Cancer.  Water  of  Water.  Queen 
of  Nymphs  and  Undines. 

PRINCE  OF  THE  CHARIOT  OF  THE  WATERS 
KNIGHT  OF  CUPS 

A winged  Kingly  figure  with  a winged  crown,  seated  in  a chariot  drawn  by  an  Eagle.  On 
the  wheel  is  the  symbol  of  a Scorpion.  The  Eagle  is  borne  as  a crest  upon  his  crown,  cuirass  and 
buskins.  General  attire  like  Knight  of  Wands.  Beneath  his  chariot  is  the  calm  and  stagnant  water 
of  a lake.  His  scale  armour  resembles  feathers  more  than  scales.  He  holds  in  one  hand  a Lotus, 
and  the  other  a Cup,  charged  with  the  Sigil  of  his  scale.  A serpent  issues  from  the  Cup,  and  has 
its  head  tending  down  to  the  waters  of  the  Lake. 

He  is  subtle,  violent,  crafty  and  artistic.  A fierce  nature  with  calm  exterior.  Powerful  for 
good  or  evil,  but  more  attracted  by  the  evil,  if  allied  with  apparent  Power  or  Wisdom.  If  ill- 
dignified  he  is  intensely  evil  and  merciless.  He  rules  from  20°  of  Libra  to  20°  Scorpio.  Air  of 
Water.  Prince  and  Emperor  of  Nymphs  and  Undines. 

PRINCESS  OF  THE  WATERS  AND  LOTUS  OF  THE  PALACE  OF  THE  FLOODS 

KNAVE  OF  CUPS 

A beautiful  Amazon-like  figure,  softer  in  nature  than  the  Princess  of  Wands.  Her  attire  is 
similar.  She  stands  on  a sea  with  foaming  spray.  Away  to  her  right  is  a Dolphin.  She  wears  as  a 
crest  on  her  Helmet,  belt  and  buskins,  a Swan  with  opening  wings.  She  bears  in  one  hand  a 
Lotus,  and  in  the  other  an  open  Cup  from  which  a Turtle  issues.  Her  mantle  is  lined  with  swans- 
down,  and  is  of  thin  floating  material. 

Sweetness,  poetry,  gentleness,  and  kindness.  Imagination,  dreamy,  at  times  indolent,  yet 
courageous  if  roused.  Ill-dignified  she  is  selfish  and  luxurious.  She  rules  a quadrant  of  the 
Heavens  around  Kether.  Earth  of  Water.  Princess  and  Empress  of  Nymphs  and  Undines.  Throne 
of  the  Ace  of  Cups 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


SWORDS 

LORD  OF  THE  WINDS  AND  BREEZES 
KING  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  AIR 
KING  OF  SWORDS 

A winged  Warrior  with  crowned  and  winged  Helmet,  mounted  upon  a brown  steed,  his 
general  equipment  is  as  that  of  the  King  of  Wands,  but  he  wears  as  a crest  a winged  six-pointed 
star,  similar  to  those  represented  on  the  heads  of  Castor  and  Pollux,  the  Dioscuri,  the  Twins 
Gemini  (a  part  of  which  constellation  is  included  in  his  rule).  He  holds  a drawn  sword  with  the 
Sigil  of  his  Scale  upon  its  pommel.  Beneath  his  horsts  feet  are  dark,  driving,  stratus  clouds. 

He  is  active,  clever,  subtle,  fierce,  delicate,  courageous,  skillful,  bit  inclined  to  domineer. 
Also  to  overvalue  small  things,  unless  well-dignified.  Ill-dignified,  deceitful,  tyrannical  and 
crafty.  Rules  from  20°  Taurus  to  20°  Gemini.  Fire  of  Air.  King  of  Sylphs  and  Syiphides. 

QUEEN  OF  THE  THRONES  OF  AIR 
QUEEN  OF  SWORDS 

A graceful  woman  with  curly  waving  hair,  like  a Queen  seated  upon  a Throne,  and 
crowned.  Beneath  the  Throne  are  grey  cumulous  clouds.  Her  general  attire  is  similar  to  that  of 
the  Queen  of  Wands.  But  she  wears  as  a crest  a winged  child’s  head  (like  the  head  of  an  infantile 
Kerub  seen  scuiptored  on  tombs.) 

A drawn  sword  in  one  hand,  and  in  the  other  a large  bearded  newly-severed  head  of  a 

man. 

Intensely  perceptive,  keen  observation,  subtle,  quick,  confident,  often  perseveringly 
accurate  in  superficial  things,  graceful,  fond  of  dancing  and  balancing.  Ill-dignified,  cruel,  sly, 
deceitful,  unreliable,  though  with  a good  exterior.  Rules  from  20°  Virgo  to  20°  of  Libra.  Water 
of  Air.  Queen  of  the  Sylphs  and  Syiphides. 

PRINCE  OF  THE  CHARIOTS  OF  THE  WINDS 
KNIGHT  OF  SWORDS 

A Winged  Knight  with  a winged  Crown,  seated  in  a chariot  drawn  by  Arch  Fays, 
archons,  or  Arch  Fairies,  represented  as  winged  youths  very  slightly  draped,  with  butterfly 
wings,  heads  encircled  with  a fillet  with  Pentagrams  thereon,  and  holding  wands  surmounted  by 
Pentagram  shaped  stars.  The  same  butterfly  wings  are  on  their  feet  and  fillet.  General  equipment 
is  that  of  the  Knight  of  Wands,  but  he  bears  as  a crest,  a winged  Angelic  Head,  with  a Pentagram 
on  the  Brow.  Beneath  the  chariot  are  grey  rain  clouds  or 


12 


VOLUME  NINE 


nimbi.  His  hair  long  and  waving  in  serpentine  whirls,  and  whorl  figures  compose  the  scales  of 
his  armour.  A drawn  sword  in  one  hand,  a sickle  in  the  other.  With  the  sword  he  rules,  with  the 
sickle  he  slays. 

Full  of  ideas  and  thoughts  and  designs,  distrustful,  suspicious,  firm  in  friendship  and 
enmity,  careful,  slow,  over-cautious.  Symbolises  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  Giver  of  Death,  who 
slays  as  fast  as  he  creates.  Ill-dignified  harsh,  malicious,  plotting,  obstinate,  yet  hesitating  and 
unreliable.  Ruler  from  20°  Capricorn  to  20°  Aquarius.  Air  of  Air.  Prince  and  Emperor  of  Sylphs 
and  Sylphides. 

PRINCESS  OF  THE  RUSHING  WINDS  - LOTUS  OF  THE  PALACE  OF  AIR 

KNAVE  OF  SWORDS 

An  Amazon  figure  with  waving  hair,  slighter  than  the  Rose  of  the  Palace  of  Fire,  Knave 
of  Wands.  Her  attire  is  similar.  The  feet  seem  springy,  giving  the  idea  of  swifness.  Weight 
changing  from  one  foot  to  another,  and  body  swinging  round.  She  resembles  a mixture  of 
Minerva  and  Diana,  her  mantle  resembles  the  Aegis  of  Minerva.  She  wears  as  a crest  the  head  of 
Medusa  with  Serpent  hair.  She  holds  a sword  in  one  hand  and  the  other  rests  upon  a small  silver 
altar  with  grey  smoke  (no  fire)  ascending  from  it.  Beneath  her  feet  are  white  cirrous  clouds. 

Wisdom,  strength,  acuteness,  subtleness  in  material  things,  grace  and  dexterity.  If  ill- 
dignified,  she  is  frivolous  and  cunning.  She  rules  a quadrant  of  the  Heavens  around  Kether. 

Earth  of  Air.  Princess  and  Empress  of  the  Sylphs  and  Sylphides.  Throne  of  the  Ace  of 
Swords. 

PENTACLES 

LORD  OF  THE  WILD  AND  FERTILE  LAND 
KING  OF  THE  SPIRITS  OF  EARTH 
KING  OF  PENTACLES 

A dark  winged  Warrior  with  winged  and  crowned  helmet;  mounted  on  a light  brown 
horse.  Equipment  as  of  the  King  of  Wands.  The  winged  head  of  a stag  or  antelope  as  acrest. 
Beneath  the  horse’s  feet  is  fertile  land,  with  ripened  corn.  In  one  hand  he  bears  a sceptre 
sirmounted  with  a hexagram,  in  the  other  a pentacle  like  a Z.A.M.’s. 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Unless  very  well  dignified,  he  is  heavy,  dull,  and  material.  Laborious,  clever  and  patient  in 
material  matters.  If  ill-dignified  he  is  avaricious,  grasping,  dull,  jealous,  not  very  courageous, 
unless  assisted  by  other  symbols.  Rules  from  above  20°  of  Leo  to  20°  of  Virgo.  Fire  of  Earth. 
King  of  the  Gnomes. 

QUEEN  OF  THE  THRONES  OF  EARTH 
QUEEN  OF  PENTACLES 

A woman  of  beautiful  face  with  dark  hair,  seated  upon  a throne,  beneath  which  is  dark 
sandy  earth.  One  side  of  her  face  is  dark,  the  other  light,  and  her  symbolism  is  best  represented  in 
profile.  Her  attire  is  similar  to  that  of  the  Queen  of  Wands.  But  she  bears  a winged  goat’s  head  as 
a crest.  A goat  is  by  her  side.  In  one  hand  she  bears  a sceptre  surmounted  by  a cube,  and  in  the 
other  an  Orb  of  gold. 

She  is  impetuous,  kind,  timid,  rather  charming,  greathearted,  intelligent,  melancholy, 
truthful,  yet  of  many  moods.  Ill-dignified,  she  is  undecided,  capricious,  foolish,  changeable. 

Rules  from  20°  Sagittarius  to  20°  Capricorn.  Water  of  Earth.  Queen  of  Gnomes. 

PRINCE  OF  THE  CHARIOT  OF  EARTH 
KNIGHT  OF  PENTACLES 

A winged  kingly  figure  seated  in  a chariot  drawn  by  a bull.  He  bears  as  a crest  the  symbol 
of  the  head  of  a winged  bull.  Beneath  the  chariot  is  land  with  many  flowers.  In  one  hand  he  bears 
an  orb  of  gold  held  downwards,  and  in  the  other  a sceptre  surmounted  by  an  Orb  and  cross. 

Increase  of  matter,  increase  of  good  and  evil,  solidifies,  practically  applies  things,  steady, 
reliable.  If  ill-dignified,  animal,  material,  stupid.  Is  either  slow  to  anger,  but  furious  if  roused. 
Rules  from  20°  Aries  to  20°  of  Taurus.  Air  of  Earth,  Prince  and  Emperor  of  the  Gnomes. 

PRINCESS  OF  THE  ECHOING  HILLS  - ROSE  OF  THE  PALACE  OF  EARTH 

KNAVE  OF  PENTACLES 

A strong  and  beautiful  Amazon  figure  with  red  brown  hair,  standing  on  grass  and 
flowers.  A grove  of  trees  near  her.  Her  form  suggests  Hera,  Ceres,  and  Proserpine.  She  bears  a 
winged  ram’s  head  as  a crest,  and  wears  a mantle  of  sheep’s  skin.  In  one  hand  she  carries  a 
sceptre  with  a circular  disc,  in  the  other  a Pentacle  similar  to  that  of  the  Ace  of  Pentacles. 

She  is  generous,  kind,  diligent,  benevolent,  careful,  courageous,  preserving,  pitiful.  If 


14 


VOLUME  NINE 


ill-dignified,  she  is  wasteful  and  prodigal.  Rules  over  one  Quadrant  of  the  Heavens  around  the 
North  Pole  of  the  Ecliptic.  Earth  of  Earth.  Princess  and  Empress  of  the  Gnomes.  Throne  of  the 
Ace  of  Pentacles. 


THE  THIRTY-SIX  DECANS 

Here  follow  the  descriptions  of  the  smaller  cards  of  the  4 Suits,  thirty-six  in  number, 
answering  unto  the  36  Decans  of  the  Zodiac. 

Commencing  from  the  sign  Aries,  the  Central  Decans  of  each  sign  follow  the  order  of  the 
Days  of  the  Week. 


CARD 

DECAN 

MEANING 

DAY 

3W 

Aries 

Established  Strength 

Sunday 

6P 

Taurus 

Material  Success 

Monday 

9S 

Gemini 

Despair  and  Cruelty 

Tuesday 

3C 

Cancer 

Abundance 

Wednesday 

6W 

Leo 

Victory 

Thursday 

9P 

Virgo 

Material  Gain 

Friday 

3S 

Libra 

Sorrow 

Saturday 

6C 

Scorpio 

Pleasure 

Sunday 

9W 

Sagittarius 

Great  Strength 

Monday 

3P 

Capricorn 

Material  Works 

Tuesday 

6S 

Aquarius 

Earned  Success 

Wednesday 

9C 

Pisces 

Material  Happiness 

Thursday 

There  being  36  Decanates  and  only  seven  Planets, 

it  follows  that  one  of  the  latter  must  rule  over 

one  more  decanate  than  the  others.  This  is  the  Planet  Mars  which  is  allotted  the  last  decan  of 
Pisces  and  first  of  Aries,  because  the  long  cold  of  the  winter  requires  a great  energy  to  overcome 

it  and  initiate  spring. 

The  beginning  of  the  decanates  is  from  the  Royal  King  Star  of  the  Heart  of  the  Lion,  the 
great  star  Cor  Leonis,  and  therefore  is  the  first  decanate  that  of  Saturn  in  Leo. 

Here  follow  the  general  meanings  of  the  small  cards  of  the  Suits,  as  classified  under  the 
Nine  Sephiroth  below  Kether. 


CHOKMAH 

The  Four  Twos  symbolise  the  Powers  of  the  King  and  Queen;  first  uniting  and  initiating 
the  Force,  but  before  the  Knight  and  Knave  are  thoroughly  brought  into  action.  Therefore  do 
they  generally  imply  the  initiation  and  fecundation  of  a thing. 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


BINAH 

The  Four  Threes,  generally,  represent  the  realisation  of  action  owing  to  the  Prince  being 
produced.  The  central  symbol  on  each  card.  Action  definitely  commenced  for  good  or  evil. 

CHESED 

The  Four  Fours.  Perfection,  realisation,  completion,  making  a matter  settled  and  fixed. 

GEBURAH 

The  Four  Fives.  Opposition,  strife  and  struggle;  war,  obstacle  to  the  thing  in  hand. 
Ultimate  success  or  failure  is  otherwise  shown. 

TIPHARETH 

The  Four  Sixes.  Definite  accomplishment,  and  carrying  out  of  a matter. 

NETZACH 

The  Four  Sevens.  Generally  shows  a force,  transcending  the  material  plane,  and  is  like 
unto  a crown  which  is  indeed  powerful  but  requireth  one  capable  of  wearing  it.  The  Sevens  then 
show  a possible  result  which  is  dependent  on  the  action  then  taken.  They  depend  much  on  the 
symbols  that  accompany  them. 

HOD 

The  Four  Eights.  Generally  show  solitary  success;  i.e.,  success  in  the  matter  for  the  time 
being,  but  not  leading  to  much  result  apart  from  the  thing  itself. 

yesod" 

The  Four  Nines.  Generally  they  show  very  great  fundamental  force.  Executive  power, 
because  they  rest  on  a firm  basis,  powerful  for  good  or  evil. 

MAEKUTH 

The  Four  Tens.  Generally  show  fixed  culminated  completed  Force,  whether  good  or  evil. 
The  matter  thoroughly  and  definitely  determined.  Similar  to  the  force  of  the  Nines,  but 
ultimating  it,  and  carrying  it  out.  These  are  the  meanings  in  the  most  general  sense. 

Here  follow  the  more  particular  descriptions  and  meanings.  Decan  cards  are  always 
modified  by  the  other  symbols  with  which  they  are  in  contact. 


16 


VOLUME  NINE 


SATURN  IN  LEO,  10-10.  THE  LORD  OF  STRIFE 
FIVE  OF  WANDS 

Two  white  radiant  angelic  hands  issuing  from  clouds  right  and  left  of  the  centre  of  the 
card.  They  are  clasped  together  as  in  the  grip  of  the  First  Order,  i.e.  the  four  fingers  of  each  right 
hand  crooked  into  each  other,  the  thumbs  meeting  above;  and  they  hold  at  the  same  time  by  their 
centres  Five  Wands,  or  torches,  which  are  similar  to  the  wand  of  a Z.A.M.  Four  Wands  cross 
each  other,  but  the  Fifth  is  upright  in  the  centre.  Flames  leap  from  the  point  of  junction.  Above 
the  central  Wand  is  the  symbb}  Saturn  and  below  it  that  of  Leo  representing  the  Decanate. 

Violent  strife  and  contest,  boldness,  rashness,  cruelty,  violence,  lust  and  desire, 
prodigality  and  generosity,  depending  on  well  or  ill  dignified. 

Geburah  of  Yod.  (Quarrelling  and  fighting.)  This  decan  hath  its  beginning  from  the  Royal 
Star  of  Leo,  and  unto  it  are  allotted  the  two  Great  Angels  of  the  Schemhamephoresch,  Vahaviah 
and  Yelayel. 

JUPITER  IN  LEO,  10-20.  LORD  OF  VICTORY 
SIX  OF  WANDS 

Two  hands  in  grip,  as  in  the  last,  holding  six  Wands  crossed,  3 and  3.  Flames  issuing 
from  the  point  of  junction.  Above  and  below  are  two  short  wands  with  flames  issuing  from  a 
cloud  at  the  lower  part  of  the  card,  surmounted  respectively  by  the  symbols  of  Jupiter  and  Leo, 
representing  the  Decanate. 

Victory  after  strife,  success  through  energy  and  industry,  love,  pleasure  gained  by  labour, 
carefulness,  sociability  and  avoiding  of  strife,  yet  victory  therein.  Also  insolence,  pride  of  riches 
and  success,  etc.  The  whole  depending  on  dignity. 

Tiphareth  of  Yod.  (Gain.)  Hereunto  are  allotted  the  Great  Angels  from  the 
Schemhamephoresch,  Saitel  and  Olmiah. 

MARS  IN  LEO,  20-30.  LORD  OF  VALOUR 
SEVEN  OF  WANDS 

Two  hands  holding  by  grip,  as  before,  6 Wands,  three  crossed  by  three,  a third  hand 
issuing  from  a cloud  at  the  lower  part  of  the  card  holding  an  upright  wand,  which  passes  between 
the  others.  Flames  leap  from  the  point  ofjunction.  Above  and  below  the  central  wand  are  the 
symbols  Mars  and  Leo,  representing  the  Decan. 

Possible  victory,  depending  upon  the  energy  and  courage  exercised;  valour,  opposition. 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


obstacles,  difficulties,  yet  courage  to  meet  them,  quarrelling,  ignorance,  pretence,  wrangling  and 
threatening,  also  victory  in  small  and  unimportant  things,  and  influence  over  subordinates. 
Depending  on  dignity  as  usual. 

Netzach  of  Yod.  (Opposition  yet  courage.)  Herein  rule  the  two  great  Angels  Mahashiah 
and  Lelahel. 

SUN  IN  VIRGO,  10-10°.  LORD  OF  PRUDENCE 
EIGHT  OF  PENTACLES 

A white  radiating  Angelic  hand  issuing  from  a cloud  and  grasping  a branch  of  a Rose 
tree,  with  four  white  roses  thereon  which  touch  only  the  four  lowermost  pentacles.  No  rosebuds 
seen,  but  only  leaves  touch  the  four  uppermost  disks.  All  the  Pentacles  are  similar  to  that  of  the 
Ace,  but  without  the  Maltese  cross  and  wings.  These  are  arranged  as  in  the  Geomantic  figure 
Populus. 

Above  and  below  them  are  the  symbols  So!  and  Virgo  for  the  Decan.  Over-careful  in 
small  things  at  the  expense  of  the  great.  “Penny-wise  and  pound-foolish.”  Gain  of  ready  money 
in  small  sums.  Mean,  avariciousness.  Industrious,  cultivation  of  land,  hoarding,  lacking  in 
enterprise. 

Hod  of  Heh.  (Skill,  prudence,  cunning.)  Here  rule  those  mighty  angels  Akaiah  and 
Kehethel. 

VENUS  IN  VIRGO,  10°~20°.  LORD  OF  MATERIAL  GAIN 
NINE  OF  PENTACLES 

A white  radiating  angelic  hand  as  before  holding  a Rose  branch  with  nine  white  roses, 
each  of  which  touches  a Pentacle.  There  are  more  buds  arranged  on  the  branches  as  well  as 
flowers.  Venus  and  Virgo  above  and  below. 

Complete  realisation  of  material  gain,  inheritance,  covetousness,  treasuring  of  goods  and 
sometimes  theft,  and  knavery.  All  according  to  dignity. 

Yesod  of  Heh.  (Inheritance,  much  increase  of  goods.)  Herein  rule  the  mighty  angels 
Hazayel  and  Aldiah. 

MERCURY  IN  VIRGO,  20°~30°.  LORD  OF  WEALTH 
TEN  OF  PENTACLES 

An  Angelic  hand  holding  a branch  by  the  lower  extremity,  whose  roses  touch  all  the 
pentacles.  No  buds  however  are  shown.  The  symbols  of  Mercury  and  Virgo  are  above  and  below 
Pentacles. 


18 


VOLUME  NINE 


Completion  of  material  gain  and  fortune,  but  nothing  beyond,  as  it  were,  at  the  very 
pinnacle  of  success.  Old  age,  slothfulness,  great  wealth,  yet  sometimes  loss  in  part,  and  later 
heaviness,  dullness  of  mind,  yet  clever  and  prosperous  in  money  transactions. 

Malkuth  of  Heh.  (Riches  and  wealth.)  Herein  rule  the  Angels  Hihaayah  and  Laviah. 

MOON  IN  LIBRA,  1-10°.  LORD  OF  PEACE  RESTORED 
TWO  OF  SWORDS 

Two  crossed  swords,  like  the  air  dagger  of  Z.  A.  M.,  each  held  by  a white  radiating 
angelic  hand.  Upon  the  point  where  the  two  cross  is  a rose  of  five  petals,  emitting  white  Rays, 
and  top  and  bottom  of  card  are  two  small  daggers,  supporting  respectively  the  symbols  of  Luna 
(in  horizontal  position)  and  Libra,  representing  the  Decan. 

Contradictory  characteristics  in  the  same  nature.  Strength  through  suffering.  Pleasure 
after  Pain.  Sacrifice  and  trouble  yet  strength  arising  therefrom  symbolised  by  the  position  of  the 
rose,  as  though  the  pain  itself  had  brought  forth  beauty.  Peace  restored,  truce,  arrangement  of 
differences,  justice.  Truth  and  untruth.  Sorrow  and  sympathy  for  those  in  trouble,  aid  to  the  weak 
and  oppressed,  unselfishness.  Also  an  inclination  to  repetition  of  affronts  if  once  pardoned,  of 
asking  questions  of  little  moment,  want  of  tact,  often  doing  injury  when  meaning  well.  Talkative. 

Chokmah  of  Vav.  (Quarrels  made  up,  but  still  some  tension  in  relationships.  Actions 
sometimes  selfish  and  sometimes  unselfish.)  Herein  rule  the  great  Angels  Yezalel  and  Mebahel. 

SATURN  IN  LIBRA,  10°-20°.  LORD  OF  SORROW 
THREE  OF  SWORDS 

Three  white  radiating  angelic  hands  issuing  from  clouds  and  holding  three  swords  upright 
(as  if  the  central  sword  had  struck  apart  from  the  two  others  which  were  crossed  in  the  preceding 
symbol.)  The  central  sword  cuts  asunder  the  Rose  of  Five  Petals  (which  in  the  preceding  symbol 
grew  at  the  junction  of  the  swords).  Its  petals  are  falling,  and  no  white  rays  issue  from  it.  Above 
and  below  the  central  Sword  are  the  symbols  of  Saturn  and  Libra,  referring  to  the  Decanate. 

Disruption,  interruption,  separation,  quarrelling,  sowing  of  discord  and  strife,  mischief 
making,  sorrow,  tears,  yet  mirth  in  evil  pleasures,  singing,  faithfulness  in  promises,  honesty  in 
money  transactions,  selfish  and  dissipated,  yet  sometimes  generous,  deceitful  in  words  and 
repetition.  The  whole  according  to  dignity. 

Binah  of  Vau.  (Unhappiness,  sorrow,  tears.)  Therein  rule  the  Angels  Harayel  and 
Hoqmiah. 


19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


JUPITER  IN  LIBRA,  20-30°.  THE  LORD  OF  REST  FROM  STRIFE 

FOUR  OF  SWORDS 

Two  white  angelic  radiating  hands,  each  holding  two  swords,  which  four  cross  in  the 
centre.  The  rose  of  five  petals  with  white  radiations  is  reinstated  on  the  point  of  intersection. 
Above  and  below,  on  the  points  of  two  small  daggers  are  the  symbols  of  Jupiter  and  Libra 
representing  the  Decan. 

Rest  from  sorrow,  yet  after  and  through  it.  Peace  from  and  after  war.  Relaxation  of 
anxiety.  Quietness,  rest,  ease  and  plenty,  yet  after  struggle.  Goods  of  this  life,  abundance. 
Modified  by  the  dignity  as  in  the  other  cases. 

Chesed  of  Vav.  (Convalescence,  recovery  from  sickness,  change  for  the  better.)  Herein 
rule  Laviah  and  Kelial. 

MARS  IN  SCORPIO,  10-10°.  LORD  OF  LOSS  IN  PLEASURE 

FIVE  OF  CUPS 

A white  radiating  angelic  hand  as  before  holding  Lotuses  or  water  lilies  of  which  the 
flowers  are  falling  right  and  left.  Leaves  only  and  no  buds  surmount  them.  These  lotus  stems 
ascend  between  the  cups  in  the  manner  of  a fountain,  but  no  water  flows  therefrom,  neither  is 
there  water  in  any  of  the  Cups,  which  are  somewhat  of  the  shape  of  the  magical  implement  of  the 
Z.A.M.  Above  and  below  are  the  symbols  of  Mars  and  Scorpio,  representing  the  Decan. 

Death  or  end  of  pleasures:  disappointment,  sorrow  and  loss  in  those  things  from  which 
pleasure  is  expected.  Sadness,  deceit,  treachery,  ill-will,  detraction,  charity  and  kindness  ill- 
requited.  All  kinds  of  anxieties  and  troubles  from  unexpected  and  unsuspected  sources. 

Geburah  of  Heh.  (Disappointments  in  love,  marriage  broken  off,  unkindness  from  a 
friend,  loss  of  friendship.  ) Therein  rule  Livoyah  and  Pehilyah. 

SUN  IN  SCORPIO,  10°~20°.  LORD  OF  PLEASURE 
SIX  OF  CUPS 

An  angelic  hand  as  before,  holds  a group  of  stems  of  Lotuses  or  water  lilies  from  which 
six  flowers  bend,  one  over  each  cup.  From  these  flowers  a white  glistening  water  flows  into  the 
cup  as  from  a fountain,  but  they  are  not  yet  full.  Above  and  below  are  the  symbols  of  Sun  and 
Scorpio,  representing  the  Decanate. 

Commencement  of  steady  increase,  gain  and  pleasure,  but  commencement  only.  Also 
affront,  detection,  knowledge,  and  in  some  instances,  contention  and  strife,  arising  from 
unwarranted  self-assertion  and  vanity.  Sometimes  thankless  and  presumptuous.  Sometimes 
amiable  and  patient,  according  to  dignity. 

Tiphareth  of  Heh.  (Beginning  of  wish,  happiness,  success  or  enjoyment.)  Therein  rule 
Nelokhiel  and  Yeyayel. 


20 


VOLUME  NINE 


VENUS  IN  SCORPIO,  20°~30°.  LORD  OF  ILLUSIONARY  SUCCESS 

SEVEN  OF  CUPS 

A hand  as  usual  holds  the  lotus  stems  which  arise  from  the  central  lower  cup.  The  hand  is 
above  this  cup  and  below  the  middle  one.  With  the  exception  of  the  central  lower  cup,  each  is 
overhung  by  a lotus  flower,  but  no  water  falls  from  them  into  cups  which  are  quite  empty.  Above 
and  below  are  the  symbols  of  the  decanate,  Venus  and  Scorpio. 

Possibly  victory,  but  neutralized  by  the  supineness  of  the  person.  Illusionary  success. 

Deception  in  the  moment  of  apparent  victory.  Lying,  error,  promises  unfulfilled. 

Drunkenness,  wrath,  vanity,  lust,  fornication,  violence  against  women.  Selfish 
dissipation. 

Deception  in  love  and  friendship.  Often  success  gained,  but  not  followed  up.  Modified  by 

dignity. 

Netzach  of  Heh.  (Lying.  Promises  unfulfilled.  Illusion.  Error.  Deception,  slight  success  at 
outset,  but  want  of  energy  to  retain  it.)  Therein  rule  Melchel  and  Chahaviah. 

MERCURY  IN  SAGITTARIUS,  10-10°.  THE  LORD  OF  SWIFTNESS 

EIGHT  OF  WANDS 

Four  white  Angelic  Hands  radiating  (two  proceeding  from  each  side)  from  clouds, 
clasped  in  two  pairs  in  the  centre  with  the  grip  of  First  Order.  (See  description  above.)  They  hold 
8 wands  crossed  four  and  four.  Flames  issue  from  the  point  ofjunction.  Surmounting  two  small 
wands  with  flames  issuing  down  them.  Placed  in  the  centre  at  top  and  bottom  of  card  are  the 
symbols  of  Mercury  and  Sagittarius,  representing  the  Decan. 

Too  much  force  applied  too  suddenly.  Very  rapid  rush,  but  too  quickly  passed  and 
expended.  Violent  but  not  lasting.  Swiftness.  Rapidity.  Courage,  boldness,  confidence,  freedom, 
warfare.  Violence,  love  of  open  air,  field  sports,  garden,  meadows.  Generous,  subtle,  eloquent, 
yet  somewhat  untrustworthy.  Rapacious,  insolent,  oppressive.  Theft  and  robbery,  according  to 
dignity. 

Hod  of  Yod.  (Hasty  communication  and  messages.  Swiftness.)  Therein  rule  Nithahiah 
and  Haayah. 

MOON  IN  SAGITTARIUS,  10°~20°.  THE  LORD  OF  GREAT  STRENGTH 

NINE  OF  WANDS 

Four  Hands  as  in  the  previous  symbol  holding  eight  wands  crossed  four  and  four,  but  a 
fifth  hand  at  the  foot  of  the  card  holds  another  wand  upright,  which  traverses  the  point  of 
junction  with  the  others.  Flames  leap  therefrom.  Above  and  below  the  symbols  Luna  (depicted 
horizontally)  and  Sagittarius. 

Tremendous  and  steady  force. that  cannot  be  shaken.  Herculean  strength,  yet  sometimes 
scientifically  applied.  Great  success,  but  with  strife  and  energy.  Victory  preceded  by 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


apprehension  and  fear.  Health  good  and  recovery,  yet  doubt.  Generous,  questioning  and  curious, 
fond  of  external  appearances,  intractable,  obstinate. 

Yesod  of  Yod.  (Strength,  power,  health.  Recovery  from  sickness.)  Herein  rule  Yirthiel 
and  Sahiah. 

SATURN  IN  SAGITTARIUS,  20°~30°.  THE  LORD  OF  OPPRESSION 

TEN  OF  WANDS 

Four  hands  upholding  8 wands  crossed  as  before.  A fifth  hand  at  foot  of  card  holding  two 
wands  upright  which  traverse  thej unction  of  the  others.  Above  and  below  the  symbols  Saturn  and 
Sagittarius.  Flames  issue  therefrom. 

Cruel  and  overbearing  force  and  energy,  but  applied  only  to  selfish  and  material  ends. 
Sometimes  shows  failure  in  a matter,  and  the  opposition  too  strong  to  be  controlled  arising  from 
the  person’s  too  great  selfishness  at  the  beginning.  Ill-will,  levity,  lying,  malice,  slander,  envy, 
obstinacy,  swiftness  in  evil,  if  ill-dignified.  Also  generosity,  self-sacrifice,  and  disinterestedness 
when  well-dignified. 

Malkuth  of  Yod.  (Cruelty,  malice,  revenge  and  injustice.)  Therein  rule  Reyayel  and 
Avamel. 

JUPITER  IN  CAPRICORN,  10-10°.  LORD  OF  HARMONIOUS  CHANGE 

TWO  OF  PENTACLES 

Two  wheels,  discs  or  Pentacles  similar  to  that  of  the  Ace.  They  are  united  by  a green  and 
gold  Serpent,  bound  about  them  like  a figure  of  Eight.  It  holds  its  tail  in  its  mouth.  A white 
radiant  angelic  hand  grasps  the  centre  or  holds  the  whole.  No  roses  enter  into  this  card.  Above 
and  below  are  the  symbols  Jupiter  and  Capricorn.  It  is  a revolving  symbol. 

The  harmony  of  change.  Alternation  of  gain  and  loss,  weakness  and  strength,  ever 
varying  occupation,  wandering,  discontented  with  any  fixed  condition  of  things;  now  elated,  now 
melancholy,  industrious  yet  unreliable,  fortunate  through  prudence  of  management,  yet 
sometimes  unaccountably  foolish.  Alternately  talkative  and  suspicious.  Kind  yet  wavering  and 
inconsistent.  Fortunate  in  journeying.  Argumentative. 

Chokmah  of  Heh  final.  (Pleasant  change,  visit  to  friends.)  Herein  rule  Lekabel  and 
Veshiriah. 

MARS  IN  CAPRICORN,  10°~20°.  THE  LORD  OF  MATERIAL  WORKS 

THREE  OF  PENTACLES 

A white  rayed  angelic  hand  as  before,  holding  a branch  of  a Rose-tree,  of  which  two 
white  rose-buds  touch  and  surmount  the  topmost  pentacle.  The  latter  are  arranged  in  a Triangle 


22 


VOLUME  NINE 


Above  and  below  are  symbols  of  Mars  and  Capricorn.  Working  and  constructive  force, 
building  up,  erection,  creation,  realisation,  and  increase  of  material  things,  gain  in  commercial 
transactions,  rank,  increase  of  substance,  influence,  cleverness  in  business,  selfishness, 
commencement  of  matter  to  be  established  later.  Narrow  and  prejudiced,  keen  in  matter  of  gain. 
Modified  by  dignity.  Sometimes  given  to  seeking  after  the  impossible. 

Binah  of  Heh  final.  (Business,  paid  employment,  commercial  transactions.)  Therein  rule 
Yechavah  and  Lehachiah. 

SUN  IN  CAPRICORN,  20°~30°.  THE  LORD  OF  EARTHLY  POWER 

FOUR  OF  PENTACLES 

A hand  holding  a branch  of  a Rose-tree,  but  without  flowers  or  buds,  save  that  in  the 
centre  is  one  fully  blown  white  rose.  Four  pentacles  with  Sun  and  Capricorn  above  and  below. 
Assured  material  gain,  success,  rank,  dominion,  earthly  power  completed,  but  leading  to  nothing 
beyond.  Prejudiced,  covetous,  suspicious,  careful  and  orderly,  but  discontented. 

Little  enterprise  or  originality.  Altered  by  dignity  as  usual.  Chesed  of  Heh  final.  (Gain  of 
money  or  influence.  A present.)  Therein  rule  Keveqiah  and  Mendial. 

VENUS  IN  AQUARIUS,  10-10°.  THE  LORD  OF  DEFEAT 
FIVE  OF  SWORDS 

Two  rayed  hands  each  holding  two  swords  nearly  upright,  but  falling  apart  from  each 
other,  right  and  left  of  card.  A third  hand  holds  a sword  upright  in  centre  as  if  it  had  separated 
them.  The  petals  of  the  rose  (which  in  the  four  of  Swords  had  been  reinstated  in  the  centre)  are 
torn  asunder  and  falling.  Above  and  below  the  symbols  of  Venus  and  Aquarius. 

Contest  finished,  and  decided  against  the  person,  failure,  defeat,  anxiety,  trouble,  poverty, 
avarice,  grieving  after  gain,  laborious,  unresting,  loss  and  vileness  of  nature.  Malicious, 
slandering,  lying,  spiteful  and  talebearing.  A busybody  and  separator  of  friends,  hating  to  see 
peace  and  love  between  others.  Cruel  yet  cowardly,  thankless,  and  unreliable.  Clever  and  quick 
in  thought  and  speech.  Feelings  of  pity  easily  roused  but  unenduring.  As  dignity. 

Geburah  of  Vav.  (Defeat,  loss,  malice,  spite,  slander,  evil-speaking.)  Herein  rule  Aniel 
and  Chaamiah. 

MERCURY  IN  AQUARIUS,  10°~20°.  THE  LORD  OF  EARNED  SUCCESS 

SIX  OF  SWORDS 

Two  hands  as  before,  each  holding  three  swords  which  cross  in  centre.  Rose  re 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


established  hereon.  Mercury  and  Aquarius  above  and  below,  supported  on  the  points  of  two  short 
daggers  or  swords. 

Success  after  anxiety  and  trouble.  Selfishness,  beauty,  conceit,  but  sometimes  modesty 
therewith,  dominion,  patience,  labour,  etc.,  according  to  dignity. 

Tiphareth  of  Vav.  (Labour,  work, journey  by  water.)  Herein  rule  Rehaayal  and  Yeyeziel. 

MOON  IN  AQUARIUS,  20°~30°.  THE  LORD  OF  UNSTABLE  EFFORT 

SEVEN  OF  SWORDS 

Two  hands  as  before,  each  holding  swords.  A third  hand  holds  a single  sword  in  the 
centre.  The  points  of  all  the  swords  do  just  touch  one  another,  the  central  sword  not  altogether 
dividing  them.  The  rose  of  the  previous  symbols  of  this  suit  is  held  by  the  hand  which  holds  the 
central  Sword,  as  if  the  Victory  were  at  its  disposal.  Above  and  below  Luna  and  Aquarius.  (In 
the  small  cards,  the  Lunar  Decans  are  always  represented  by  a crescent  on  its  back.) 

Partial  success,  yielding  when  victory  is  within  grasp,  as  if  the  last  reserves  of  strength 
were  used  up.  Inclination  to  lose  when  on  the  point  of  gaining  though  not  continuing  the  effort. 
Love  of  abundance,  fascinated  by  display,  given  to  compliment,  affronts  and  insolences,  and  to 
detect  and  spy  on  another.  Inclined  to  betray  confidences,  not  always  intentional.  Rather 
vacillating  and  unreliable,  according  to  dignity  as  usual. 

Netzach  of  Vav.  (Journey  by  land,  in  character  untrustworthy.)  Herein  rule  Michael  and 
Hahihel. 

SATURN  IN  PISCES,  1-10°.  THE  LORD  OF  ABANDONED  SUCCESS 

EIGHT  OF  CUPS 

A hand  holding  a group  of  stems  of  Lotuses  or  water  lilies.  There  are  only  two  flowers 
shown  which  bend  over  the  two  center  cups  pouring  into  them  a white  water.  The  cups  are  not 
yet  filled.  The  three  upper  cups  are  empty.  At  top  and  bottom  are  Saturn  and  Pisces. 

Temporary  success,  but  without  further  result.  Things  thrown  aside  as  soon  as  gained.  No 
lasting  even  in  the  matter  in  hand.  Indolence  in  success.  Journeying  from  place  to  place.  Misery 
and  repining  without  cause.  Seeking  after  riches.  Instability  according  to  dignity. 

Hod  of  Heh.  (Success  abandoned,  decline  of  interest  in  anything.)  Herein  rule  Vavaliah 
and  Yelahiah. 

JUPITER  IN  PISCES,  10°~20°.  THE  LORD  OF  MATERIAL  HAPPINESS 

NINE  OF  CUPS 

Hand  from  cloud  holding  Lotuses  or  water  lilies,  one  flower  of  which  overhangs  each 


24 


VOLUME  NINE 


cup,  and  from  which  water  pours.  All  the  cups  are  full  and  running  over.  Above  and  below  are 
the  symbols  of  Jupiter  and  Pisces  representing  the  Decan. 

Complete  and  perfect  realisation  of  pleasure  and  happiness  almost  perfect.  Self-praise, 
vanity,  conceit,  much  talking  of  self,  yet  kind  and  lovable,  and  may  be  self-denying  therewith. 
Highminded,  not  easily  satisfied  with  small  and  limited  ideas.  Apt  to  be  maligned  through  too 
much  self-assumption.  A good,  generous,  but,  maybe,  foolish  nature. 

Yesod  of  Heh.  (Complete  success,  pleasure,  happiness,  wish  fulfilled.)  Therein  rule 
Saliah  and  Aariel. 

MARS  IN  PISCES,  20°~30°.  THE  LORD  OF  PERFECTED  SUCCESS 

TEN  OF  CUPS 

Hand  holding  bunch  of  Lotuses  or  water-lilies  whose  flowers  pour  a pure  white  water 
into  all  the  cups,  which  all  run  over.  The  top  cup  is  held  sideways  by  a hand  and  pours  water  into 
top  left  hand  cup.  A single  lotus  flower  surmounts  top  cup  and  is  the  source  of  the  water  that  fills 
it.  Above  and  are  below  Mars  and  Pisces. 

Permanent  and  lasting  success,  happiness  because  inspired  from  above.  Not  sensual  as 
Nine  of  Cups,  The  Lord  of  Material  Happiness,  yet  almost  more  truly  happy.  Pleasure, 
dissipation,  debauchery. 

Pity,  quietness,  peacemaking.  Kindness,  generosity,  wantonness,  waste,  etc.,  according  to 

dignity. 

Malkuth  of  Heh.  (Matters  definitely  arranged  as  wished,  complete  good  fortune.)  Herein 
rule  Aasliah  and  Mihal. 

[This  is  not  such  a good  card  as  stated  above.  It  represents  boredom  and  quarrelling 
arising  therefrom;  disgust  springing  from  too  great  luxury.  In  particular  it  could  represent  drug 
habits,  the  sottish  excess  of  pleasure  and  the  revenge  of  nature.] 

MARS  IN  ARIES,  10-10°.  THE  LORD  OF  DOMINION 
TWO  OF  WANDS 

Hand  grasping  two  Wands  crossed.  Flames  issue  from  the  point  of  junction.  On  two  small 
wands,  above  and  below,  with  flames  issuing  from  them,  are  Mars  and  Aries. 

Strength,  dominion,  harmony  of  rule  and  justice.  Boldness,  courage,  fierceness, 
shamelessness,  revenge,  resolution,  generous,  proud,  sensitive,  ambitious,  refined,  restless, 
turbulent,  sagacious  withal,  yet  unforgiving  and  obstinate,  according  to  dignity. 

Chokmah  of  Yod.  (Influence  over  others.  Authority,  power,  dominion.)  Rule  therein 
Vehooel  and  Deneyal. 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


SUN  IN  ARIES,  10°~20°.  THE  LORD  OF  ESTABLISHED  STRENGTH 

THREE  OF  WANDS 

Hand  issuing  from  clouds  holds  three  wands  in  centre.  Two  crossed  and  one  upright. 
Flames  from  point  of  junction.  Above  and  below  are  Sun  and  Aries. 

Established  force  and  strength.  Realisation  of  hope.  Completion  of  labour,  success  of  the 
struggle.  Pride,  nobility,  wealth,  power,  conceit.  Rude  self  assumption  and  insolence.  Generosity, 
obstinacy  according  to  dignity. 

Binah  of  Yod.  (Pride,  arrogance  and  self-assertion.)  Herein  rule  Hechashiah  and 
Aamamiah. 

VENUS  IN  ARIES  20°~30°.  LORD  OF  PERFECTED  WORK 
FOUR  OF  WANDS 

Two  hands  as  before,  issuing  from  clouds  each  side  of  card,  and  clasped  in  centre  with 
First  Order  grip,  holding  four  wands  crossed.  Flames  issue  at  point  ofj unction.  Above  and  below 
are  two  small  flaming  wands  with  Venus  and  Aries,  representing  the  Decan. 

Perfection,  a completion  of  a thing  built  up  with  trouble  and  labour.  Rest  after  labour. 
Subtlety,  cleverness,  beauty,  mirth,  success  in  completion.  Reasoning  faculty,  conclusions  drawn 
from  previous  knowledge.  Unreadiness,  unreliable,  and  unsteady,  through  over  anxiety  and 
hurriedness  of  action.  Graceful  in  manners.  At  times  insincere,  etc. 

Chesed  of  Yod.  (Settlement,  arrangement,  completion.  ) Herein  rule  Nanael  and  Nithal. 

MERCURY  IN  TAURUS,  10-10°.  LORD  OF  MATERIAL  TROUBLE 

FIVE  OF  PENTACLES 

Hand  holding  a branch  of  White  Rose  Tree,  from  which  roses  are  falling,  leaving  no  buds 
behind.  Five  pentacles  similar  to  Ace.  Mercury  and  Taurus  for  Decan. 

Loss  of  money  or  position.  Trouble  about  material  things.  Toil,  labour,  land  cultivation, 
building,  knowledge  and  acuteness  of  earthly  things,  poverty,  carefulness.  Kindness,  sometimes 
money  regained  after  severe  toil  and  labour.  Unimaginative,  harsh,  stern,  determined,  obstinate. 

Geburah  of  Heh  final.  (Loss  of  profession,  loss  of  money,  monetary  anxiety.)  Therein 
rule  Mibahiah  and  Pooyal. 

MOON  IN  TAURUS,  10°~20°.  LORD  OF  MATERIAL  SUCCESS 

SIX  OF  PENTACLES 

Hand  holding  a rose  branch  with  white  roses  and  buds,  each  of  which  touch  a pentacle. 
Above  and  below  Luna  and  Taurus  represent  the  Decanate. 


26 


VOLUME  NINE 


Success  and  gain  in  material  undertakings,  power,  influence,  rank,  nobility,  rule  over  the 
people.  Fortunate,  successful  just  and  liberal.  If  ill-dignified,  may  be  purse-proud,  insolent  from 
success,  or  prodigal. 

Tiphareth  of  Heh  final.  (Success  in  material  things.  Prosperity  in  business.)  Herein  rule 
Nemamiah  and  Yeyelal. 

SATURN  IN  TAURUS,  20°~30°.  THE  LORD  OF  SUCCESS  UNFULFILLED 

SEVEN  OL  PENTACLES 

Hand  from  a cloud  holding  rose  branch  of  seven  pentacles  arranged  as  in  Rubeus.  Only 
five  of  which  overhang  but  do  not  touch  the  five  upper  pentacles.  No  other  buds  shown,  and 
none  are  near  or  touch  the  two  lower  pentacles.  Above  and  below  are  Saturn  and  Taurus. 

Promises  of  success  unfulfilled.  (Shown  in  the  symbolism  of  the  rosebuds,  which  do  not 
as  it  were  come  to  anything.)  Loss  of  apparently  promising  fortune.  Hopes  deceived  and  crushed. 
Disappointment.  Misery,  slavery,  necessity  and  baseness.  A cultivator  of  land,  and  yet  is  loser 
thereby.  Sometimes  it  denotes  slight  and  isolated  gains  with  no  fruits  resulting  therefrom,  and  of 
no  further  account,  though  seeming  to  promise  well.  According  to  dignity. 

Netzach  of  Heh.  (Unprofitable  speculation  and  employment.  Little  gain  for  much  labour.) 
Therein  rule  Herochiel  and  Mitzrael. 

JUPITER  IN  GEMINI,  10-10°.  LORD  OF  SHORTENED  FORCE 
EIGHT  OF  SWORDS 

Four  hands  as  usual,  each  holding  two  swords,  points  upwards,  touching  near  top  of  card, 
two  hands  lower  on  left,  two  on  right  of  card.  The  rose  of  other  sword  symbols  re-established  in 
centre.  Above  and  below  are  Jupiter  and  Gemini. 

Too  much  force  applied  to  small  things,  too  much  attention  to  detail,  at  expense  of 
principle  and  more  important  points.  Ill-dignified,  these  qualities  produce  malice,  pettiness,  and 
domineering  qualities. 

Patience  in  detail  of  study,  great  ease  in  some  things,  counter-balanced  by  equal  disorder 
in  others.  Impulsive,  equally  fond  of  giving  or  receiving  money,  or  presents.  Generous,  clever, 
acute,  selfish,  and  without  strong  feeling  of  affection.  Admires  wisdom,  yet  applies  it  to  small 
and  unworthy  objects. 

Hod  of  Vav.  (Narrow,  restricted,  petty,  a prison.)  Herein  rule  Vemibael  and  Yehohel. 

MARS  IN  GEMINI,  10°~20°.  THE  LORD  OF  DESPAIR  AND  CRUELTY 

NINE  OF  SWORDS 

Four  hands  (somewhat  as  in  preceding  symbol)  hold  eight  swords  upright  but  with  the 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


points  falling  away  from  each  other.  A fifth  hand  holds  a ninth  sword  upright  in  the  centre,  as  if 
it  had  disunited  them,  and  struck  them  asunder.  No  rose  at  all  is  shown  (as  if  it  were  not  merely 
cut  in  pieces  but  completely  and  definitely  destroyed).  Above  and  below  Mars  and  Gemini. 

Despair,  cruelty,  pitilessness,  malice,  suffering,  want,  loss,  misery.  Burden,  oppression, 
labour,  subtlety  and  craft,  lying,  dishonesty,  slander.  Yet  also  obedience,  faithfulness,  patience, 
unselfishness,  etc.,  according  to  dignity. 

Yesod  of  Vau.  Therein  rule  Aaneval  and  Mochayel. 

SUN  IN  GEMINI,  20°~30°.  LORD  OF  RUIN 
TEN  OF  SWORDS 

Four  hands  (as  in  previous  symbol)  hold  eight  swords  with  points  falling  away  from  each 
other.  Two  hands  hold  two  swords  crossed  in  the  centre  (as  if  theirjunction  had  disunited  the 
others).  No  rose,  flower  or  bud  is  shown.  Above  and  below  are  Sun  and  Gemini. 

(Almost  a worse  symbol  than  Nine  of  Swords.)  Undisciplined  warring  force,  complete 
disruption  and  failure.  Ruin  of  all  plans  and  projects.  Disdain,  insolence  and  impertinence,  yet 
mirth  and  jolly  therewith.  A Marplot,  loving  to  overthrow  the  happiness  of  others,  a repeater  of 
things,  given  to  much  unprofitable  speech,  and  of  many  words,  yet  clever,  acute,  and  eloquent, 
etc.,  depending  on  dignity. 

Malkuth  of  Vav.  (Ruin,  death,  defeat,  disruption.)  Herein  rule  Dambayah  and  Menqal. 

VENUS  IN  CANCER,  10-10°.  LORD  OF  LOVE 
TWO  OF  CUPS 

Hand  at  lower  part  from  cloud  holds  lotuses.  A Lotus  flower  rises  above  water,  which 
occupies  the  lowest  part  of  card,  and  rises  above  the  hand  holding  the  Lotus.  From  this  Lotus 
flower  a stem  rises,  terminating  nearly  at  the  top  of  the  card  in  another  Lotus  or  water-lily 
flower,  from  which  a white  water  gushes  like  a fountain.  Crossed  on  the  stem  just  beneath  are 
two  Dolphins,  Argent  and  Or,  on  to  which  the  water  falls  and  from  which  it  pours  in  full  streams, 
likejets  of  gold  and  silver,  into  two  cups,  which  in  their  turn  overflow,  flooding  the  lower  part  of 
the  card.  Above  and  below  Venus  and  Cancer. 

Harmony  of  masculine  and  feminine  united.  Harmony,  pleasure,  mirth,  subtlety, 
sometimes  folly,  dissipation,  waste,  and  silly  action,  according  to  dignity. 

Chokmah  of  Heh.  (Marriage,  home,  pleasure.)  Herein  rule  Ayoel  and  Chabooyah. 

MERCURY  IN  CANCER,  10°~20°.  LORD  OF  ABUNDANCE 

THREE  OF  CUPS 

Hands  as  before  holds  group  of  Lotuses  or  Water-lilies,  from  which  two  flowers  rise  on 


28 


VOLUME  NINE 


either  side  of,  and  overhanging  the  top  cup,  pouring  into  it  the  white  water.  Flowers  in  the  same 
way  pour  water  into  the  lower  cups.  All  the  cups  overflow,  the  topmost  into  the  two  others,  and 
these  upon  the  lower  part  of  the  card.  Above  and  below  Mercury  and  Cancer. 

Abundance,  plenty,  success,  pleasure,  sensuality,  passive  success,  good  luck  and  fortune. 
Love,  gladness,  kindness  and  bounty.  According  to  dignity. 

Binah  of  Heh.  (Plenty,  hospitality,  eating  and  drinking,  pleasure,  dancing,  new  clothes, 
merriment.)  Herein  rule  Rahael  and  Yebomayah. 

MOON  IN  CANCER,  20°~30°.  THE  LORD  OF  BLENDED  PLEASURE 

FOUR  OF  CUPS 

Four  cups,  the  two  upper  overflow  into  the  two  lower,  which  do  not  overflow.  A hand 
grasps  a bunch  of  lotuses  from  which  ascends  a stem  bearing  one  flower  at  the  top  of  the  card, 
from  which  water  issues  into  two  top  cups.  From  the  centre  two  leaves  pass  right  and  left, 
making  as  it  were  a cross  between  the  four  cups.  Luna  and  Cancer  are  above  and  below. 

Success  or  pleasure  approaching  their  end.  A stationary  period  in  happiness  which  may  or 
may  not  continue.  It  does  not  show  marriage  and  love  so  much  as  the  previous  symbol.  It  is  too 
passive  a symbol  to  represent  perfectly  complete  happiness.  Swiftness,  hunting  and  pursuing. 
Acquisition  by  contention;  injustice  sometimes.  Some  drawbacks  to  pleasure  implied. 

Chesed  of  Heh.  (Receiving  pleasure,  but  some  slight  discomfort  and  anxieties,  therewith. 
Blended  pleasure  and  success.)  Therein  rule  Hayayel  and  Mevamayah. 

NOTE 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 

Here  finishes  the  description  of  the  36  smaller  cards,  referring  to  the  30  Dccanates  of  the 
Zodiac.  Although  the  Angels  of  the  Schem  ha-mephoresch  have  been  linked  with  the  Decanates, 
yet  their  dominion  is  far  more  exalted,  extended,  and  important  than  this  would  at  first  sight 
seem  to  imply.  In  all  of  this  I have  not  only  transcribed  the  symbolism,  but  have  tested,  studied, 
compared,  and  examined  it  both  clairvoyantly  and  in  other  ways.  The  result  of  these  has  been  to 
show  me  how  absolutely  correct  the  symbolism  of  the  Book  T is,  and  how  exactly  it  represents 
the  occult  Forces  of  the  Universe. 

TAROT  DIVINATION 

This  form  is  especially  applicable  to  Divination  concerning  the  ordinary  material  events 
of  daily  life. 


29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


It  is  a mode  of  placing  the  cards  based  upon  the  scheme  of  the  dominion  of  the  Tarot 
Symbols.  The  more  rigidly  correct  and  in  harmony  with  the  scheme  of  the  Universe  is  any  form 
of  Divination,  so  much  the  more  is  it  likely  to  yield  a correct  and  reliable  answer  to  the  enquirer. 
For  then  and  then  only  is  there  a firm  link,  and  bond  of  union,  established  between  it  and  the 
Occult  forces  of  Nature.  The  moment  the  correct  correspondence  of  the  Symbols  employed 
ceases  to  be  observed,  the  link  between  them  and  the  inner  Occult  forces  is  strained,  and  in  some 
cases  broken.  For  this  cause,  therefore,  is  it  that  the  same  mode  of  Divination  will  sometimes 
yield  a true  and  sometimes  false  answer,  and  at  other  times  a partly  true  and  partly  false;  because 
the  correspondences  are  either  not  rigidly  observed  or  else  made  use  of  by  an  ignorant  and 
uninitiated  person. 

Therefore  the  Diviner  should  enter  upon  the  Divination  with  a mind  clear  and 
unprejudiced,  neither  disturbed  by  anger,  fear,  nor  love,  and  with  a sound  knowledge  of  the 
correspondences  of  the  symbols  which  he  employs.  Also  he  should  be  able  to  employ  his 
clairvoyant  and  intuitive  faculties  therein  when  necessary  and  should  avoid  as  much  as  possible  a 
warped  or  strained  decision.  Also  it  is  not  well  to  divine  repeatedly  concerning  the  same  matter; 
and  the  Diviner  should  also  recognise  that  even  the  material  occult  forces  do  not  act  as  the 
instruments  of  a blind  fatality,  but  rather  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  the  more  spiritual  powers 
which  are  behind  them. 

Also  it  may  be  well  for  the  Diviner  to  put  on  his  insignia,  and  make  over  the  pack  any 
invoking  hexagram  or  pentagram,  either  with  the  hand  alone,  or  with  convenient  magical 
instruments.  And  it  may  also  be  advisable  in  some  instances  to  invoke  an  elemental  force 
consonant  with  the  matter,  to  aid  in  the  divination. 

And  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  in  working  with  the  lesser  magical  implements  all  four 
should  be  at  hand,  even  though  only  one  be  actually  employed.  For  if  this  be  not  done,  it  will 
give  undue  force  to  the  suit  corresponding  to  the  Element  invoked,  and  instead  of  being  an  aid  in 
the  matter,  it  will  be  a hindrance  to  correct  reading. 

THE  OPENING  OF  THE  KEY 

The  mode  of  performing  the  Divination  called  “The  Opening  of  the  Key”  is  by  five 
consecutive  operations  of  laying  out  the  cards,  they  having  been  previously  well  shuffled,  and,  in 
addition  in  the  first  and  fourth  cases,  having  been  cut  as  well,  and  in  a certain  manner.  These  five 
operations  answer  respectively,  the  first  to  the  Dominion  of  the  Four  Knaves  under  the 
presidency  of  the  Four  Aces;  the  Second  to  that  of  the  Kings,  Queens  and  Knights,  referred  to  the 
Twelve  Houses;  the  Third  to  that  of  the  Twelve  Keys  attributed  to  the  Signs;  the  Fourth  to  that  of 
the  smaller  cards  answering  to  the  36  Decanates;  and  the  Fifth  and  last  to  the  rule  of  the 
Sephiroth  in  the  Celestial  Heavens. 

These  are  five  distinct  operations,  consecutively  executed  from  the  mode  of  Operation 
called  the  “Opening  of  the  Key,”  which,  as  has  been  before  said,  is  especially  applicable  to  the 
daily  events  of  life.  The  first  of  these  methods  shows  the  opening  of  the  matter  as  it  then  stands. 
The  2nd,  3rd,  4th,  its  consecutive  development,  and  the  5th  its  termination. 


30 


VOLUME  NINE 


Before  commencing  the  Divination,  one  of  the  sixteen  court  cards  should  be  selected  to 
represent  the  significator  of  the  enquirer,  and  should  answer  as  nearly  to  his  description. 

WANDS  generally  - very  fair-haired  and  red-haired  persons  with  fair 

complexion. 

CUPS  generally  - moderately  fair  persons. 

SWORDS  generally  - dark  persons. 

PENTACLES  generally  - very  dark  persons. 

KINGS  - Generally  men. 

QUEENS  - Generally  women. 

KNIGHTS  - Generally  young  men. 

PAGES  (KNAVES)  - generally  young  women. 

Of  these  the  Queens  and  Knights  in  reading  the  cards  during  the  processes  almost  always 
represent  persons  connected  with  a matter  under  consideration.  The  Kings,  if  looking  against  the 
direction  of  the  reading,  or  if  meeting  it,  represent  the  coming  of  a person  or  event,  or  phase  of 
an  event,  but  if  looking  with  the  direction  of  the  reading  represent  the  departure  of  a person  or 
the  going  off  or  wane  of  some  event. 

The  Pages  (Knaves)  if  looking  with  the  direction  of  the  reading,  represent  general  opinion 
in  harmony  with,  and  approving  of  the  matter;  but  if  looking  against  the  direction  of  the  reading 
the  reverse. 

If  the  Diviner  be  performing  the  Divination  for  a person  at  a distance  and  of  whose 
general  description  he  is  ignorant,  he  can  select  the  significator  by  cutting  the  pack,  and  taking 
one  of  the  court  cards  of  that  suit,  cut  to  represent  him,  of  course  earnestly  thinking  of  the  person 
at  the  time. 

It  is  usually  much  better  for  the  Enquirer  to  shuffle  or  cut  the  cards  himself;  but  if  the 
Diviner  should  have  to  do  this  himself,  he  must,  while  doing  so,  earnestly  think  of  the  person 
enquiring,  or  concerning  whom  the  Divination  is  performed.  In  all  cases  of  shuffling  and  cutting, 
the  person  doing  so  should  think  earnestly  of  the  matter  in  hand.  In  cutting,  if  a false  cut  be 
made,  that  is  to  say  if  one  or  more  cards  should  drop  in  the  process,  the  cards  should  be  at  once 
reshuffled,  and  again  cut  clearly,  otherwise  it  is  probable  that  the  answer  will  be  unreliable.  If  the 
matter  be  important,  he  should  wait  twelve  hours  before  reshuffling. 

In  the  laying  out  of  the  Cards,  if  any  are  inverted,  they  must  remain  so  and  must  not  be 
turned  round,  as  that  would  alter  the  direction  in  which  they  would  be  looking.  A card  has  the 
same  meaning  and  forces,  whether  right  side  up  or  inverted,  so  that  no  particular  attention  need 
be  paid  to  the  circumstances. 

The  order  of  the  cards  as  laid  down  must  also  not  be  interfered  with.  In  the  reading  of  the 
cards  when  laid  out,  the  Significator  of  the  Enquirer  is  the  starting  point,  and  reading  proceeds  by 
counting  over  certain  cards  in  the  direction  in  which  the  face  of  the  Court  card  chosen  as 
Significator  of  the  Enquirer  is  turned. 


31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


AN  ALTERNATIVE  METHOD  OF  SELECTING  THE  SIGNIFICATOR 

By 

C.S.  HYATT 

(In  1963  by  chance  1 met  a lady  who  sought  employment  as  a part-time  baby  sitter.  After  a 
few  months  of  employment  she  introduced  me  to  the  Tarot  system,  which  from  this  point  of 
time  seems  similar  to  if  not  identical  with  the  Golden  Dawn  System  herein  described. 
However  she  used  a different  method  of  determining  the  significator,  using  both  astrology 
and  numerology. 

First  she  requested  the  birth  data.  From  this  she  determined  if  the  sign  was  either  Fire, 
Water,  Air  or  Earth.  She  attributed  Wands  to  Fire,  Cups  to  Water,  Swords  to  Air,  and 
Pentacles  to  Earth.  For  example,  November  17,  1907,  would  be  (11-17-1907).  First  this 
querent  would  be  a Cup  since  Scorpio  is  the  Sun  sign  in  early  November.  Next  she  would 
simply  add  the  numbers  together  giving  a total  of  45.  This  number  would  be  reduced  to  a 
number  from  two  to  ten  (excluding  the  number  one)  in  this  case  giving  the  number  9.  So  that 
the  significator  is  the  9 of  Cups  which  is  the  Lord  of  Material  Happiness.)  Now  we  may 
return  to  the  official  document  of  D.D.C.F. 

The  mode  of  counting  is  as  follows,  recognising  the  card  from  which  one  starts  as  the  No. 

1. 

From  every  Ace — Five  cards  (spirit  and  four  elements). 

Princess  (Knave)  — Seven  cards  (seven  palaces  of  Malkuth). 

King,  Queen,  Prince — Four  cards,  (letters  of  Tetragrammaton). 

Smaller  cards — Its  own  number  (a  Sephirah). 

Key  of  Aleph  Mem  Shin — Three  cards  (number  of  the  Mother  letters). 

Key  of  duplicated  letters — Nine  cards  (number  of  planets  and 

Caput  and  Cauda  Draconis). 

Key  of  single  letters  Twelve  (number  of  signs). 

The  counting  is  continued  till  one  alights  on  a card  which  has  already  been  read. 

Thus,  in  the  following  example,  we  will  suppose  that  the  significator  is  the  Queen  of 
Cups,  and  that  she  is  looking  to  the  left.  We  should  read  as  follows:  Queen  of  Cups — a fair 
woman;  counting  four,  we  come  to  Five  of  Pentacles,  Le.  “Loss  of  money”  and  as  it  has  on  one 
side  the  Moon  and  on  the  other  a card  of  Pentacles,  it  shows  that  it  is  through  deception  in 
business  matters,)  we  then  count  5,  the  number  of  the  card,  from  the  5 of  Pentacles,  which  falls 
on  the  6 of  Cups  “Success.”  But  as  this  has  on  one  side  the  Foolish  Man,  and  on  the  other  the 
Ace  of  Wands,  this  will  not  be  great  owing  to  unwise  conduct.  Then  we  count  six  from  the  6 of 
Cups,  still  going  in  the  same  direction  which  brings  us  to  the  Queen  of  Cups,  a card  we  have 
already  read,  so  we  finish  there. 


32 


VOLUME  NINE 


SIGNIFICATOR  - QUEEN  OF  CUPS 

Thus  the  reading  will  be  "A  rather  fair  woman  has  lost  money  through  some 
cheating  in  business,  and  though  she  is  again  beginning  to  succeed,  this  success  is 
liable  to  be  damaged  by  unwise  conduct  on  her  part  for  which  she  will  have  herself 
to  thank." 

If  the  significator  were  the  Knave  of  Wands,  and  (looking  towards  the  right)  we 
should  count  seven  to  the  2 of  Pentacles,  then  two  from  that  to  the  5 of  Pentacles. 
Then  five  from  that  to  the  Hierophant,  twelve  from  that  to  the  Queen  of  Cups,  four 
from  that  to  the  King  of  Pentacles.  Then  four  to  the  Foolish  Man,  and  thence  three 
to  the  2 of  Pentacles,  where  we  stop,  having  read  that  card  already.  The 
interpretation  given  is:  "A  young  woman  is  just  making  a change  in  her  business, 
which  brings  her  loss  of  money  through  some  deceit  on  the  part  of  a fair  woman  and  a 
dark  man  whose  foolish  advice  has  led  to  the  change."  The  cards  would  then  be  paired 
two  by  two,  from  opposite  ends  as  hereafter  shown,  (as  in  a horseshoe)  thus:  Moon 
and  Tower,  etc. 

From  the  Moon  and  the  Tower,  "The  deceit  is  discovered."  3 of  Pentacles  and 
Queen  of  Cups,  "On  the  part  of  this  person  who  has  brought  about  her  loss."  2 of 
Pentacles  and  Hierophant,  "by  advising  the  change."  Knight  of  Cups  and  Knight  of 
Wands,  "for  the  young  woman  meets  an  older  man,"  King  of  Pentacles  and  Fool 
"who  counteract  the  foolish  advice  of  the  dark  man."  Ace  of  Wands  and  6 of  Cups 
"and  she  in  consequence  succeeds  better,  but  only  by  the  dint  of  energy  and  hard 
work." 

The  scheme  of  Divination  called  "The  Opening  of  the  Key"  is  worked  out  in  the 
following  manner.  1 adjoin  an  example  carried  carefully  through  the  five  stages  for 
the  instruction  of  the  Z.A.M.  The  complete  pack  of  78  cards  is  employed. 

FIRST  OPERATION 

REPRESENTING  THE  OPENING  OF  THE  QUESTION 
The  significator  being  chosen,  the  enquirer  shuffles  the  cards,  thinking  earnestly  of  the 
matter  under  consideration.  He  then  places  the  cards  in  a single  packet  on  the  table  before 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


him,  face  downwards.  This  represents  the  Name  YHVH,  which  is  now  to  be  separated  into  the 
component  letters.  He  therefore  is  to  cut  the  pack  as  nearly  in  the  middle  as  his  eye  can  direct, 
and  to  face  the  uppermost  portion  to  the  right  of  the  lowermost;  the  former  will  represent  YH  and 
the  latter  VH  (final).  He  again  is  to  cut  the  right  hand  packet  into  two  parts,  as  nearly  in  the 
centre  as  he  can,  and  place  the  uppermost  part  to  the  right  again.  This  will  represent  Y and  the 
lower  part  the  remaining  H.  He  is  now  to  cut  the  left  hand  packet  to  the  left,  its  uppermost  part 
will  represent  V and  its  lower  part  H (final).  So  that  he  will  now  have  four  packets  nearly  equal 
in  size,  answering  from  right  to  left  to  the  name  YHVH  under  the  presidency  of  the  Four 
Princesses  (knaves)  and  through  them  to  the  four  radical  forces  (Aces).  These  four  packets  are 
then  turned  face  upwards  without  altering  their  relative  position,  and  the  meaning  of  their  four 
bottom  cards  (which  are  now  uppermost)  thus  shown  may  be  read  as  an  indication  of  the  matter. 
Each  packet  is  now  examined  to  find  where  the  Significator  of  the  Enquirer  is,  being  careful  not 
to  alter  the  order  of  the  Cards.  The  packet  containing  the  Significator  is  retained  for  reading,  and 
the  others  are  put  aside  and  not  used  in  this  particular  reading  (operation).  Carefully  note  to 
which  of  the  Four  letters  the  packet  containing  the  significator  of  the  Enquirer  corresponds.  If  to 
Y and  Wands,  energy  and  strife.  If  to  H and  Cups,  pleasure.  If  to  V and  Swords,  sickness  and 
trouble.  If  to  H final  and  Pentacles,  business  and  money.  The  packet  containing  the  significator  is 
now  spread  out  face  upwards  in  the  form  of  a horseshoe  (count  in  the  way  the  Significator  looks) 
and  its  meaning  is  read  in  the  manner  previously  described. 

First  by  counting  to  certain  cards  until  one  alights  upon  that  which  has  been  previously 
read;  and  then  by  pairing  them  together  in  succession  from  opposite  ends  of  the  horseshoe.  (You 
do  not  miss  the  significator.) 

Before  commencing  counting  from  the  Significator,  the  Diviner  should  first  notice  what 
suit  predominates  in  the  number  of  cards.  In  this  a majority  of  Wands  would  signify  energy, 
quarrelling,  opposition.  Of  Cups,  pleasure  and  merriment.  Of  Swords,  trouble  and  sadness, 
sometimes  sickness  and  death.  Of  Pentacles,  business,  money,  possession,  etc.  Also  if  in  the 
cards  laid  out  there  should  be  either  three  or  four  cards  of  a sort,  such  as  3 Aces,  4 Fives,  etc., 
their  meaning  should  be  noted  according  to  the  table  hereafter  given.  A majority  of  the  Trumps 
(Major  Arcana)  shows  forces  beyond  one’s  control. 

Supposing  that  a young  man  asks  the  question  “Shall  I succeed  in  my  present  affairs?” 

His  complexion  is  fair,  and  his  hair  light  brown.  The  Diviner  therefore  takes  the  Knight  of  Cups 
for  Significator.  (Had  he  been  an  older  man  he  would  have  selected  the  King  of  the  same  suit 
instead)  and  requests  Enquirer  to  carefully  shuffle  the  pack  and  place  it  face  downwards  on  the 
table  before  him.  He  then  instructs  him  to  cut  the  pack  as  nearly  in  the  centre  as  possible,  and  to 
place  the  uppermost  half  well  to  the  right.  Then  to  cut  each  of  the  packets  as  nearly  in  the  centre 
as  possible,  putting  each  uppermost  half  to  the  right  of  and  beside  the  lower  half,  thus  yielding 
four  packets  of  nearly  equal  dimensions. 


34 


VOLUME  NINE 


Here  the  10  of  Wands  is  strong,  being  in  the  place  of  Yod  which  governs  Wands  - Fire. 
The  Six  of  Swords  is  moderately  strong,  being  in  the  place  of  Heh  which  rules  Cups  - Water, 
which  is  not  a hostile  and  contrary  element  to  Air;  the  4 of  Pentacles  is  weak  because  it  is  in  the 
place  of  Vau  which  rules  the  contrary  element  to  Earth,  viz.  Air;  and  the  Chariot,  Cancer,  a 
watery  sign,  is  fairly  strong,  being  in  the  place  of  Heh  final,  which  rules  Earth,  a friendly  element 
to  Water. 

The  Diviner  then  reads  these  4 Cards  as  a preliminary  thus:  “The  Enquirer  works  very 
hard  and  gains  but  little  money,  yet  matters  are  beginning  to  improve.”  This  is  based  on  the  10  of 
Wands  showing  cruelty,  harshness,  etc.  6 of  Swords  labour  and  work.  4 of  Pentacles  gain  of 
money,  and  the  Chariot  success. 

The  Diviner  then  examines  the  Four  Packets  to  find  where  the  Significator  is.  It  proves  to 
be  in  the  one  of  which  the  6 of  Swords  is  the  bottom  card.  This  is  in  the  place  answering  to  the 
letter  Heh,  which  represents  pleasure  and  rules  Cups.  This  is  so  far  a good  omen,  as  it  shows 
society  and  merriment.  This  pack  of  cards  is  retained  for  reading,  the  others  are  put  aside  as  not 
bearing  on  the  question. 

Let  us  suppose  that  this  packet  consists  of  20  cards,  and  that  they  are  in  the  following 
order.  The  Diviner  spreads  them  out  in  the  form  of  a horseshoe: 


— p" 

'S  1*  t’ 

OH (to 

Mi 

M 

m 

Di-yiKEft. 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  suit  of  Cups  is  distinctly  in  the  majority  - pleasure,  visiting  friends,  love-making,  etc. 
There  are  3 Knaves  which  indicates  society  of  the  young.  From  which  the  Diviner  reads  that  the 
Enquirer  is  fond  of  young  people  and  of  flirting,  etc.  There  being  no  other  set  of  3 or  4 cards  of  a 
sort,  the  Diviner  proceeds  to  read  by  counting  from  the  Significator,  whose  face  is  turned 
towards  the  9 of  Wands. 

The  counting  therefore  proceeds  in  the  direction  of  the  arrow,  thus:  4 from  the  King  of 
Cups,  10  of  Pentacles,  10  from  this,  8 of  Cups.  8 from  this.  Wheel  of  Fortune.  9 from  this,  Knave 
of  Wands,  7 from  this,  10  of  Cups.  10  from  this,  5 of  Swords.  5 from  this,  Knight  of  Wands.  4 
from  this,  Ace  of  Pentacles.  5 from  this,  10  of  Cups.  And  as  this  card  has  already  been  taken,  this 
form  of  reading  finishes  here. 

In  this  reading  as  hereafter  explained,  each  card  is  modified  by  the  card  on  either  side  of 
it.  If  it  be  an  end  card,  such  as  the  6 of  Swords,  in  this  case  it  is  modified  not  only  by  the  card 
next  to  it,  Ace  of  Pentacles,  but  also  by  the  card  at  the  opposite  end,  Knave  of  Wands. 

If  these  cards  are  of  a contrary  element  to  the  card  itself,  they  very  much  weaken  and 
neutralize  its  force,  but  if  the  contrary  element  is  only  in  one  card,  and  the  other  is  of  a 
connecting  nature,  it  does  not  much  matter.  This  is  explained  later  among  the  tabulated  rules. 

The  King  of  Cups  is  between  the  9 of  Wands  and  the  Wheel  of  Fortune,  both  of  which  cards  are 
of  a fiery  nature,  and  therefore  contrary  to  Cups  which  is  Water,  and  therefore  it  shows  that  the 
Enquirer  is  rather  lacking  in  perseverance  and  energy.  10  of  Pentacles,  “His  business  will  begin 
to  prosper,”  8 of  Cups,  “but  yet  he  will  lose  interest  in  it,  owing  to  his  love  of  pleasure  and 
society”  (shown  by  8 of  Cups  having  the  suit  on  each  side  of  it).  Wheel  of  Fortune,  “and  through 
his  fortune  changing  for  the  better.”  Knave  of  Wands  (Knight  of  Wands  on  one  side  and  6 of 
Swords  on  the  other),  “He  yet  is  anxious  through  falling  in  love  with  a graceful  and  sprightly  girl 
with  chestnut  hair  and  fair  complexion  whom  he  has  recently  met:  (shown  by  Knight  of  Wands 
turned  contrary  to  the  course  of  the  reading).  10  of  Cups,  “His  suit  is  at  first  favourably 
received.”  5 of  Swords,  “but  some  slanderous  reports  and  mischief  making”  (not  altogether 
without  foundation)  “come  to  her  knowledge.”  Ace  of  Pentacles,  “though  his  increasing 
prosperity  in  business.”  10  of  Cups,  “had  lead  her  to  regard  him  with  favour.” 

The  Diviner  now  pairs  the  cards  from  opposite  ends  of  the  horseshoe,  as  in  the  following 
example. 

Knave  of  Wands  - 6 of  Swords 

“She  is  anxious  about  this.” 

Knight  of  Wands  - Ace  of  Pentacles 

“And  he  begins  to  neglect  his  business  which  yet  is  fairly  good. 

3 of  Cups  - 2 of  Pentacles 

“And  instead  throws  aside  his  business  for  pleasures. 

Knight  of  Cups  - 5 of  Cups 

“The  consequence  of  this  is  that  the  engagement  between  them  is  broken  off,  shown  by 
Knight  being  turned  in  opposite  direction. 


36 


VOLUME  NINE 


10  of  Pentacles  - 8 of  Cups 

“Still  his  business  does  fairly  well  though  he  is  losing  interest  in  it. 

5 of  Swords  - 10  of  Cups 

“The  matter  is  the  subject  of  much  gossip. 

9 of  Wands  - Queen  of  Cups 

These  two  cards  of  contrary  suits  are  therefore  of  little  importance.  “Among  their 
acquaintances.” 

King  of  Cups  - Knave  of  Cups 

“He  moreover  begins  to  pay  attention  to  another  girl  of  not  quite  so  fair  complexion. 

Wheel  of  Fortune  - King  of  Swords 

“Who  however  prefers  a dark  man,  who  is  much  admired  by  the  fair  sex  (shown  by  his 
being  next  to  two  Knaves  and  a Queen.) 

6 of  Wands  - Knave  of  Pentacles 

“But  he  has  already  gained  the  affection  of  a girl  with  dark  brown  eyes  and  hair.”  (This 
description  is  obtained  by  mixing  the  effect  of  the  Wands  with  Pentacles.) 

This  concludes  the  reading  in  the  First  Operation,  which  may  be  thus  resumed: 

“The  enquirer  is  a fair  young  man  who  works  very  hard,  and  has  hitherto  gained  but  little 
money,  yet  matters  are  beginning  to  improve.  He  is  fond  of  society,  and  of  visiting  friends.  He  is 
rather  lacking  in  perseverance  and  energy.  Notwithstanding  this,  his  business  and  money 
transactions  will  begin  to  prosper.  But  yet  he  will  lose  interest  in  it  owing  to  his  love  of  pleasure 
and  society,  and  though  his  fortune  is  changing  for  the  better  he  has  yet  much  anxiety  through 
falling  in  love  with  a graceful  and  sprightly  girl  with  chestnut  hair  and  fair  complexion  whom  he 
has  recently  met.  His  suit  is  at  first  favourably  received,  but  some  slanderous  tales  and  mischief- 
making not  altogether  without  foundation,  come  to  her  knowledge,  though  his  increasing 
prosperity  in  business  has  led  her  to  regard  him  with  favour.  She  is  made  anxious  by  this,  and  he 
begins  to  neglect  his  business  which  yet  is  fairly  good,  and  instead  abandons  it  for  pleasure  and 
merry-making.” 

“The  consequence  of  this  is  that  the  engagement  is  broken  off.  Still  his  business  does 
fairly  well  though  he  has  lost  interest  in  it.  The  whole  affair  is  the  subject  of  much  gossip  among 
their  mutual  acquaintances.  (One  of  the  chief  mischief-makers  is  a fair  middle-aged  woman 
shown  by  the  Queen  of  Cups.)  He,  however,  soon  begins  to  pay  attention  to  another  girl  of  not 
quite  so  fair  a complexion.  She,  however,  prefers  a dark  young  man  who  is  much  admired 
generally  by  the  fair  sex,  but  he  has  already  gained  the  affection  of  a young  woman  with  dark 
brown  hair  and  blue  eyes.” 

SECOND  OPERATION 

REPRESENTING  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  MATTER 
The  Enquirer  again  carefully  shuffles  the  cards,  and  places  the  Pack  on  the  table  face 


37 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


downwards,  but  he  is  not  to  cut  them.  The  Diviner  now  takes  the  Pack  and  deals  it  round  card  by 
card  in  12  Packets  face  downwards  in  rotation  as  in  the  following  diagram: 


(Deal  and  read  in  order  of  Houses  against  the  direction  of  the  Sun.)  So  that  the  first 
packet  answering  to  the  Ascendant  will  consist  of  the  1st,  13th,  25th,  3 7th,  49th,  6 1st,  73rd 
cards  as  shown,  and  so  on. 

This  Operation  is  under  the  presidency  of  the  Court  Cards,  whose  dominion  in  the 
Celestial  Heavens  falls  immediately  between  that  of  the  4 Knaves  and  that  of  the  Keys  answering 
to  the  12  Signs  of  the  Zodiac.  It  represents  the  12  Astrological  Houses  of  Heaven,  as  shown. 

Without  altering  the  relative  order  of  the  packets,  or  of  the  cards  in  the  packets,  the 
Diviner  examines  each  in  succession,  till  he  finds  the  one  which  contains  the  Significator.  This 
he  retains  for  reading,  noting  carefully  to  which  astrological  house  it  corresponds  and  gathers  up 
the  other  packets,  and  puts  them  aside,  as  they  are  not  of  any  further  use  in  this  operation. 

As  before,  the  Diviner  reads  the  packet  containing  the  Significator,  by  spreading  them  out 
in  the  form  of  a horseshoe,  first  reading  by  counting  the  cards  in  order  from  the  Significator  in 
the  direction  in  which  the  face  of  the  figure  on  the  card  is  turned,  and  next  by  pairing  the  cards 
together  from  the  opposite  ends  of  the  horseshoe.  It  is  hardly  likely  that  in  so  small  a packet  there 
will  be  either  3 or  4 cards  of  a sort,  but  if  there  be,  the  Diviner  takes  note  of  the  same,  and  also 
observes  which  suit  predominates.  I now  continue  the  examples  commenced  in  the  previous 
operation.  I must  here  observe  that  the  example  is  purely  of  my  own  invention,  and  of  course  is 
not  contained  in  the  Book  T,  wherein  only  the  mode  of  working  is  given.  I have  purposely  taken 
a commonplace,  trivial,  and  material  question  for  elucidation. 


38 


VOLUME  NINE 


We  will  suppose  the  Enquirer  to  have  duly  and  carefully  shuffled  the  Cards,  thinking  of 
his  affairs,  and  that  the  Diviner  has  dealt  them  round  into  12  packets  as  above  shown.  The  packet 
containing  the  Significator  is  located  in  the  Ascendant,  and  it  contains  the  following  cards  in  the 
order  given. 


This  mode  of  reading  shows  that  as  the  Significator  is  in  the  Ascendant  it  will  principally 
relate  to  the  Enquirer’s  manner  of  living  at  this  point. 

The  Significator  is  in  this  case  right  side  up,  whereas  in  the  previous  reading  it  was 
inverted  and  is  looking  towards  the  9 of  Swords,  which  direction  therefore  the  reading  proceeds, 
counting  thus:  4 from  King  of  Cups  - Knave  of  Pentacles;  7 from  this  - Sun;  9 from  this;  - Knave 
of  Pentacles;  7 from  this  - Sun;  where  the  reading  ends. 

King  of  Cups  - Knave  of  Pentacles 

“The  enquirer  is  unhappy”  (looking  to  9 of  Swords)  “and  makes  the  acquaintance  of  the 
girl  with  the  dark  hair  and  blue  eyes  with  whom  the  dark  young  man  (his  rival)  is  in  love.  (She  is 
artistic  and  well-mannered;  and  hopes  to  carry  out  her  wishes,  i.e.  to  marry  the  dark  man  with 
whom  the  fair  girl,  to  whom  the  Enquirer  has  transferred  his  affection,  is  now  in  love.)  For  she  is 
beginning  to  be  apprehensive  regarding  her  success,  and  is  jealous  in  consequence.” 

Pairing  the  cards  from  opposite  ends  of  the  horseshoe  the  Diviner  proceeds: 

King  of  Cups  - 9 of  Swords 

“The  Enquirer  is  anxious,  and  his  health  begins  to  suffer. 

8 of  Pentacles  - Sun 

“But  hopes  ultimately  to  succeed  through  skillful  action  in  the  matter. 

4 of  Swords  - Knave  of  Pentacles 

“He  therefore  endeavours  to  make  a friend  of  the  dark  girl.” 

Temperance 

“As  he  expects  to  realize  his  wishes  by  her  means  in  the  end.”  (This  is  shown  by  the  card 
being  single  in  the  end.) 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THIRD  OPERATION 

CONTINUING  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  QUESTION 

The  Enquirer  again  carefully  shuffles  the  cards,  while  thinking  earnestly  on  her  affairs. 
The  pack  is  not  cut.  The  Diviner  deals  out  the  cards  into  12  Packets  in  precisely  the  same  manner 
as  in  the  Second  Operation.  Only  instead  of  being  referred  to  the  12  Astrological  Houses,  these 
12  Packets  are  under  the  presidency  of  the  12  Keys  of  the  Tarot  attributed  to  the  12  Signs  of  the 
Zodiac.  The  first  packet,  Emperor  - Aries,  the  2nd,  Hierophant  - Taurus,  the  3rd,  Lovers  - 
Gemini,  and  so  on.  As  before  the  Diviner  selects  the  packet  which  contains  the  Significator  for 
reading,  and  rejects  the  rest.  He  notes  also  the  meaning  of  the  Trump  answering  to  the  Sign  of 
the  Zodiac,  under  which  the  Packet  falls.  He  spreads  the  cards  out  in  the  form  of  a horseshoe, 
exactly  as  before.’  I now  continue  the  example  before  commenced: 

EXAMPLE 

We  will  suppose  that  the  Packet  containing  the  King  of  Cups  is  that  whose  position 
answers  to  the  Hierophant  - Taurus  and  that  it  consists  of  the  following  cards,  arranged  as  in  the 
diagram. 

The  Hierophant  and  the  majority  of  the  cards  in  this  packet  being  Keys  alike  show  that 
the  forces  at  present  at  work  are  ceasing  to  be  under  the  control  of  the  Enquirer.  The  reading 
proceeds  according  to  the  usual  order  of  counting,  as  follows:  King  of  Cups,  2 of  Wands. 
Magician  - Queen  of  Wands;  Universe  - Tower;  2 of  Wands  again. 


It  may  be  mentioned  that  supposing  a packet  to  consist  of  six  cards,  and  the  Significator 
to  be  a Knave,  or  counting  7 from  it,  it  would  come  back  to  the  Knave  again,  this  would  show 
that  the  Enquirer  would  act  according  to  his  own  ideas  in  this  point  of  question,  and  would  not 
let  his  line  of  action  be  influenced  by  the  opinion  of  others.  (The  reading  would  then  proceed  by 
the  pairing  of  the  cards  as  usual:) 

King  of  Cups  - 2 of  Wands 

“Though  anxious  concerning  several  matters,  he  (the  Enquirer)  is  beginning  to  succeed 
better  by  this  line  of  action.” 


40 


VOLUME  NINE 


Magician  - Queen  of  Wands 

“Which  seems  to  be  quite  the  best.  But  the  older  woman  (who  previously  made  mischief 
and  was  represented  by  the  Queen  of  Cups  in  the  1st  Operation)  who  is  artful  and  a gossip,” 
Universe  - Tower  - 2 of  Wands 

“Again  injures  the  matter  because  she  wishes  to  get  an  influence  over  the  Enquirer 
herself.” 

Pairing  the  cards,  the  Diviner  proceeds: 

2 of  Wands  - Tower 

“Her  influence  cunningly  exercised,  brings  about  a complete  disruption  of  the  whole 

matter. 

Universe  - Magician 

“The  entire  matter  becomes  invested  with  trickery  and  glamour.” 

Queen  of  Wands  - King  of  Cups 

“As  she  herself  pays  him  a good  deal  of  attention  and  sympathy,” 

2 of  Pentacles 

“Which  furthers  her  plans  by  bringing  about  a friendship  between  them.” 

FOURTH  OPERATION 

THE  FURTHER  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  QUESTION 

As  before  the  Enquirer  is  instructed  to  shuffle  the  pack  and  place  it  on  the  table  but  not  to 

cut  it. 

The  Diviner  takes  the  Pack,  turns  it  face  upwards,  and  goes  through  it,  being  careful  not 
to  disarrange  the  order  of  the  cards,  till  he  finds  the  Significator.  At  this  point  he  cuts  the  Pack, 
that  is  to  say,  he  takes  the  Significator  and  the  cards  which  had  been  beneath  it  and  places  them 
on  the  top  of  the  remainder,  turning  the  whole  face  downwards  again,  ready  for  dealing  out.  (Be 
very  careful  here:  S.A.) 

The  consequence  of  this  Operation  is  that  the  Significator  becomes  the  top  card  of  the 
pack  (bottom,  really;  face  on  table).  The  Diviner  takes  off  the  Significator,  places  it  face  upwards 
on  the  middle  of  the  table  and  then  the  following  36  cards  laid  out  in  the  form  of  a circle  round  it, 
face  upwards,  answering  to  the  36  Decanates  of  the  Zodiac,  and  showing  the  further 
development  of  the  Question.  These  are  dealt  round  in  the  order  and  direction  of  dealing  as  the 
12  packets  in  the  two  previous  operations. 

The  reading  proceeds  by  the  same  law  of  counting,  but  instead  of  counting  from  the 
Significator  itself,  it  begins  from  the  first  card  of  the  36,  and  always  goes  in  the  direction  of 
dealing.  The  suit  which  is  in  the  majority  and  the  circumstances  of  either  3 or  4 cards  of  a sort 
being  found  in  the  36  Decanates  are  also  noted.  When  the  reading  by  counting  is  finished  the 
cards  are  paired  together;  1st  and  36th;  2nd  and  35th;  3rd  and  34th;  and  so  on,  placed  in  order 
successively  upon  the  Significator.  I now  continue  the  example  before  commenced. 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


We  will  suppose  the  Enquirer  to  have  shuffled  the  pack,  and  that  the  Diviner  takes  it  in 
his  hands,  and  in  turning  it  up  finds  the  bottom  card  to  be  Temperance.  On  going  through  it  he 

comes  to  the  Significator,  thus: 


SAHII  if  lot 


He  therefore  takes  the  cards  from  King  of  Cups  to  Temperance  included  and  places  them 
above  (or  behind,  S.A.)  the  5 of  Pentacles,  being  careful  not  to  disturb  their  relative  order.  This 
has  really  the  effect  of  cutting  the  pack  between  the  Queen  of  Wands  and  the  King  of  Cups. 


42 


VOLUME  NINE 


Of  course  when  he  again  turns  them  face  downwards  for  dealing,  the  King  of  Cups  will 
necessarily  be  the  top  card  and  the  Queen  of  Wands  the  bottom  card;  Temperance  being 
immediately  above  the  5 of  Pentacles,  the  former  top  card.  The  Diviner  takes  the  top  card,  the 
Significator  and  places  it  face  upwards  in  the  centre,  and  then  deals  round  in  succession  36  cards, 
face  upwards  in  the  order  shown  in  the  above  Diagram. 

Let  us  suppose  them  to  be  thus  arranged.  The  reading  always  proceeds  in  the  same 
direction  as  the  dealing  in  this  form  of  operation,  commencing  the  counting  from  the  1st  card 
dealt. 

We  here  find  12  out  of  the  22  keys;  7 of  Wands;  7 of  Cups;  5 of  Swords;  6 of  Pentacles; 
total  37  including  Significator.  The  preponderance  of  the  Keys  represent  “Influences  beyond  the 
control  of  the  Enquirer.”  There  are  four  Kings  - “Meetings  with  influential  persons,”  and  four 
Eights,  “Much  news  and  correspondence.” 

The  counting  proceeds  as  follows  from  the  first  card  dealt.  King  of  Cups  - Six  of  Cups  -5 
of  Pentacles  - Hermit  -4  of  Cups  - Fortitude  -4  of  Swords  - 7 of  Cups  - Justice  - 5 of  Cups  King 
of  Swords  - Emperor  - 6 of  Cups  again. 

King  of  Cups  - 6 of  Cups 

“The  Enquirer’s  love  of  pleasure-going,” 

5 of  Pentacles 

“Brings  about  loss  of  money  and  business,” 

Hermit 

“And  he  is  forced  to  be  more  prudent,’ 

4 of  Cups 

“And  not  go  into  the  society  of  others  so  much,  which  has  already  brought  him  anxiety 
(shown  by  4 Cups  between  2 Wands,  contrary  elements  weakening  effect  on  this  card.) 

Fortitude 

“He  works  more  closely,” 

4 of  Swords 

“And  begins  to  get  better.” 

7 of  Cups 

“Yet  he  has  not  sufficient  energy  in  his  nature  to  stick  to  work  for  long.”  Justice 

“The  retributive  effect  of  this  is,” 

5 of  Cups 

“That  he  loses  his  friends.” 

King  of  Wands 

“And  his  former  rival  who,  though  rather  a vain  man,  is  energetic  and  hard  working.” 

Emperor  - 6 of  Cups 

“Replaces  him  in  popularity  and  esteem.” 

Pairing  them  now  the  diviner  proceeds: 

King  of  Cups  - Death  - 6 of  Cups 

“The  enquirer  loses  pleasure  in  consequence.” 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


4 of  Swords  - 7 of  Cups 

“And  becomes  less  energetic  even  then  before,  and  more  anxious  for  pleasure-going  than 

ever.” 

Moon  - Chariot 

“Yielding  to  the  tempation  of  idleness  and  vanity  by  means  of  fraud. 

8 of  Swords  - Ace  of  Pentacles 

“He  embezzles  the  money  of  his  employer,  and  sees  prison  staring  him  in  the  face. 

8 of  Cups  - Temperance 

“The  result  of  this  is  the  loss  of  good  name. 

3 of  Pentacles  - 5 of  Pentacles 
“And  of  his  situation  of  trust. 

10  of  Wands  - 2 of  Cups 

“His  former  friends  and  admirers  turn  a cold  shoulder  to  him.  Fool  - Justice 
“And  the  result  of  this  folly  is  that  he  is  arrested  and  brought  before  a court  of  law. 

7 of  Wands  - Hierophant 
“The  decision  is  adverse. 

Judgment  - Hermit 

“And  judgment  very  justly  given  against  him. 

Emperor  - King  of  Wands 

“But  his  employer,  though  stern,  is  a kind  hearted  man, 

2 of  Swords  - 9 of  Swords 

“Offers  to  take  him  back  and  overlook  the  past. 

Star  - Fortitude 

“As  he  hopes  this  will  have  proved  a lesson  to  him, 

King  of  Swords  - King  of  Pentacles 
“And  points  out  to  him  that  his  former  rival, 

3 of  Wands  - 8 of  Pentacles 

“Though  perhaps  vain,  was  yet  a hard-working  and  good  man  of  business. 

4 of  Cups  - 10  of  Swords 

“The  Enquirer  in  consequence  of  this  determines  to  completely  give  up  his  former  mode 
of  life  which  had  brought  him  to  the  brink  of  ruin,  and  becomes  a steady  man. 

8 of  Wands  - 6 of  Wands 

“After  this  he  suddenly  receives  a hasty  message  which  gives  him  much  pleasure,  3 of 
Cups  - 9 of  Pentacles 

“Stating  that  owing  to  the  loss  of  a relative  he  is  the  inheritor  of  a legacy.”  This  concludes 
the  Fourth  Operation. 

It  is  always  necessary  for  the  Diviner  to  employ  his  intuition  in  reading,  and  sometimes 
he  may  have  to  clairvoyantly  “go  through”  a card  of  doubtful  signification.  Thus  in  the  reading 
just  given  it  is  only  the  circumstance  of  the  Moon,  Chariot,  8 of  Swords,  Ace  of  Pentacles  being 
followed  by  other  confirmative  cards  which  justifies  such  an  evil  meaning  of  them. 


44 


VOLUME  NINE 


FIFTH  OPERATION 
CONCLUSION  OF  THE  MATTER 

The  cards  are  to  be  again  carefully  shuffled  by  the  Enquirer  but  not  cut.  The  Diviner  then 
takes  the  Pack,  and  deals  it  card  by  card  in  rotation  into  ten  answering  to  the  Tree  of  Life.  This 
refers  to  the  rule  of  the  10  Sephiroth  in  the  Celestial  Heavens. 

This  being  done,  the  Diviner  selects  the  packet  containing  the  Significator  for  reading, 
noting  carefully  under  which  Sephirah  it  falls,  and  taking  this  as  a general  indication  in  the 
matter.  This  packet  is  then  spread  out  in  a horseshoe  form,  and  read  in  the  usual  way,  counting 
from  the  Significator  and  this  time  in  the  direction  in  which  the  face  of  the  figure  looks.  The 
cards  are  finally  paired  together  as  in  the  previous  Operation.  This  completes  the  Mode  of 
Divination  called  “The  Opening  of  the  Key.”!  now  give  the  conclusion  of  the  example. 

We  will  suppose  that  the  cards  have  been  shuffled  and  dealt  in  the  following  manner  into 
10  packets  answering  to  the  Sephiroth  in  the  Tree  of  Life: 


* q q 
j&  n I* 

*J  71  — 


* n a 

ii  if 

If  Tf  — 


f (f  3f 
Jt  ft  *r 

Tf  — 


0 

i tr  * M ft 

*ft 

0 

fc  fi  Jlr  J4,, 
1*>  J*-  **  * 

0 

f tf  tt  If 

ft  n * f ^ 


j -X  J1 
11  VI  U 
« T?  - 


w « Jf 


t *9 

n IT  IT 
/ V*  Tf 


jm  fm  ** 

JV  4*  H — - 


45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  packet  containing  the  Significator  falls  under  Binah,  containing  the  3,  13,  23,  33,43, 
53,  63,  and  73rd  cards  dealt.  This  is  an  argument  of  sadness  and  trial.  The  cards  are  spread  as 
follows: 


The  counting  proceeds  as  follows:  King  of  Cups  - Star  - Judgment  - King  of  Cups  again. 
Evil  cards  are  in  the  majority,  another  argument  of  loss  and  trouble. 

King  of  Cups  - Star  - Judgment 

“He  has  hopes  of  thus  establishing  his  fortunes  and  that  a favourable  result  will  ensue  for 

him.” 

The  Diviner  then  pairs  them  thus: 

King  of  Cups  - 7 of  Pentacles 

“He  plunges  therefore  into  speculation  by  which  he  loses  heavily  (indicated  by  7 
Pentacles  near  Hanged  Man.) 

Knave  of  Cups  - Hanged  Man 
“And  his  love  affair  comes  to  nothing.” 

Star  - Judgment 

“All  his  expectations  are  disappointed,” 

Knight  of  Pentacles  - 8 of  Swords 

“And  his  life  for  a time  is  arduous,  petty,  and  uninteresting.” 

(The  coming  of  trouble  is  here  shown  by  the  Knight  of  Pentacles  looking  against  the 
direction  of  the  reading.  If  it  were  turned  the  other  way  it  would  show  that  his  troubles  were 
quitting  him  and  that  matters  would  improve.)  This  completes  the  operation,  and  shows  the 
general  development  and  result  of  the  question. 

TABULATED  RULES 

SHUFFLING,  CUTTING,  DEALING  AND  EXAMINING 

In  shuffling,  the  mind  of  the  Enquirer  should  be  earnestly  fixed  on  the  matter  concerning 
which  he  desires  information.  If  any  cards  fall  in  the  process,  they  should  be  taken  up 


46 


VOLUME  NINE 


without  being  noticed  and  the  shuffling  resumed.  The  shuffling  being  concluded,  and  the  pack 
placed  upon  the  table,  if  any  cards  fall  to  the  ground,  or  become  turned  in  a different  direction, 
the  shuffling  should  be  done  again,  in  less  important  matters.  In  more  important  matters  see 
previous  instructions. 

A cut  should  be  clean  and  decided.  If  any  cards  fall  from  the  hand  in  the  performance,  the 
operation  of  shuffling  should  be  repeated  before  they  are  again  cut.  In  dealing,  care  should  be 
taken  not  to  invert  the  cards,  and  their  relative  order  should  be  strictly  maintained.  In  examining 
a pack  of  cards,  their  relative  order  should  be  rigidly  maintained,  as  without  care  in  this  respect, 
one  may  be  easily  pushed  under  or  over  another,  which  would  of  course  have  the  effect  of 
completely  altering  the  counting  in  the  Reading. 


THE  SELECTION  OF  THE  SIGNIFICATOR  AND 
OF  THE  COMPLEXION  ASSIGNED  TO  THE  COURT  CARDS 

Wands  generally  Fair  and  red-haired  person 

Cups  generally  Moderately  fair 

Swords  generally  Moderately  dark 

Pentacles  generally  Very  dark 

Kings  Men 

Queens  Women 

Knights  Young  men 

Princesses  (Knaves)  Young  women 

Therefore  the  Significators  are  to  be  thus  selected.  For  example,  a dark  complexioned 
middle-aged  man,  King  of  Pentacles.  A fair  young  woman,  Princess  (Knave)  of  Cups,  etc. 

In  the  actual  reading  of  the  cards,  these  descriptions  can  be  modified  by  those  which  are 
on  either  side  of  them,  thus:  The  Queen  of  Cups,  which  indicates  a fair  woman  with  golden 
brown  hair,  if  between  cards  of  the  suits  of  Swords  and  Pentacles,  would  show  a woman  with 
rather  dark  brownhair  and  dark  eyes.  As  before  stated,  the  Knights  and  Queens  almost  invariably 
represent  actual  men  and  women  connected  with  the  subject  in  hand.  But  the  Kings  sometimes 
represent  either  the  coming  on  or  going  off  of  a matter,  arrival,  or  departure,  according  to  the 
way  in  which  they  face.  While  the  Knaves  show  opinions,  thoughts,  or  ideas,  either  in  harmony 
with  or  opposed  to  the  subject. 


THE  GENERAL  SIGNIFICATION  OF  THE  MAJORITY  OF  A 
PARTICULAR  SUIT  AND  OF  THE  PARTICULAR  SIGNIFICATION 
OF  EITHER  3 OR  4 CARDS  OF  A SUIT  IN  A READING 


A majority  of  Wands 
A majority  of  Cups 
A majority  of  Swords 
A majority  of  Pentacles 


Energy,  quarrelling,  opposition 

Pleasure  and  merriment 

Trouble  and  sadness,  sickness,  or  death 

Business,  money,  possessions,  etc. 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


A majority  of  Keys 

Forces  of  considerable  strength,  but  beyond 
the  Enquirer’s  control 

A majority  of  Court  Cards 

Society,  meeting  with  many  persons 

A majority  of  Aces 

Strength  often;  aces  are  always  strong  cards 

4 Aces 

Great  power  and  Force 

3 Aces 

Riches  and  Success 

4 Kings 

Great  swiftness  and  rapidity 

3 Kings 

Unexpected  meetings,  generally  shows  news 

4 Queens  generally 

Authority  and  influence 

3 Queens  generally 

Powerful  and  influential  friends 

4 Knights 

Meetings  with  the  great 

3 Knights 

Rank  and  honour 

4 Knaves 

New  ideas  and  plans 

3 Knaves 

Society  of  the  young 

4 Tens  generally 

Anxiety  and  responsibility 

3 Tens  generally 

Buying,  selling,  commercial  transactions 

4 Nines  generally 

Added  responsibility 

3 Nines  generally 

Much  correspondence 

4 Eights  generally 

Much  news 

3 Eights  generally 

Much  journeying 

4 Sevens  generally 

Disappointments 

3 Sevens  generally 

Treaties  and  compacts 

4 Sixes  generally 

Pleasure 

3 Sixes  generally 

Gain  and  Success 

4 Fives  generally 

Order,  regularity 

3 Fives  generally 

Quarrels,  fights 

4 Fours  generally 

Rest  and  Peace 

3 Fours  generally 

Industry 

4 Threes  generally 

Resolution  and  determination 

3 Threes  generally 

Deceit 

4 Deuces  generally 

Conference  and  conversations 

3 Deuces  generally 

Reorganization  and  restarting  of  a thing.  The  Keys  are  not 

noticed  as  above,  by  threes  and  fours. 

EXTRA  AND  BRIEF  MEANING  OF  THE  36  SMALLER  CARDS 

WANDS 

Deuce  Influence  over  another.  Dominion. 

Three  Pride  and  arrogance. 

Power  sometimes. 

Four  Settlement.  Arrangement  completed. 

Five  Quarrelling.  Fighting. 

Six  Gain  and  success. 

48 


VOLUME  NINE 


Seven  Opposition;  sometimes  courage  therewith. 

Eight  A hasty  communication,  letter  or  message.  Swiftness. 

Nine  Strength.  Power.  Health.  Energy. 

Ten  Cruelty  and  malice  towards  others.  Overbearing  strength.  Revenge.  Injustice. 


CUPS 

Deuce  Marriage,  love,  pleasure.  Warm  friendship 

Three  Plenty.  Hospitality,  eating,  drinking.  Pleasure,  dancing,  new  clothes  and  merriment. 
Four  Receiving  pleasures  or  kindness  from  others,  yet  some  discomfort  therewith. 

Five  Disappointment  in  love.  Marriage  broken  off,  etc.  Unkindness  from  friends. 

(Whether  deserved  or  not  is  shown  by  the  cards  with  it,  or  counting  from  or  to  it.)  Loss  of 
friendship. 

Six  Wish,  happiness,  success,  enjoyment. 

Seven  Lying,  deceit,  promises  unfulfilled,  illusion,  deception.  Error,  slight  success,  but  not 
enough  energy  to  retain  it. 

Eight  Success  abandoned,  decline  of  interest  in  a thing.  Ennui. 

Nine  Complete  success.  Pleasure  and  happiness.  Wishes  fulfilled. 

Ten  Matters  definitely  arranged  and  settled  in  accordance  with  one’s  wishes.  Complete  good 
fortune. 


SWORDS 

Deuce  Quarrel  made  up,  and  arranged.  Peace  restored,  yet  some  tension  in  relations. 

Three  Unhappiness,  sorrow,  tears. 

Four  Convalescence,  recovery  from  sickness,  change  for  the  better. 

Five  Defeat,  loss,  malice.  Slander,  evil-speaking. 

Six  Labour,  work;  journey,  probably  by  water.  (Shown  by  cards  near  by.) 

Seven  In  character  untrustworthy,  vacillation.  Journey  probably  by  land.  (Shown  by  cards  near, 
etc.) 

Eight  Narrow  or  restricted.  Petty.  A prison. 

Nine  Illness.  Suffering.  Malice.  Cruelty.  Pain 
Ten  Ruin  Death.  Failure.  Disaster. 


PENTACLES 

Deuce  Pleasant  change.  Visit  to  friends,  etc 

Three  Business,  paid  employment.  Commercial  transactions. 


49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Four  Gain  of  money  and  influence.  A present. 

Five  Loss  of  profession.  Loss  of  money.  Monetary  anxiety. 

Six  Success  in  material  things;  prosperity  in  business. 

Seven  Unprofitable  speculations,  employments;  also  honorary  work  undertaken  for  the  love  of 
it,  and  without  desire  of  reward. 

Eight  Skill,  prudence,  also  artfulness,  and  cunning.  (Depends  on  cards  with  it.) 

Nine  Inheritance.  Much  increase  of  money. 

Ten  Riches  and  Wealth. 


BRIEF  MEANINGS  OF  THE  22  TRUMPS 


0.  Fool.  Idea,  thought,  spirituality,  that  which  endeavours  to  rise  above  the 
material.  (That  is,  if  the  subject  which  is  enquired  about  be  spiritual.)  But  if  the  Divination  be 
regarding  a material  event  of  ordinary  life,  this  card  is  not  good,  and  shows  folly,  stupidity, 
eccentricity,  and  even  mania,  unless  with  very  good  cards  indeed.  It  is  too  ideal  and  unstable  to 
be  generally  good  in  material  things. 

1.  Magician  or  Juggler.  Skill,  wisdom,  adaptation.  Craft,  cunning,  etc.,  always 
depending  on  its  dignity.  Sometimes  occult  Wisdom. 

2.  High  Priestess.  Change,  alteration,  Increase  and  Decrease.  Fluctuation 

(whether  for  good  or  evil  is  again  shown  by  cards  connected  with  it.)  Compare  with  Death  and 
Moon. 

3.  Empress.  Beauty,  happiness,  pleasure,  success,  also  luxury  and  sometimes 

dissipation,  but  only  if  with  very  evil  cards. 

4.  Emperor.  War,  conquest,  victory,  strife,  ambition. 

5.  Hierophant.  Divine  Wisdom.  Manifestation.  Explanation.  Teaching.  Differing 

from  though  resembling  in  some  respects,  the  meaning  of  The  Magician,  The  Hermit,  and  The 
Lovers.  Occult  Wisdom. 

6.  The  Lovers.  Inspiration  (passive  and  in  some  cases  mediumistic,  thus  differing 

from  that  of  the 

Hierophant  and  Magician  and  Hermit.)  Motive,  power,  and  action,  arising  from 

Inspiration  and  Impulse. 

7.  The  Chariot.  Triumph.  Victory.  Health.  Success  though  sometimes  not  stable 

and  enduring. 

8.  Fortitude  or  Strength.  (In  former  times  and  in  other  decks  8 Justice  and  1 1 
Fortitude  were  transposed.)  Courage,  Strength,  Fortitude.  Power  not  arrested  as  in  the  act  of 
Judgment,  but  passing  on  to  further  action,  sometimes  obstinacy,  etc.  Compare  with  11  - Justice. 


50 


VOLUME  NINE 


9 The  Hermit.  Wisdom  sought  for  and  obtained  from  above.  Divine  Inspiration 
(but  active  as  opposed  to  that  of  the  Lovers).  In  the  mystical  titles,  this  with  the  Hierophant  and 
the  Magician  are  the  3 Magi. 

10  Wheel  of  Fortune.  Good  fortune  and  happiness  (within  bounds),  but 
sometimes  also  a species  of  intoxication  with  success,  if  the  cards  near  it  bear  this  out. 

1 1 Justice.  Eternal  Justice  and  Balance.  Strength  and  Force,  but  arrested  as  in 

the  act  of  Judgment.  Compare  with  8 - Fortitude.  Also  in  combination  with  other  cards,  legal 
proceedings,  a court  of  law,  a trial  at  law,  etc. 

12  Hanged  Man  or  Drowned  Man.  Enforced  sacrifice.  Punishment,  Loss.  Fatal 
and  not  voluntary.  Suffering  generally. 

13  Death.  Time.  Ages.  Transformation.  Change  involuntary  as  opposed  to  The 
Moon.  Sometimes  death  and  destruction,  but  rarely  the  latter,  and  the  former  only  if  it  is  borne 
out  by  the  cards  with  it.  Compare  also  with  High  Priestess. 

14  Temperance.  Combination  of  Forces.  Realisation.  Action  (material).  Effect 
either  for  good  or  evil. 

15  Devil.  Materiality.  Material  Force.  Material  temptation;  sometimes  obsession, 
especially  if  associated  with  the  Lovers. 

16  Tower.  Ambition,  fighting,  war,  courage.  Compare  with  Emperor.  In  certain 
combinations,  destruction,  danger,  fall,  ruin. 

17  Star.  Hope,  faith,  unexpected  help.  But  sometimes  also  dreaminess,  deceived 
hope,  etc. 

18  Moon  Dissatisfaction,  voluntary  change  (as  opposed  to  Death).  Error,  lying, 
falsity,  deception.  (The  whole  according  to  whether  the  card  is  well  or  ill-dignified,  and  on  which 
it  much  depends.) 

19  Sun  Glory,  Gain,  Riches.  Sometimes  also  arrogance.  Display,  Vanity,  but  only 
when  with  very  evil  cards. 

20  Judgment.  Final  decision.  Judgment.  Sentence.  Determination  of  a matter 

without  appeal  on  its  plane. 

21  Universe.  The  matter  itself.  Synthesis.  World.  Kingdom.  Usually  denotes  the 

actual  subject  of  the  question,  and  therefore  depends  entirely  on  the  accompanying  cards. 


51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  SIGNIFICATION  OF  THE  CARDS 

A card  is  strong  or  weak,  well-dignified  or  ill-dignified,  according  to  the  cards  which  are 
next  to  it  on  either  side.  Cards  of  the  same  suit  on  either  side  strengthen  it  greatly  either  for  good 
or  evil,  according  to  their  nature.  Cards  of  the  suits  answering  to  its  contrary  element,  on  either 
side,  weaken  it  greatly  for  good  or  evil.  Air  and  Earth  are  contraries  as  also  are  Fire  and  Water. 
Air  is  friendly  with  Water  and  Fire,  and  Fire  with  Air  and  Earth. 

If  a card  of  the  suit  of  Wands  falls  between  a Cup  and  a Sword,  the  Sword  modifies  and 
connects  the  Wand  with  the  Cup,  so  that  it  is  not  weakened  by  its  vicinity,  but  is  modified  by  the 
influence  of  both  cards;  therefore  fairly  strong.  But  if  a card  pass  between  two  which  are 
naturally  contrary,  it  is  not  affected  by  either  much,  as  a Wand  between  a Sword  and  a Pentacle 
which  latter,  being  Air  and  Earth,  are  contrary  and  therefore  weaken  each  other. 

Here  the  question  being  of  the  Wand,  this  card  is  not  to  be  noticed  as  forming  a link 
between  the  Sword  and  Pentacle. 


A FEW  EXAMPLES 
By 

G.H.  FRATER  S.R.M.D. 

9 SW.  10  SW.  5 SW. 

Very  strong  and  potent  in  action.  Very  evil. 

10W.  10  SW.  2W. 

Not  quite  so  strong.  Ruin  checked  and  perhaps  overcome. 

6 C.  10  SW.  10C. 

Rather  good  than  otherwise.  It  is  bounty  overcoming  loss,  like  a piquant  sauce  which 
adds  to  pleasure. 

9 P.  10  SW.  10C. 

Very  weak,  evil,  slight  loss  in  material  things,  but  more  anxiety  than  actual  loss. 

5 SW.  2 W.  9 SW. 

Moderately  strong.  Rashness  which  brings  evil  in  its  train.  Evil. 

9P.2  W.6P. 

Fairly  strong.  Good.  Considerable  gain  and  victory. 

10C.  2W.  6C. 

Weak,  evil.  Victory  which  is  perverted  by  debauchery  and  evil  living.  But  other  cards 
may  mitigate  the  judgment. 

9 SW.  10  C.  5 SW. 

Medium  strong.  Evil.  Sorrow  arising  from  pleasure  and  through  one’s  own  pleasures. 
9 P.  10  C.  6 P. 

Perfect  success  and  happiness. 


52 


VOLUME  NINE 


10W.  IOC.  5 Sw. 

Rather  evil.  Pleasure  that  when  obtained  is  not  worth  the  trouble  one  has  had  in  obtaining 
it. 

10SW.  6C.  9P. 

Fairly  strong  and  good.  The  Sw.  and  P.  being  opposite  elements  counteract  each  other. 
Therefore  is  it  as  if  they  were  not  there. 

10  SW.  6C.  10  w. 

Fairly  good.  Some  trouble,  but  trouble  which  is  overcome.  If  6 C.  were  a bad  card  the 
evil  would  carry  the  day. 

9 sw.  Death.  3 SW. 

Death  accompanied  by  much  pain  and  misery. 

9 w.  9 SW.  High  Priestess. 

Recovery  from  sickness. 

6 w.  Q w.  King  of  Pentacles. 

An  active  woman,  courageous  and  reliable  with  dark  chestnut  hair,  and  open  fearless 
expression. 

7 C.  King  Cups.  5 Sw. 

A rather  fair  man  but  very  deceitful  and  malicious. 

PAIRING  THE  CARDS  IN  READING 

On  pairing  the  cards  each  is  to  be  taken  as  of  equal  force  with  the  other.  If  of  opposite 
elements  they  mutually  weaken  each  other.  If  at  the  end  of  the  pairing  of  the  cards  in  a packet, 
one  card  remains  over,  it  signifies  the  partial  result  of  that  particular  part  of  the  Divination  only. 
If  an  evil  card  and  the  other  good,  it  would  modify  the  good. 

If  it  be  the  Significator  of  the  Enquirer,  or  of  another  person,  it  would  show  that  matters 
would  much  depend  on  the  line  of  action  taken  by  the  person  represented.  The  reason  of  this 
importance  of  the  single  card  is,  that  it  is  alone  and  not  modified.  If  two  cards  are  at  the  end 
instead  of  a single  one,  they  are  not  of  so  much  importance. 

THE  EXERCISE  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE  AND  INTUITION 

In  describing  any  person  from  a Significator  in  the  actual  reading,  the  Diviner  should 
endeavour,  by  Clairvoyance  and  using  the  card  in  question  as  a symbol,  to  see  the  person  implied 
using  the  rules  to  aid,  and  restrict,  his  vision.  In  describing  an  event  from  the  cards  in  the 
reading,  he  should  employ  his  intuition  in  the  same  manner.  Personal  descriptions  are  modified 
by  the  cards  next  to  them;  e.  g.,  the  Knave  of  Wands  represents  usually  a very  fair  girl,  but  if 
between  cards  of  the  suit  of  Pentacles,  she  might  be  even  quite  dark,  though  the  Wands  would 
still  give  a certain  brightness  to  hair,  eyes,  and  complexion. 


53 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


COUNTING 

In  all  cases  of  counting  from  the  card  last  touched,  the  card  itself  is  1,  that  next  it  is  2,  and 

so  on. 

From  every  Ace  count  5. 

From  every  Knave  count  7. 

From  every  other  Court  card  4 is  counted. 

From  every  small  card  the  number  of  its  pips. 

From  every  Key  answering  to  an  Element  (Aleph,  Mem,  Shin)  3 is  counted. 

From  every  Key  answering  to  a Sign  12  is  counted. 

From  every  Key  answering  to  a Planet  9 is  counted. 

UNOFFICIAL 

DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  TAROT  TRUMPS 

By 

G.  H.  SOROR  Q.  L. 

The  cards  of  the  Lesser  Arcana  present  to  us  the  vibrations  of  Number, 
Colour  and  Element  - that  is,  the  plane  on  which  number  and  colour  function.  Thus, 
in  the  Ten  of  Pentacles  we  have  the  number  Ten  and  tertiary  colours,  citrine,  olive, 
and  russet,  working  in  Malkuth,  the  material  plane.  In  the  Ten  of  Wands  we  have 
the  number  Ten  and  the  tertiaries  working  in  pure  energy.  In  these  cards,  the 
Sephirah  is  indicated  by  the  colouring  of  the  clouds;  the  plane  by  the  colouring  of 
the  symbols. 

The  four  Honours  of  each  suit  taken  in  their  most  abstract  sense  may  be 
interpreted  as: 


Potential  Power  is  the  King 
Brooding  Power  is  the  Queen 
Power  in  action  is  the  Knight 

Reception  and  Transmission  is  the  Knave. 


All  these  cards  are  coloured  according  to  their  elements  plus  the  Sephirah  to 
which  they  are  attributed.  With  the  Greater  Arcana,  however,  we  are  given  the  Keys 
to  divine  manifestation,  each  one  an  individual  force  to  be  considered 
independently.  It  must  never  be  forgotten  that  the  Trumps  are,  intrinsically,  glyphs 
of  cosmic  not  human  forces. 


54 


VOLUME  NINE 


TRUMPS 


0.  The  Fool. 

This  card  as  usually  presented  shows  a man  in  motley  striding  along  heedless 
of  the  dog  which  tears  his  garments  and  threatens  to  attack  him.  In  this  is  seen  only 
the  lower  aspect  of  the  card,  giving  no  hint  to  the  Divine  Folly  of  which  St.  Paul 
speaks.  But  in  the  Order  pack,  an  effort  is  made  to  reveal  the  deeper  meaning.  A 
naked  child  stands  beneath  a rose-tree  bearing  yellow  roses  - the  golden  Rose  of  Joy 
as  well  as  the  Rose  of  Silence.  While  reaching  up  to  the  Roses,  he  yet  holds  in  leash  a 
grey  wolf,  worldly  wisdom  held  in  check  by  perfect  innocence.  The  colours  are  pale 
yellow,  pale  blue,  greenish  yellow  - suggestive  of  the  early  dawn  of  a spring  day. 

1.  The  Magician. 

It  represents  the  union  and  balance  of  the  elemental  powers  controlled  by 
mind.  The  Adept  dedicating  the  minor  implements  on  the  Altar.  The  paths  of  Beth 
and  Mercury  link  Kether  the  Crown  with  Binah,  the  Aimah  Elohim.  The  Magician, 
therefore,  is  reflected  in  the  Intellect  which  stores  and  gathers  up  knowledge  and 
pours  it  into  the  House  of  Life,  Binah.  The  number  of  the  Path,  12,  suggests  the 
synthesis  of  the  Zodiac,  as  Mercury  is  the  synthesis  of  the  planets.  The  colours 
yellow,  violet,  grey  and  indigo,  point  to  the  mysterious  astral  light  surrounding  the 
great  Adept.  It  is  a card  linked  with  the  name  Tahuti  and  Hermes  as  the  previous 
one  is  with  Krishna  and  Harparkrat  or  Dionysius. 

2.  The  High  Priestess. 

She  rules  the  long  path  uniting  Kether  to  Tiphareth,  crossing  the  reciprocal 
Paths  of  Venus  and  Leo.  She  is  the  great  feminine  force  controlling  the  very  source  of 
life,  gathering  into  herself  all  the  energising  forces  and  holding  them  in  solution  until 
the  time  of  release.  Her  colours,  pale  blue,  deepening  into  sky  blue,  silvery  white, 
and  silver,  relieved  by  touches  of  orange  and  flame,  carry  out  these  ideas. 

3.  The  Empress. 

She  is  an  aspect  of  Isis;  the  creative  and  positive  side  of  Nature  is  suggested 
here.  The  Egyptian  trilogy,  Isis,  Hathor  and  Nephthys,  symbolised  by  the  crescent, 
full  moon,  and  gibbous  moon  are  represented  in  the  Tarot  by  the  High  Priestess, 
Hathor.  The  Empress,  Isis,  takes  either  the  crescent  moon  or  Venus  as  her  symbol. 
Justice,  Nephthys,  takes  the  gibbous  moon. 

Isis  and  Venus  give  the  aspect  of  Love,  while  Hathor  is  rather  the  Mystic,  the 
full  moon  reflecting  the  Sun  of  Tiphareth  while  in  Yesod,  transmitting  the  rays  of  the 
Sun  in  her  path  Gimel.  In  interpreting  a practical  Tarot  it  is  often  admissable  to 
regard  the  Empress  as  standing  for  Occultism.  The  High  Priestess  for  religion,  the 
Church  as  distinguished  from  the  Order. 

The  Empress,  whose  letter  is  Daleth,  is  the  Door  of  the  inner  mysteries,  as 
Venus  is  the  door  of  the  Vault.  Her  colours  are  emerald,  sky-blue,  blue-green  and 
cerise  or  rose-pink. 

4.  The  Emperor. 

Here  we  have  the  great  energising  forces  as  indicated  by  the  varying  shades  of 
red.  It  may  be  noted  here  that  the  red  paths  remain  red  in  all  planes,  varying  only  in 
shade.  Thus  Aries, 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


the  Emperor,  the  Pioneer,  the  General,  is  blood  and  deep  crimson,  red,  pure 
Vermillion  or  glowing  fiery  red.  He  is  Ho  Nike  the  Conqueror,  hot,  passionate, 
impetuous,  the  apotheosis  of  Mars,  whether  in  love  or  in  war.  He  is  the  positive 
masculine  as  the  Empress  is  the  positive  feminine. 

5.  Hierophant. 

The  High  Priest  is  the  counterpart  of  the  High  Priestess.  As  Aries  is  the  house 
of  Mars  and  the  exaltation  of  the  Sun,  so  Taurus  is  the  house  of  Venus  and 
exaltation  of  the  Moon.  He  is  the  reflective  or  mystical  aspect  of  the  masculine.  He 
is  the  thinker  as  the  Emperor  is  the  doer. 

His  colours  unlike  those  of  the  Emperor  vary  considerably.  Red,  orange, 
maroon,  deep  brown,  and  chestnut  brown,  suggest  veiled  thought,  interior  power, 
endurance,  contemplation  and  reconciliation.  This  card  frequently  indicates  the 
hidden  guar,  ianship  of  the  Masters. 

6.  The  Lovers. 

The  impact  of  inspiration  on  intuition,  resulting  in  illumination  and 
liberation  - the  sword  striking  off  the  fetters  of  habit  and  materialism,  Perseus 
rescuing  Andromeda  from  the  Dragon  of  fear  and  the  waters  of  Stagnation. 
(Consult  the  Golden  Dawn  Tarot  Deck,  Wang  & Regardie,  U.S.  Games  Systems.) 

The  colours  are  orange,  violet,  purplish  grey  and  pearl  grey.  The  flashing 
colour  of  orange  gives  deep  vivid  blue  while  the  flashing  colour  for  violet  is 
golden  yellow.  The  flashing  colours  may  always  be  introduced  if  they  bring  out  the 
essent  :.l  colour  meaning  more  clearly.  In  practise  this  card  usually  signifies 
sympathetic  understanding. 

7.  The  Chariot. 

Here  we  have  a symbol  of  the  spirit  of  man  controlling  the  lower  principles, 
soul  and  body,  and  thus  passing  triumphantly  through  the  astral  plane,  rising  above 
the  clouds  of  illusion  and  penetrating  to  the  higher  spheres. 

The  colours  amber,  silver-grey,  blue-grey,  and  the  deep  blue  violet  of  the 
night  sky  elucidate  this  symbol.  It  is  the  sublimation  of  the  Psyche. 

8.  Strength. 

This  also  represents  the  mastery  of  the  lower  by  the  higher.  But  in  this  case  it 
is  the  soul  which  holds  in  check  the  passions,  although  her  feet  are  still  planted  on 
earth,  and  the  dark  veil  still  floats  about  her  head  and  clings  around  her.  The 
colours,  pale  greenish  yellow,  black,  yellowish  grey  and  reddish  amber,  suggest 
the  steadfast  endurance  and  fortitude  required,  but  the  deep  red  rose  which  is  the 
flashing  colour  to  the  greenish  yellow,  gives  the  motive  power. 

9.  The  Hermit. 

Prudence.  These  three  trumps  should  be  collated  in  studying  them  for  they 
represent  the  three  stages  of  initiation.  The  man  wrapped  in  hood  and  mantle,  and 
carrying  a lantern  to  illuminate  the  Path  and  a staff  to  support  his  footsteps.  He  is  the 
eternal  seeker,  the  Pilgrim  soul.  His  hood  and  mantle  are  the  brown  of  earth,  and 
above  him  is  the  night-sky.  But  the  delicate  yellow-greens  and  bluish  greens  of 
spring  are  about  him,  and  spring  is  in  his  heart. 


56 


VOLUME  NINE 


10.  Wheel  of  Fortune. 

In  the  Tree  of  Life,  the  Wheel  is  placed  on  the  Pillar  of  Mercy,  where  it 
forms  the  principal  column  linking  Netzach  to  Chesed,  Victory  to  Mercy.  It  is  the 
revolution  of  experience  and  progress,  the  steps  of  the  Zodiac,  the  revolving  staircase, 
held  in  place  by  the  counter-changing  influence  of  Light  and  Darkness,  Time  and 
Eternity  - presided  over  by  the  Plutonian  cynocephalus  below,  and  the  Sphinx  of 
Egypt  above,  the  eternal  Riddle  which  can  only  be  solved  when  we  attain 
liberation.  The  basic  colours  of  this  Trump  are  blue,  violet,  deep  purple,  and  blue 
irradiated  by  yellow.  But  the  zodiacal  spokes  of  the  wheel  should  be  in  the  colours 
of  the  spectrum,  while  the  Ape  is  in  those  of  Malkuth,  and  the  Sphinx  in  the 
primary  colours  and  black. 

11.  Justice. 

Nephthys,  the  third  aspect  of  Luna,  the  twin  sister  of  Isis.  Justice  as 
distinguished  from  love.  Her  emblems  are  the  Sword  and  the  Scales.  Like  her  sister, 
she  is  clothed  in  green,  but  in  a sharper  colder  green  than  the  pure  emerald  of  Isis. 
Her  subsidiary  colours  are  blue,  blue-green,  pale  green.  It  is  only  by  utilising  the 
flashing  colours  that  we  can  find  the  hidden  warmth  and  steadfastness. 

12.  The  Hanged  Man. 

An  elusive,  because  a profoundly  significant  symbol.  It  is  sacrifice  - the 
submergence  of  the  higher  in  the  lower  in  order  to  sublimate  the  lower.  It  is  the 
descent  of  the  Spirit  into  Matter,  the  incarnation  of  God  in  man,  the  submission  to 
the  bonds  of  matter  that  the  material  may  be  transcended  and  transmuted.  The 
colours  are  deep  blue,  white  and  black  intermingled  but  not  merged,  olive,  green 
and  greenish  fawn. 

13.  Death. 

The  sign  of  transmutation  and  disintegration.  The  skeleton  which  alone 
survives  the  destructive  power  of  time,  may  be  regarded  as  the  foundation  upon 
which  the  structure  is  built.  The  type  which  persists  through  the  permutations  of 
Time  and  Space,  adaptable  to  the  requirements  of  evolution  and  yet  radically 
unchanged.  It  is  the  transmuting  power  of  Nature  working  from  below  upwards,  as 
the  Hanged  Man  is  the  transmuting  power  of  the  spirit  working  from  above 
downwards.  The  colours  are  blue-green,  both  dark  and  pale,  the  two  dominant 
colours  of  the  visible  world,  and  the  flashing  colours  of  orange  and  red-orange. 

14.  Temperance. 

This  is  the  equilibrium  not  of  the  balance  of  Libra  but  of  the  impetus  of  the 
Arrow,  Sagittarius,  which  cleaves  its  way  through  the  air  by  the  force  imparted  to  it 
by  the  taut  string  of  the  Bow.  It  requires  the  counterchanged  forces  of  Lire  and  Water, 
Shin  and  Qoph,  held  by  the  restraining  power  of  Saturn,  and  concentrated  by  the 
energies  of  Mars  to  initiate  this  impetus.  All  these  are  summed  up  in  the 
symbolism  of  the  figure  standing  between  Earth  and  Water,  holding  the  two 
amphorae  with  their  streams  of  living  water,  and  with  the  volcano  in  the 
background.  The  colours  are  bright-blue,  blue-grey,  slate-blue,  and  lilac-grey. 


57 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


15.  The  Devil. 

This  card  should  be  studied  in  conjunction  with  No.  13.  They  are  the  two  great 
controlling  forces  of  the  Universe,  the  centrifugal  and  the  centripetal,  destructive  and 
reproductive,  dynamic  and  static.  The  lower  nature  of  man  fears  and  hates  the 
transmuting  process;  hence  the  chains  binding  the  lesser  figures  and  the  bestial  forms  of 
their  lower  limbs.  Yet  this  very  fear  of  change  and  disintegration  is  necessary  to  stabilise 
the  life-force  and  preserve  continuity.  The  colours  are  indigo,  livid  brown,  golden 
brown  and  grey. 

16. . .The  Tower. 

As  always  red  remains  persistent  throughout  the  four  planes,  although  modified  in 
tone.  Thus  we  find  vivid  scarlet  shading  into  deep  sombre  red  and  Vermillion  shot  with 
amber.  The  contrasting  shades  of  green  serve  to  throw  the  red  into  relief.  The 
tremendous  destructive  influence  of  the  lightning,  rending  asunder  established  forms  to 
make  way  for  new  forms  to  emerge.  It  is  revolution  as  distinguished  from  transmutation 
or  sublimation.  Destructive  as  opposed  to  the  conservative,  energy  attacking  inertia. 
The  impetuous  ejection  of  those  who  would  enclose  themselves  in  the  walls  of  ease 
and  tradition. 

17. The  Star. 

This  shows  the  seven-pointed  Star  of  Venus  shining  above  the  Waters  of 
Aquarius,  the  guiding  force  of  love  in  all  its  forms  and  aspects,  illuminates  the  soul 
during  her  immersion  in  Humanity.  Thus  bonds  of  Saturn  are  dissolved  in  the  purified 
Waters  of  Baptism.  The  dove  of  the  Spirit  hovers  above  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  giving 
the  promise  of  ultimate  attainment  - and  on  the  other  side  gleams  of  the  Tree  of  Life. 

Pale  colours  suggest  dawn  and  the  morning  Star  - amethyst,  pale  grey,  fawn,  dove 
colour  and  white,  with  the  pale  yellow  of  the  Star. 

18. . .The  Moon. 

Here  also  is  a river  but  it  is  the  troubled  waters  of  Night,  wherein  is  to  be 
descried  a crayfish,  counterpart  of  the  Scarabeus.  From  the  water's  edge  winds  the  dark 
path  of  toil,  effort  and  possible  failure.  It  is  guarded  by  the  threatening  watch-dogs, 
seeking  to  intimidate  the  wayfarers,  while  in  the  distance  the  barren  hills  are 
surmounted  by  the  frowning  fortresses  still  further  guarding  the  way  to  attainment.  It  is 
the  path  of  blood  and  tears  in  which  fear,  weakness,  and  fluctuation  must  be  overcome. 
The  colours  are  dark  crimson,  reddish  brown,  brownish  crimson  and  plum  colours  - but 
their  sombre  hues  are  lightened  by  the  translucent  faint  greens  and  yellows  to  be  found 
in  their  counterparts. 

19.  The  Sun. 

The  Watery  Paths  of  trial  and  probation  are  counterbalanced  by  the  fiery  paths 
of  Temperance,  Judgment,  and  Decision.  In  violent  contrast  to  the  sombre  colouring  of 
Aquarius  and  Pisces,  we  are  confronted  by  the  flaring  hues  of  the  Sun  and  Fire.  The 
too-aspiring  Icarus  may  find  his  waxen  wings  of  Ambition  and  Curiosity  shrivelled  and 
melted  by  the  fiery  rays  of  the  Sun  and  the  heat  of  Fire.  Approached  with  humility  and 
reverence,  the  Sun  becomes  the  beneficent  source  of  life. 

Protected  by  an  enclosing  wall,  standing  by  the  Waters  of  repentance,  the  Pilgrim 
may  submit  himself  humbly  but  without  fear  to  the  searching  Light  and  absorb  warmth 
and 


58 


VOLUME  NINE 


vitality  from  it  for  the  struggle  before  him.  The  colours  are  clear-orange, 
golden-yellow,  amber  shot  with  red,  and  the  contrasting  blue  and  purple. 

20.  The  Last  Judgment. 

The  three  trumps  attributed  to  the  Elemental  Paths  are  perhaps  the  most 
difficult  to  understand.  They  represent  the  action  of  forces  exterior  to  the  experience 
of  humanity,  not  the  influence  of  environment  but  the  impact  of  the  Supernals  upon 
the  sublunary. 

In  the  Air  we  have  pure  spirit  holding  in  leash  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  In  water, 
the  sublimating  power  of  sacrifice.  Here  in  Fire,  we  are  shown  the  cosmic  forces 
concentrating  on  the  pilgrim  from  all  sides.  Judgment  is  pronounced  upon  him.  He  is 
not  the  judge  nor  does  decision  rest  in  his  hands.  Lazarus  cannot  emerge  from  the 
Sepulchre  until  the  voice  cries  out,  "Come  forth!"  Nor  can  he  cast  aside  the 
conflicting  grave-clothes  until  the  command,  "Loose  him!"  is  given.  Man  of  himself 
is  helpless.  The  impulse  to  ascend  must  come  from  above,  but  by  its  power  he  may 
transcend  the  sepulchre  of  environment  and  cast  aside  the  trammels  of  desire.  Here 
once  more,  the  fiery  energy  of  red  burns  through  the  planes.  Fiery  scarlet,  glowing 
crimson,  burning  red  are  emphasized  by  passive  greens. 

21.  The  Universe. 

Observe  that  this  represents  not  the  World  but  the  Universe.  It  should  be 
remembered  that  to  the  ancients,  Saturn  represented  the  confines  of  the  Solar 
system.  They  had  no  means  of  measuring  either  Uranus  or  Neptune.  To  them, 
therefore,  Saturn  passing  through  the  spiral  path  of  the  Zodiac,  marked  at  its  cardinal 
points  by  the  symbols  of  the  Kerubim  forming  the  Cross,  was  a comprehensive 
glyph  of  the  whole. 

Thus,  in  this  card  we  find  a synthesis  of  the  whole  Taro  or  Rota.  The  central 
figure  should  be  taken  as  Hathor,  Athor,  or  Ator,  rather  than  Isis,  thus  indicating  the 
hidden  anagram  which  may  perhaps  be  translated  thus:  ORAT  - man  prays.  ATOR  - 
to  the  Great  Mother,  TARO  - who  turns,  ROTA  - the  wheel  of  Life  and  Death. 

The  colours  like  those  of  the  Wheel  of  Fortune  include  the  colours  of  the 
Spectrum  and  those  of  the  elements,  but  they  are  placed  against  the  indigo  and  black 
of  Saturn,  with  the  white  gleam  of  the  Stars  shining  in  the  darkness  and  the  misty 
figure  of  the  Aimah  Elohim  in  the  midst.  In  the  practical  Tarot,  this  card  is  taken  to 
signify  the  matter  in  hand,  that  is  the  subject  of  any  question  that  has  been  asked. 

Having  now  reviewed  the  22  Atous  or  Trumps  in  succession,  it  will  be  wise  for 
the  Student  to  reverse  the  process  and  seek  to  follow  the  Path  of  the  Pilgrim  from 
below  upwards,  thus  seeking  to  comprehend  the  interior  process  of  Initiation  and 
Illumination.  It  is  a process  in  which  the  whole  Universe  does  not  disdain  to  take  part, 
for  Man  is  himself  the  Microcosm  of  the  Macrocosm  and  the  Child  of  the  Gods.  And 
again,  the  Macrocosm  must  itself  be  undergoing  a corresponding  process  in  which 
the  experience  not  only  of  humanity  but  of  each  individual  must  be  an  integral  part. 
The  fragments  are  gathered  up  into  the  baskets,  that  nothing  may  be  lost;  and  from 
the  feeding  of  the  multitude  there  remains  not  less  but  more  than  the  unbroken  bread 
and  fish  - fit  emblems  of  Earth  and  Water. 

Cease  not  to  seek  day  and  night  the  Purifying  Mysteries 


59 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  TREE  OF  LIFE  AS  PROJECTED  IN  A SOLID  SPHERE 

By 

Y.H.  FRATER  S.R.M.D, 

The  Planets’  sphere  which  illustrates  this  manuscript,  as  part  of  the  Z.A.M.’s  Abstract  of 
the  Tarot,  has  been  drawn  by  S.R.M.D.  as  instructed.  It  represents  the  Heavens  polarized  on  the 
plane  of  the  Ecliptic,  not  on  the  plane  of  the  Equator  of  our  Earth,  so  that  its  North  Pole  is  the 
veritable  North  Pole  of  our  Heavens  and  not  merely  that  part  of  them  to  which  the  North  Pole  of 
our  Earth  now  points. 

Another  very  important  difference  is  that,  throughout  the  true  Tarot,  the  teaching  assigns 
the  commencing  Point  of  the  Zodiac  to  the  bright  Star  “Regulus”  which  is  in  Leo.  And  it 
measures  Right  Ascension  and  Longitude  from  that  point,  and  not  from  a suppositious  point 
divided  by  the  Equinox  and  called  the  0°  of  Aries  (though  in  reality  now  far  removed  from  the 
constellation  of  that  name),  which  has  been  adopted  by  modern  or  western  astronomy  and 
astrology. 

By  this  now  usual  way  of  reckoning,  and  the  Procession  of  the  Equinoxes,  it  has 
gradually  come  to  pass  that  the  signs  (or  divisions,  each  of  30°,  of  the  Zodiac)  no  longer  coincide 
with  the  constellations  of  the  same  name,  and  each  decade  shows  them  slowly  but  surely 
receding. 

But  the  Tarot  method  of  reckoning  from  the  star  named  Regulus  has,  it  will  be  seen,  the 
effect  of  making  the  Signs  and  the  Constellations  coincide. 

“Regulus”  is  also  named  Cor  Leonis  - “The  Heart  of  the  Lion.” 

“Regulus”  means  “Star  of  the  Prince.”  “Regulus”  coincides  with  the  position  of  the 
“heart”  in  the  figure  of  Leo  upon  the  Star  Maps. 


60 


VOLUME  NINE 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  SOUTHERN  HEMISPHERE 


62 


VOLUME  NINE 


TABULAR  VIEW  OF  THE  DOMINION  OF  THE  SYMBOLS 
OF  THE  TAROT  IN  THE  CELESTIAL  HEAVENS. 

The  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor  shall  know  that  the  great  “King  Star”  or  “Heart  of  the  Lion,” 
which  is  in  Leo  upon  the  path  of  the  Ecliptic  and  one  of  the  “Four  Tiphareth  Points”  (see  later)  of 
the  Celestial  Heavens,  is  the  commencement  and  Ruler  of  all  our  reckoning  of  Longitude  (or 
Ecliptic).  The  Path  of  the  Sun  itself  is  the  commencement  of  our  reckoning  of  the  Latitude  in  the 
searching  out  of  our  Hidden  Wisdom. 

Also  the  Dragon,  the  constellation  Draco,  surroundeth  the  Pole  Kether  of  our  Celestial 
Heavens. 

But  the  Northern  Pole  and  Kether  of  the  Material  Planet  (even  of  our  Erthe,  earth) 
looketh  constantly  unto  Binah,  for  as  much  as  she  is  under  sorrow  and  suffering.  When,  oh  Lord 
of  the  Universe,  shall  she  turn  from  her  evil  ways  so  that  she  shall  again  behold  Kether? 
Wherefore  she  is  now  a place  of  trial.  For  each  thing  in  this  world  of  Assiah  looketh  towards  that 
which  is  its  Natural  Governor.  To  what  part  of  the  Celestial  Heavens  the  Kether  of  a Planet 
constantly  looketh,  by  that  part  is  that  Planet  ruled.  For  in  all  things  shine  the  Sephiroth  even  as 
hath  been  sufficiently  said. 

The  Four  Knaves  rule  the  celestial  Heavens  from  the  North  Pole  of  the  Zodiac  to  the  45° 
of  Latitude  North  of  the  Ecliptic.  They  form  the  Thrones  of  the  Four  Aces,  who  rule  in  Kether. 
The  Four  Kings,  4 Queens,  4 Knights  rule  the  Celestial  Heavens  from  the  45°of  North  Latitude 
down  to  the  Ecliptic.  The  12  Tarot  Keys  attributed  to  the  12  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  rule  the 
Celestial  Heavens  from  the  Ecliptic  down  to  the  45°  of  South  Latitude.  The  36  smaller  cards  of 
the  Suits  (from  two  to  ten)  rule  the  Celestial  Heavens  from  the  45°  South  of  the  Ecliptic  to  the 
South  Pole,  or  the  Malkuth  place  therein.  All  calculation  arises  from  the  Star  “Regulus,”  the  0° 
of  our  Led. 


SYMBOLS 

These  Four  Aces  revolve  in  Kether,  their  Thrones  are  the  central  portion  of  45°  of 
Longitude  in  extent  in  the  dominions  of  the  Knaves  of  their  respective  suits. 

STAR  GROUPS 

Ace  of  Wands 

A part  of  the  tail  of  Draco,  fore-feet  of  Ursa  Major,  tail  of  Ursa  Major,  and  of  the 
Northern  dog  of  Canis  Venatici. 

Ace  of  Cups 

Head  of  Draco,  body  and  legs  of  Hercules. 

Ace  of  Swords 

Body  of  Draco.  Right  arm  of  Orpheus,  head  and  body  of  Lacerta.  Body  of  Cygnus. 


63 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Ace  of  Pentacles 

Body  of  Draco.  Legs  of  Cepheus.  Tail  of  Ursa  Minor,  and  the  Pole  Star.  Legs  of 
Cassiopeia.  Head  and  neck  of  Camelopardus. 

Knave  of  Wands 

Rules  from  North  Pole  to  45°  and  from  0°  of  Cancer  to  30°  of  Virgo,  the  end  of  Virgo. 
The  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Wands  extends  45°  from  22°  - 30°  of  Cancer  to  7°  - 30°  of  Virgo 
within  the  limits  of  45°  Latitude. 

Star  groups  corresponding  to  above. 

Tail  of  Draco,  Head  and  forepart  of  Ursa  Minor,  left  arm  and  part  of  head  and  chest  of 
Bootes.  The  greater  part  of  the  Northernmost  dog  of  Canis  Venatici.  Tail  and  Back  of  Ursa 
Major,  (ancient  Italian  name  was  Septemtriones,  the  7 Ploughing  Oxen).  This  includes  the 
celebrated  Seven  stars  of  the  constellation  called  “Charles  Wai.n”  by  the  English;  “Seven  Rishis” 
by  the  Hindus,  and  in  the  Egyptian  Book  of  the  Dead,  Ch.  XVII,  “The  Seven  bright  ones  who 
follow  their  Lord,  the  Thigh  of  the  Northern  Heaven.”  In  the  Zodiac  of  Denderah,  and  in  the 
Tablet  of  Edfus,  that  Ursa  Major  is  represented  as  the  thigh  of  an  Ox. 

Knave  of  Cups 

Rules  from  North  Pole  to  45°  of  Latitude  and  from  0°  of  Libra  to  30°  of  Sagittarius  in 
Longitude.  The  Throne  of  the  Ace  embraces  from  22°  - 30°  of  Libra  to  7°  - 30°  of  Sagittarius 
within  the  above  limits  of  Latitude. 

Star  Group 

Head  of  Draco.  Left  arm,  body  and  legs  of  Hercules,  part  of  head,  right  shoulder  and  club 
of  Bootes. 

Knave  of  Swords 

Rules  from  North  Pole  to  45°  Latitude  and  from  0°  of  Capricorn  to  30°  of  Pisces 
Longitude.  The  Throne  of  the  Ace  extends  from  22°  - 30°  of  Capricorn  to  7°  - 30°  of  Pisces  as 
before. 

Star  Group 

Body  of  Draco,  part  of  Lyra.  Head,  body  and  right  arm  of  Cepheus,  the  King  and  Father 
of  Andromeda,  the  whole  of  Cygnus,  head  and  body  of  Lacerta,  back  and  part  of  head  of 
Vulpecula  the  Fox. 

Knave  of  Pentacles 

Rules  from  North  Pole  to  45°  Latitude,  and  from  0°  of  Aries  to  30°  of  Gemini  Longitude. 

The  Throne  of  the  Ace  embraces  from  22°  - 30°  of  Aries  to  7°  - 30°  of  Gemini  within  the 

Latitude  as  above. 

Star  Group 

Body  of  Draco,  legs  and  part  of  right  arm  and  Sceptre  of  Cepheus,  tail  and  hind  quarters 
of  Ursa  Minor,  with  the  Pole  Star  of  our  Earth,  head  and  neck  of  Camelopardalis  (Giraffe),  body 
and  right  arm,  throne  and  legs  of  Cassiopeia,  the  Queen  of  Cepheus  and  Mother  of  Andromeda, 
head  of  Ursa  Major. 

Prince  of  Wands 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  North  Latitude  and  from  20°  Cancer  to  20°  Leo  in  Longitude. 


64 


VOLUME  NINE 


Star  Group 

Head,  body,  and  tail  of  Leo,  body  and  tail  of  Leo  Minor,  hind  quarters  and  legs  of  Ursa 
Major,  head  and  fore-quarters  of  Southern  dog  of  Canis  Venatici. 

King  of  Pentacles 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  North  Latitude  and  from  20°  of  Leo  to  20°  of  Virgo. 

Star  Group 

Head  and  body  of  Virgo,  left  arm  of  Bootes,  hair  of  Berenice.  Body  and  hind  quarters  of 
Southern  dog  of  Canes  Venatici,  hind  feet  of  Northern  dog  of  Canis  Venatici. 

Queen  of  Swords 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  and  from  20°  of  Virgo  to  20°  of  Libra. 

Star  Group 

Right  leg  of  Virgo,  body  and  right  arm  and  right  leg  of  Bootes.  Beam  and  part  of  Scales 
of  Libra. 

Knight  of  Cups 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  and  from  20°  of  Libra  to  20°  of  Scoipio. 

Star  Group 

Part  of  Scales  of  Libra,  left  claws  of  Scorpio,  body  and  legs  of  Ophiucus,  the  holder  of 
the  Serpent.  Lront  half  of  Serpent’s  head,  right  arm  and  club  of  Hercules. 

The  King  of  Wands 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  North  Latitude  and  from  20°  of  Scorpio  to  20°  of  Sagittarius. 

Star  Group 

Top  of  head  and  bow  of  Sagittarius,  head  and  right  arm  of  Ophiucus,  rear  half  of  Serpent. 

Queen  of  Pentacles 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  North  Latitude  and  from  20°  of  Sagittarius  to  20°  of 
Capricorn. 

Star  Group 

Top  of  head,  neck  and  horns  of  Capricorn,  left  hand  of  Aquarius,  the  man  who  carries  the 
Water,  the  whole  of  Aquila,  the  Eagle,  the  greater  part  of  Delphinus,  whole  of  Sagitta,  the 
Arrow,  forefeet  and  body  of  Vulpecula  the  Lox,  and  the  tail  of  the  Cygnet  which  he  seizes. 

Knight  of  Swords 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  North  Latitude,  and  from  20°  of  Capricorn  to  20°  of  Aquarius. 

Star  Group 

Tail  of  Capricornus,  head  and  body  of  Aquarius,  head  and  forelegs  of  Pegasus,  the 
winged  horse  who  sprang  from  the  blood  of  Medusa  near  the  sources  of  the  ocean,  the  whole  of 
Equilaus,  the  lesser  horse,  part  of  head  of  Dolphin,  tail  and  hind  quarters  of  Vulpecula,  part  of 
wing  of  Cygnus,  the  swan,  part  of  head  of  Pisces. 

King  of  Cups 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  of  North  Latitude  and  from  20°  of  Aquarius  to  20°  of  Pisces. 


65 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Star  Group 

Body  and  tail  of  one  of  the  Pisces,  and  part  of  the  band.  Body  and  wings  of  Pegasus,  head 
and  arms  of  Andromeda,  chained  to  the  rock,  tail  of  Lacerta. 

Queen  of  Wands 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  North  Latitude  and  from  20°  of  Pisces  to  20°  of  Aries. 

Star  Group 

The  other  Fish  and  part  of  Band  of  Pisces,  head  and  back  of  Aries,  body  and  legs  of 
Andromeda,  the  Triangle,  hand  left  arm  of  Cassiopeia,  the  winged  instep  of  Aries. 

Knight  of  Pentacles 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  450  North  Latitude  and  from  20°  of  Aries  to  20°  of  Taurus. 

Star  Group 

Tail  of  Aries,  one  horn  and  shoulder  and  back  of  Taurus,  whole  of  Perseus,  and  the  head 
of  Medusa,  hind  quarters  and  legs  of  Camelopardalis,  left  leg  of  Auriga,  Charioteer,  and  part  of 
Capella,  the  she-goat  which  bears  kids  in  her  arms. 

King  of  Swords 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  45°  North  Latitude  from  20°  of  Taurus  to  20°  Gemini  in 
Longitude. 

Star  Group 

Head  and  body  of  Castor,  one  of  the  Gemini,  greater  part  of  Auriga  and  Capella,  head 
and  forepart  of  Lynx,  forefeet  of  Camelopardalis. 

Queen  of  Cups 

Rules  from  Ecliptic  to  450  North  Latitude,  and  from  20°  Gemini  to  20°  of  Cancer  in 
Longitude. 

Star  Group 

Head  and  body  of  Pollux,  the  other  of  the  Gemini;  greater  part  of  Cancer,  crab;  face  ol 
Leo;  head  and  face  of  Ursa  Major. 

THE  TWELVE  KEYS  WHICH  GOVERN  THE  CELESTIAL  HEAVENS 
FROM  THE  ECLIPTIC  TO  45°  OF  SOUTH  LATITUDE 

Fortitude 

Rules  the  whole  of  Leo,  from  the  point  of  Regulus  or  Cor  Leonis.  Stars 

The  fore-legs  and  hind-feet  of  Leo,  greater  part  of  the  Sextans  and  of  Crater,  the  cups, 
part  of  the  body  of  Hydra,  the  great  Water  serpent,  greater  part  of  Antlia  Pneumatica,  the  air 
Pump,  greater  part  of  Pisces  Nautica,  a small  part  of  the  ship  Argo. 

Hermit 

Rules  the  whole  of  Virgo. 

Stars 

Left  arm,  hand,  and  arm  of  Virgo,  and  her  ear  of  Corn;  part  of  the  body  of  Hydra,  Corvus, 
the  Crow,  part  of  Crater,  tail  and  right  hand  of  Centaurus,  the  man  horse,  smal  part  of  Air  Pump 
and  of  Argo. 


66 


VOLUME  NINE 


Justice 

Rules  the  whole  of  Libra. 

Stars 

Part  of  the  South  Scale  of  Libra,  tail  of  Hydra,  head,  body,  arms  and  forefeet  of  Centauri. 
Legs,  body  and  tail  of  Lupus,  the  Wolf  which  he  is  killing.  Right  claw  of  Scorpio. 

Death 

Rules  the  whole  of  Scorpio. 

Stars 

Body  and  tail  of  Scorpio,  head  and  neck  of  Lupus,  whole  of  Ara  - Altar,  two  feet  of 
Ophiucus,  point  of  arrow  of  Sagittarius,  part  of  Norma,  Mason’s  square. 

Temperance 

Rules  the  whole  of  Sagittarius. 

Stars 

The  whole  of  Sagittarius,  the  Archer,  except  right  hind  leg,  the  tail,  the  crown  of  the 
head,  extreme  points  of  Bow  and  Arrow,  Corona  Australis,  Telescope,  Pavo  - Peacock. 

The  Devil 

Rules  the  whole  of  Capricorn. 

Stars 

Whole  lower  half  of  Capricornus,  the  he-Goat,  part  of  Piscis  Australis,  Southern  Fish, 
Microscope  Part  of  Grus,  the  Crane.  Part  of  Indus. 

The  Star 

Rules  the  whole  of  Aquarius. 

Stars 

Legs  of  Aquarius,  and  the  issuant  water  head  of  Piscis  Australis,  part  of  Grus,  part  of 
Phoenix,  part  of  apparatus  Sculptorum,  part  of  Cetus. 

The  Moon 

Rules  the  whole  of  Pisces. 

Stars 

The  connecting  band  of  Pisces,  the  body  of  Cetus,  the  sea  Monster  to  which  Andromeda 
was  exposed,  part  of  Apparatus  Sculptorum.  Part  of  Phoenix,  part  of  Fornax. 

The  Emperor 

Rules  the  whole  of  Aries. 

Stars 

Legs  of  Aries,  part  of  body  of  Taurus,  head  and  fore-part  of  Cetus,  part  of  Fornax  and  of 
Eridanus. 

The  Hierophant 

Rules  the  whole  of  Taurus. 

Stars 

Head  and  forepart  of  Taurus  the  Bull.  The  Bull  sent  by  Neptune  to  frighten  the  horses  of 
Sol  and  those  of  the  Hippolytus.  The  greater  part  of  Orion  the  Giant,  and  hunter.  The  beginning 
of  the  River  Eridanus  into  which  Phaeton  was  hurled  when  attempting  to  drive  the  horses  of  the 
Sun,  greater  part  of  Lepus,  the  Hare. 


67 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Lovers 

Rule  the  whole  of  Gemini. 

Stars 

Legs  of  Castor  and  Pollux,  the  Gemini,  Canis  Minor,  a small  part  of  Cancer.  The  whole 
of  Monoceros,  the  Unicorn,  except  the  hind-quarters.  Head  and  fore-part  of  Canis  Major,  the 
greater  Dog. 

The  Chariot 

Rules  the  whole  of  Cancer  up  to  Regulus  in  Leo. 

Stars 

One  claw  and  part  of  the  body  of  Cancer,  forepaws  of  Leo,  head  and  part  of  Hydra,  part 
of  Sextans,  part  of  Pisces  Nautica,  hind  legs  and  tail  of  Monoceros,  part  of  the  mast,  rigging,  and 
prow  of  the  ship  Argo. 

IN  CONCLUSION 

The  Keys  answering  unto  the  Seven  Lords  who  wander  (planets)  and  the  Three  Spirits 
(the  elements)  are  not  assigned  any  fixed  dominion.  The  following  36  small  cards  (2’s  to  10’s) 
rule  the  decans  of  the  signs  in  the  Celestial  Heavens  and  their  Dominion  extendeth  from  45° 
South  of  the  Ecliptic  unto  Malkuth  at  the  Southern  Pole. 

5 of  Wands 

0°  - 10°  of  Leo,  Saturn,  Part  of  Argo,  part  of  Pisces  Volcun. 

6 of  Wands 

10°  - 20°  of  Leo,  Jupiter,  Part  of  Argo,  part  of  Pisces  Volcun. 

7 of  Wands 

20°-  30°  of  Leo,  Mars,  Part  of  Argo,  part  of  Pisces  Volcun. 

8 of  Pentacles 

0°  - 10°  of  Virgo,  Sun,  Part  of  Argo,  part  of  Pisces  Volcun. 

9 of  Pentacles 

10°  - 20°  of  Virgo,  Venus,  Hind  feet  of  Centauri,  part  of  Pisces  Volcun. 

10  of  Pentacles 

20°  - 30°  of  Virgo,  Mercury,  Hind  legs  of  Centauri,  part  of  Chameleon. 

2 of  Swords 

0°  - 10°  of  Libra,  Moon,  Hind  legs  of  Centauri,  pt.  Crux,  pt.  Musea  and  Chameleon. 

3 of  Swords 

10°  - 20°  of  Libra,  Saturn,  Pt.  of  Crux,  Musea  and  Chameleon. 

4 of  Swords 

20°-  30°  of  Libra,  Jupiter,  Pt.  of  Musea,  Circinus,  Compasses,  and  Chameleon. 

5 of  Cups 

0°-  10°  of  Scorpio,  Mars,  Pt.  Circinus,  Chameleon  and  of  Triangulum  Australis. 

6 of  Cups 

10°  - 20°  of  Scorpio,  Sun,  Pt.  Triangulum  Australis,  Apus  the  Swallow  and  Octano. 


68 


VOLUME  NINE 


7 of  Cups 

20°  - 30°  of  Scorpio,  Venus,  Part  of  Pavo,  Apus,  Octano. 

8 of  Wands 

0°  - 10°  of  Sagittarius,  Mercury,  Part  of  Pavo,  Apus,  Octano. 

9 of  Wands 

10°  - 20°  of  Sagittarius,  Moon,  Part  of  Pavo,  Apus,  Octano. 

10  of  Wands 

20°  30°  of  Sagittarius,  Saturn,  Pt.  of  Pavo,  pt.  Hydra,  watersnake. 

2 of  Pentacles 

0°  - 10°  of  Capricorn,  Jupiter,  Part  of  Pavo,  part  of  Hydra. 

3 of  Pentacles 

10°  - 20°  of  Capricorn,  Mars,  Part  of  Toncan,  part  of  Hydra. 

4 of  Pentacles 

20°  - 30°  of  Capricorn,  Saturn,  Part  of  Toncan,  part  of  Phoenix. 

5 of  Swords 

0°  - 10°  of  Aquarius,  Venus,  Part  Phoenix,  end  of  Eridanus. 

6 of  Swords 

10°  - 20°  of  Aquarius,  Mercury,  Parts  Hydrus,  Reticulus,  Rhombus. 

7 of  Swords 

20°  - 30°  of  Aquarius,  Moon,  Parts  Phoenix,  Hydra,  Reticulum  and  Eridanus. 

8 of  Cups 

0°  - 10°  of  Pisces,  Saturn,  Part  Phoenix,  Eridanus,  Reticulum. 

9 of  Cups 

10°  - 20°  of  Pisces,  Jupiter,  Part  Phoenix,  Eridanus,  Reticulum. 

10  of  Cups 

20°  - 30°  of  Pisces,  Mars,  Part  Phoenix,  Dorado,  Reticulum. 

2 of  Wands 

0°  - 10°  of  Aries,  Mars,  Part  Phoenix  and  Dorado. 

3 of  Wands 

10°  - 20°  of  Aries,  Sun,  Part  Coelum  Sculptori,  and  Dorado. 

4 of  Wands 

20°  - 30°  of  Aries,  Venus,  Part  Coelum  Sculptori  (Engraver’s  Burin). 

5 of  Pentacles 

0°  - 10°  of  Taurus,  Mercury,  Part  Eridanus,  Columba,  Naochi,  Dorado,  Equilaus,  Pictoris. 

6 of  Pentacles 

10°  - 20°  of  Taurus,  Moon,  Forepart  of  Lepus,  Tail  and  Wing  of  Columba,  part  of 
Equilaus. 

7 of  Pentacles 

20°-  30°  of  Taurus,  Saturn,  Part  Equilaus  and  Lepus,  Body  of  Columba. 

8 of  Swords 

0°  - 10°  of  Gemini,  Jupiter,  Feet  of  Canis  Major,  Prow  Argo,  part  Equilaus  Pictoris. 


69 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


9 of  Swords 

10°  - 20°  of  Gemini,  Mars,  Legs  of  Canis  Major,  Part  of  Prow  of  Argo. 

10  of  Swords 

20°  - 30°  of  Gemini,  Sun,  Hind  quarters  of  Canis  Major,  part  of  Prow  of  Argo. 

2 of  Cups 

0°  - 10°  of  Cancer,  Venus,  Prow  Argo,  Tail  Canis  Major. 

3 of  Cups 

10°  - 20°  of  Cancer,  Mercury,  Prow  of  Argo. 

4 of  Cups 

20°  - 30°  of  Cancer,  Moon,  Prow  of  Argo. 

While  the  greater  number  of  the  Northern  Constellations  are  connected  with  classical 
mythology,  the  titles  of  many  of  the  Southern  Constellations,  and  especially  of  those  near  the 
South  Pole,  are  of  more  or  less  recent  nomenclature,  and  bear  witness  to  absence  of  reference  to 
Occult  Knowledge,  such  names  for  instance  as  Reticulum,  and  Coelum  Scuiptores,  Octanus,  etc. 

RECAPITULATION 

In  the  dominion  of  the  various  forces,  the  rule  of  each  may  be  divided  into  three  portions. 
The  centre  is  the  most  pronounced  in  its  accord  with  the  nature  of  its  Ruler,  and  the  two  outer 
portions  are  tinged  with  the  nature  of  the  Ruler  of  the  dominion  bordering  thereon.  For  example, 
in  the  case  of  Leo,  the  Dominion  of  Fortitude,  the  central  10  degrees  will  have  most  of  this 
nature.  For  the  beginning  10  degrees  are  tinged  with  the  nature  of  Cancer,  and  the  last  ten 
degrees  with  the  nature  of  Virgo,  the  nature  of  Leo  however  predominating  the  mixture. 

The  whole  Heavens  then,  are  thus  divided  into  Four  Great  Belts  or  Zones: 

The  Uppermost 

Is  the  Dominion  of  the  Knaves  like  a Cross  within  a Circle. 

The  Second  Belt 

Under  the  Dominion  of  the  other  Court  cards  represents  a Belt  of  Influence  descending 
vertically. 

The  Third  Belt 

Is  under  the  Dominion  of  the  12  Keys  related  to  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  represents  a Belt 
of  influence  acting  horizontally.  This  Zone  in  union  with  the  second  Belt  will  therefore  yield  a 
great  Zone  of  12  Crosses  encircling  the  heavens. 

The  Fourth  Belt 

Consists  of  36  Decans  under  the  Dominion  of  the  36  small  cards  of  the  four  suits,  the 
numbers  2-10  of  each  suit.  In  each  of  these  sets  of  3 parts  of  a Sign,  the  central  one  will  be  more 
pronounced  in  effect  than  the  lateral  parts. 


70 


VOLUME  NINE 


Therefore  the  3 Decanates  of  each  of  the  Signs  will  be  symbolised  by  a triangle.  Thus  are 
yielded  twelve  Triangles  surrounding  the  lower  heavens,  and  therefore  there  will  ultimate  twelve 
Crosses  surmounting  12  Triangles  surrounding  the  heavens.  In  other  words,  the  symbol  of  the 
G.D.  in  the  Outer,  12  times  repeated. 


fNFLtlENCE  OF 
THE  /3L  QOV*r  CAKO  K 


fHFLUE MCE  OF  THE 


(Z  -TeD/Acm. 


Central  nee an 


CEMTKALVeCAH 


OUTEA?  Pe<LA^  10* 


OUTE*  OeCAH 


THE  HlPO&j  Sun  OF  TiFmvKTT*  AMO  finiM C A&oYt 

m£  (*Are*.i  of  SFAcir. 


The  central  Rising  Sun  will  represent  the  hidden  influence  of  Tiphareth  in  the  centre  of 
the  Sphere,  as  will  be  hereafter  explained,  rising  above  the  waters  of  Space  (the  ethereal  expanse 
of  the  Sky  called  by  the  Egyptians  “The  Waters  of  Nu  which  are  the  parents  of  the  Gods,”  The 
Shoreless  Ocean  of  Space). 

In  the  Golden  Dawn  initiation,  the  Cross  surmounting  the  Triangle  is 
preferably  represented  by  a Calvary  Cross  of  6 Squares,  as  still  more  allied  to 
Tiphareth. 


71 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ON  THE  OPERATION  AND  RULE  OF  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE  IN  THE 
CELESTICAL  HEAVENS  PROJECTED  AS  IF  IN  A SOLID  SPHERE 

When  the  Tree  of  Life  is  considered  not  as  being  a plane  but  as  a solid  figure,  and  when  it 
is  projected  in  the  Sphere,  the  North  Pole  of  the  Sphere  will  coincide  with  Kether,  and  the  South 
Pole  with  Malkuth. 

As  we  have  before  sufficiently  learned  the  Ten  Sephiroth  are  repeated  not  alone  in  each 
whole  figure,  but  also  in  the  parts  thereof,  so  that  every  material  thing  created,  will  have  its  own 
Sephiroth  and  Paths. 

Now  as  the  North  Pole  corresponds  with  Kether,  and  the  South  Pole  corresponds  with 
Malkuth,  the  central  Pillar  of  the  Sephirotic  Tree  will  form  the  invisible  Axis  of  the  Sphere,  the 
Central  point  coinciding  with  Tiphareth.  This  latter  Sephirah  together  with  that  of  Yesod  will  be 
completely  hidden  from  view,  so  that  Tiphareth  will  be  the  exact  centre  of  the  Sphere. 

Also  the  Sephiroth  Chokmah,  Binah,  Chesed,  Geburah,  Netzach  and  Hod  will  be 
duplicated.  As  also  the  Paths,  Aleph,  Beth,  Gimel,  Vau,  Cheth,  Caph,  Mem,  Qoph,  and  Shin,  and 
so  many  of  the  others  will  be  even  quadrupled.  But  although  Tiphareth  and  Yesod  will  be 
concealed,  there  will  be  four  especial  points  on  the  sphere  where  the  influence  of  each  will  be 
indicated. 

As  projected  in  the  before-described  Celestial  Sphere,  Kether  will  govern  a Radius  of  10° 

around  the  North  Pole,  thus  embracing  the  whole  body  of  the  Constellation  Draco. 

Chokmah  will  be  on  the  60°  North  Latitude;  embracing  a radius  of  10°,  the  right  foot  of 

Hercules,  the  left  arm,  hand,  and  part  of  head  of  Bootes.  Also  on  the  other  side  of  the 

Heavens,  a radius  of  10°  including  the  head  and  shoulders  of  Cephus,  and  the  head  of 

Lacerta. 

Binah,  has  a similar  radius  and  is  posited  on  the  same  parallel  of  Latitudes,  and  includes 
the  pole  Star  of  the  Earth,  the  head  of  Camelopardelus,  the  tip  of  the  tail  of  Draco;  also  Lyra  and 
left  knee  of  Hercules  in  the  opposite  side  of  the  Heavens. 

Chesed  with  a similar  radius,  and  posited  in  the  30°  of  North  Latitude,  will  include  part 
of  Coma  Berenices,  of  Bootes,  and  of  Virgo,  and  parts  of  Andromeda  and  of  Pegasus. 

And  so  with  the  other,  Sephiroth  of  the  outer  Pillars,  each  being  30°  distant  from  the  line 
of  the  Sephiroth  above  and  below  it,  and  having  a radius  of  10°. 

The  central  line  of  the  Two  Pillars  of  Mercy  and  Severity  will  respectively  traverse  that 
of  Mercy  the  15°  of  Virgo  and  15°  of  Pisces;  that  of  Severity  the  15°  of  Gemini  and  the  15°  of 
Sagittarius.  The  four  Yesod  points  will  be  on  the  line  of  the  60°  of  South  Latitude,  and  at  similar 
Zodiacal  points.  From  which  circumstances  the  path  of  Influence  or  nature  of  the  Sun  will  be 
along  the  line  of  the  Ecliptic,  coinciding  with  Tiphareth,  and  that  of  the  Moon  will  be  on  the  60° 
of  South  Latitude  answering  to  the  Yesod  points  on  that  line. 


72 


VOLUME  NINE 


SatrtHEK^ 

KEfHrSPHtEfc” 


PIOKTHERN 

HeNlfcPHERE 


ecLiPTfc  CS4CW 
T/wficrn  wfrtf 
f&tA.  ftwrt 


FCMfcFtnWTS  U>H£f*r 
'&£&>'£  IfirttifNCe 
Of£*A  TtS 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  LAW  OF  THE  CONVOLUTED  REVOLUTION  OF  THE  FORCES 
SYMBOLISED  BY  THE  FOUR  ACES  ROUND  THE  NORTH  POLE 
In  the  Book  “T,”  it  is  written:  “Also  the  Dragon  (i.e.  Draco,  the  constellation  at  the 
Northern  pole  of  the  Heavens)  surroundeth  the  Pole  Kether  of  the  Celestial  Heavens.”  It  is 
further  laid  down  that  the  Four  Aces,  (symbolised  by  the  Knaves),  rule  the  Celestial  Heavens 
from  the  Northern  Pole  of  the  Zodiac  unto  the  45th  Degree  of  Latitude  North  of  the  Ecliptic,  and 
from  the  Thrones  of  the  Four  Aces  which  rule  in  Kether. 

And  again  it  is  stated  that: 

The  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Cups  is  the  head  of  Draco. 

The  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Swords  is  fore  part  of  body. 

The  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Pentacles  is  the  hind  part  of  body. 

The  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Wands  is  the  tail  of  Draco. 

Regard  thou  then  the  form  of  this  Constellation  of  the  Dragon.  It  is  convoluted  in  the  four 
places  answering  unto  the  rule  of  the  Aces. 

Head,  First  convolution  is  the  Ace  of  Cups. 

Second  convolution  is  the  Ace  of  Swords. 

Third  convolution  is  the  Ace  of  Pentacles. 

Fourth  convolution  is  the  Ace  of  Wands. 

This  convoluted  course  will  represent  the  Law  of  the  Aces. 

Now  in  the  Four  Faces  of  YHVH,  Fire  and  Water  be  contrary,  and  also  Earth  and  Air  be 
contrary.  The  throne  of  the  Element  will  attract  and  seize,  as  it  were,  the  Force  of  that  element, 
so  that  herein  be  the  Forces  of  Antipathy  and  of  Sympathy,  or  what  are  known  chemically  as 
attraction  and  repulsion. 

Recall  also  the  allotment  of  the  Triplicities: 

Aries,  Leo,  Sagittarius  is  Fire,  Wands  of  the  Tarot. 

Cancer,  Scorpio,  Pisces  is  Water,  Cups  of  the  Tarot. 

Gemini,  Libra,  Aquarius  is  Air,  Swords  of  the  Tarot. 

Taurus,  Virgo,  Capricorn  is  Earth,  Pentacles  of  the  Tarot. 

Now  the  order  of  the  Knaves,  and  consequently  of  the  Thrones,  is  formed  from  right  to 

left: 

Yod 

Knave  of  Wands  is  Leo  and  Fire. 

Heh 

Knave  of  Cups  is  Scorpio  and  Water. 

Vau 

Knave  of  Swords  is  Aquarius  and  Air. 

Heh  (final) 

Knave  of  Pentacles  is  Taurus  and  Earth. 

The  order  of  the  Aces  is  formed  from  left  to  right,  though  their  motion  is  from  right  to 

left: 

Yod 

Ace  of  Wands. 

Heh 

Ace  of  Cups. 

Vau 

Ace  of  Swords. 


74 


VOLUME  NINE 


Heh  (final) 

Ace  of  Pentacles. 

This,  then  will  be  the  order  of  their  movement.  Let  us  first  suppose  the  Aces  on  the 
following  stations: 

Station  2 
Ace  of  Wands. 

Station  1 
Ace  of  Cups. 

Station  12 
Ace  of  Swords. 

Station  11 
Ace  of  Pentacles. 

Now  the  Station  2 is  the  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Wands,  while  the  movement  of  the  Aces  is 
steadily  from  right  to  left  in  the  direction  of  the  numbering  of  the  stations.  In  the  ordinary  course 
the  Ace  of  Wands  would  pass  to  Station  3;  the  Ace  of  Cups  to  Station  2;  the  Ace  of  Swords  to 
Station  1;  the  Ace  of  Pentacles  to  Station  12. 

But  the  Station  2,  being  the  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Wands,  attracts  and  arrests  the  move 
ment  of  that  Force  so  that  instead  of  passing  into  Station  3,  it  remains  on  Station  2 until  the  other 
Aces  have  passed  over  it  in  turn. 

Ace  of  Wands  remains  on  Station  2. 

Ace  of  Cups  passes  also  on  to  Station  2, 

Ace  of  Swords  passes  on  to  Station  1, 

Ace  of  Pentacles  passes  on  to  Station  12. 

Ace  of  Cups  passes  to  Station  3, 

Ace  of  Wands  remains  at  Station  2, 

Ace  of  Swords  passes  also  onto  Station  2, 

Ace  of  Pentacles  passes  also  on  to  Station  1. 

Ace  of  Cups  passes  on  to  Station  4, 

Ace  of  Swords  passes  on  to  Station  3, 

Ace  of  Wands  remains  at  Station  2, 

Ace  of  Pentacles  passes  also  on  to  Station  2. 

Ace  of  Cups  passes  to  Station  5, 

Ace  of  Swords  passes  to  Station  4, 

Ace  of  Pentacles  passes  on  to  Station  3, 


75 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Ace  of  Wands  still  remains  on  Station  2. 

But  Station  5 is  the  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Cups.  Therefore  it  attracts  and  arrests  that 
Force,  in  the  same  manner  that  the  Throne  of  the  Ace  of  Wands  acted  previously  in  attracting 
and  arresting  the  Ace  of  Wands,  the  result  of  which  has  been  to  make  that  Force  which 
previously  was  leading  become  the  last  of  the  Four. 

Ace  of  Cups  remains  on  Station  5, 

Ace  of  Swords  passes  also  on  to  Station  5, 

Ace  of  Pentacles  passes  also  on  to  Station  4, 

Ace  of  Wands,  now  at  last  passes  into  Station  3. 

For  it  has  now  become  the  last  of  the  Four,  and  the  Ace  of  Cups  has  commenced  to  act 
through  its  Throne.  The  Ace  of  Pentacles,  moving  to  Station  4,  would  create  a hiatus  in  the 
movement  of  the  Aces,  if  the  Ace  of  Wands  did  not  move  forward  to  Station  3.  Also  there  is  the 
attraction  of  the  motion  of  those  Aces  in  front  of  it.  Wherefore  all  these  Forces  combining,  at 
length  cause  it  to  move  forward. 

The  movement  then  continues,  thus: 

The  Ace  of  Swords  passes  on  to  Station  6, 

The  Ace  of  Cups  remains  on  Station  5, 

The  Ace  of  Pentacles  passes  also  on  to  Station  5, 

The  Ace  of  Wands  passes  also  on  to  Station  4. 

The  Ace  of  Swords  passes  on  to  Station  7, 

The  Ace  of  Pentacles  passes  on  to  Station  6, 

The  Ace  of  Cups  still  remains  on  Station  5, 

The  Ace  of  Wands  passes  also  on  to  Station  5. 

The  Ace  of  Swords  passes  on  to  Station  8,  its  Throne, 

The  Ace  of  Pentacles  passes  on  to  Station  7, 

The  Ace  of  Wands  passes  on  to  Station  6, 

The  Ace  of  Cups  still  remains  on  Station  5. 

The  Ace  of  Swords  remains  on  Station  8, 

The  Ace  of  Pentacles  passes  also  on  to  Station  8, 

The  Ace  of  Wands  passes  on  to  Station  7, 

The  Ace  of  Cups  now  at  length  passes  on  to  Station  6,  and  so  on. 


76 


VOLUME  NINE 


The  movement  of  the  Aces  will  be  very  similar  to  the  convolutions  of  Draco  thus: 
The  Course  of  the  Aces: 


This  will  imply  a much  more  sustained  exercise  of  force  through  the  Thrones  than 
elsewhere.  So  that  the  generic  effect  of  the  Thrones  will  be  that  of  the  seasons,  while  the  other 
stations  will  give  the  variations  thereof  in  accordance  with  their  natures  and  with  the  order  of  the 
movement  of  the  aces  in  them. 


13 

Cf= 

mm 

m 

•u&uew-. 

iN 

Ff^fcnf 

■i 

KM 

V 

A 

V 

A 

fcf 

V 

n 

B 

A 

A 

B 

A 

V 

-6 

m 

V 

A 

V 

R 

*r 

V 

A : 

V 

E71 

A 

V 

A 

B 

A 

,v 

B 

Ac*-  AT 

erf* 

B 

n 

V 

A 

E9 

A 

V 

A 

V 

A 

V 

B 

V 

— 

A 

B 

A 

V 

a 

V 

A 

V 

A 

Order  of  Movement  of  Elements 


77 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


And  as  Kether  acted  directly  upon  Tiphareth  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  centre  and  focus  of 
the  Sephiroth  when  projected  in  a sphere,  so  do  the  Aces  act  upon  the  Sun  as  the  centre  and  focus 
of  the  Solar  System.  So  that  the  Sun,  according  to  his  position  with  regard  to  the  Equinox  and  the 
Earth’s  surface  will  translate  the  effect  of  the  seasons,  he  being  the  translator  of  the  force  of  heat 
thereto,  whether  the  then  position  of  the  Equinoctial  points  coincide  with  what  we  call  0°  Aries, 
and  0°  Libra  (reckoning  from  Regulus)  or  not.  So  that  his  effect  North  of  the  Equator  shall 
produce  when  just  leaving  the  Equinoctial  point,  the  effect  of  Aries,  whether  he  be  with  that 
constellation  actually  in  the  heavens  or  not. 

Conversely  also,  for  the  South  of  the  Equator  (as  in  the  country  of  Australia)  his  quitting 
the  Equinoctial  point  southward  will  translate  the  same  effect  of  Aries. 

But  this  rule  shall  not  for  one  moment  affirm  that  Aries  and  Libra  are  identical  in  nature. 
Nor  that  the  Zodiac  proper  is  inoperative.  Nor  that  the  nature  of  the  Sun  is  not  modified  by  the 
constellation  in  which  he  is.  But  only  that  the  direct  effect  of  the  physical  impact  of  his  rays 
falling  upon  a certain  portion  of  the  Earth’s  surface,  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  duration  of  their 
action,  in  the  excitement  they  produce  in  the  terrestrial  forces. 

And  now  as  the  Forces  symbolized  by  these  Aces,  pass  in  succession  over  these  stations, 
so  will  they  awake  certain  terrestrial  action  according  unto  the  sign  of  the  division  of  the  Zodiac 
above  which  they  pass  in  the  domain  of  the  Knaves  and  according  unto  the  nature  thereof. 
Nevertheless,  the  force  roused  by  the  Ace  when  on  its  Throne  will  be  of  longer  duration  than  at 
other  points. 

And  hence  it  is  that  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  be  divided  into  Fixed  or  Kerubic,  Moveable 
or  changing,  and  Common  or  fluctuating,  according  unto  the  nature  of  the  power  which  can  be 
awakened  therein.  And  again,  these  will  be  varied  according  unto  their  Elements,  for  the 
Elements  have  a various  classification. 


78 


VOLUME  NINE 


NOTE 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  S.R.M.D. 

It  is  here  advisable  to  transcribe  the  following  from  Cornelius  Agrippa: 

Of  The  Four  Elements  and  Their  Natural  Qualities: 

“It  is  necessary  that  we  should  know  and  understand  the  nature  and  quality  of  the  Four 
Elements,  in  order  to  our  being  perfect  in  the  principles  and  groundwork  of  our  studies  in  the 
Talismanic  or  Magical  Art. 

“Therefore,  there  are  four  Elements,  the  original  grounds  of  all  corporeal  things,  viz.: 

Earth,  Air,  Fire,  and  Water,  of  which  elements  all  inferior  bodies  are  compounded,  not  by 
way  of  being  heaped  up  together,  but  by  transmutation  and  union;  and  when  they  are  destroyed, 
they  are  resolved  into  elements. 

“But  there  are  none  of  the  sensible  elements  that  are  pure.  They  are  more  or  less  mixed, 
and  apt  to  be  changed  into  one  into  the  other,  even  as  earth  being  moistened  and  dissolved 
becomes  water,  but  the  same  being  made  thick  and  hard  becomes  earth  again,  and  being 
evaporated  through  heat  it  passes  into  air,  and  that  being  kindled  into  fire;  and  this  being 
extinguished  into  air  again;  but  being  cooled  after  burning  becomes  water  again,  or  else  stone  or 
sulphur,  and  this  is  clearly  demonstrated  by  lightning. 

“Now  every  one  of  these  Elements  has  two  specific  qualities:  the  former  whereof  it 
retains  as  proper  to  itself;  in  the  other  as  a mean,  it  agrees  with  that  which  comes  directly  after  it. 
For  Fire  is  hot  and  dry;  Water  cold  and  moist;  and  Air  hot  and  moist;  and  so  in  this  manner,  the 
Elements,  according  to  two  contrary  qualities  are  opposite  one  to  the  other,  as  Fire  to  Water,  and 
Earth  to  Air. 

“Likewise  the  Elements  are  contrary  one  to  the  other  on  another  account.  Two  are  heavy, 
as  Earth  and  Water;  and  the  others  are  light,  as  Fire  and  Air. 

TABLE  SHOWING  QUALITIES  OF  ELEMENTS 

Fire 

Heat,  dryness,  excessive  lightness,  brilliance,  excessive  subtlety,  motion  rapid. 

Water 

Cold,  moisture,  weight,  obscurity,  solidity,  motion. 

Air 

Heat,  moisture,  lightness,  slight  obscurity,  subtlety,  excessive  motion. 

Earth 

Cold,  dryness,  excessive  weight,  excessive  obscurity,  excessive  solidity,  rest. 


79 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


TABLE  SHOWING  THE  QUALITIES  OF  THE  ELEMENTS  WHEN  MIXED  IN 

PAIRS 

Fire  and  Water. 

Slight  weight,  some  subtlety,  intense  and  rapid  motion. 

Fire  and  Air. 

Great  heat,  intense  lightness,  slight  brilliance,  intense  subtlety,  intense  motion. 

Fire  and  Earth. 

Great  dryness,  slight  obscurity. 

Water  and  Air. 

Great  moisture,  intense  motion. 

Water  and  Earth. 

Great  cold,  intense  weight,  intense  obscurity,  intense  solidity. 

Air  and  Earth. 

Some  weight,  intense  obscurity,  little  solidity,  little  motion. 

Therefore  the  Stoics  called  the  former  ‘passives,’  but  the  latter  ‘actives.’  And  Plato 
distinguishes  them  after  another  manner,  and  assigns  to  each  of  them  three  qualities,  viz.: 

To  the  Fire  brightness,  thinness  and  motion.  To  the  Earth,  darkness,  thickness,  and 
quietness.  And  according  to  these  qualities  the  Elements  of  Fire  and  Earth  are  contrary.  Now  the 
other  Elements  borrow  their  qualities  from  these,  so  that  the  Air  receives  two  qualities  from  the 
Fire,  thinness  and  motion,  and  from  the  Earth  one,  darkness.  In  like  manner,  Water  receives  two 
qualities  from  the  Earth,  darkness  and  thickness;  and  from  the  Fire  one,  motion.  But  Fire  is  twice 
as  thin  as  Air,  thrice  more  moveable,  and  four  times  lighter.  The  Air  is  twice  more  bright,  thrice 
more  thin,  and  four  times  more  moveable  than  Water.  Therefore,  as  Fire  is  to  Air,  so  is  Air  to 
Water,  and  Water  to  Earth.  And  again,  as  the  Earth  is  to  the  Water,  so  is  Water  to  Air,  and  Air  to 
Fire.  And  this  is  the  root  and  foundation  of  all  bodies,  natures,  and  wonderful  works.  And  he 
who  can  know  and  thoroughly  understand  these  qualities  of  the  Elements  and  their  mixtures  shall 
bring  to  pass  wonderful  and  astonishing  things  in  Magic. 

“Now  each  of  these  Elements  has  a threefold  consideration,  so  that  the  number  of  four 
may  make  up  the  number  of  twelve;  and  by  passing  by  the  number  of  seven  into  ten,  there  may 
be  a progress  to  the  Supreme  Unity  upon  which  all  virtue  and  wonderful  things  do  depend.  Of 
the  first  Order,  are  the  pure  Elements,  which  are  neither  compounded,  changed,  nor  mixed,  but 
are  incorruptible  and  not  of  which  but  through  which  the  virtues  of  all  natural  things  are  brought 
forth  to  act.  No  man  is  fully  able  to  declare  their  Virtues,  because  they  can  do  all  things  upon  all 
things.  He  who  remains  ignorant  of  these,  shall  never  be  able  to  bring  to  pass  any  wonderful 
matter. 

“Of  the  second  order  are  Elements  that  are  compounded,  changeable  and  impure,  yet 
such  as  may,  by  art,  be  reduced  to  their  pure  simplicity,  whose  virtue,  when  they  are  thus 
reduced,  doth  above  all  things  perfect  all  occult  and  common  operations  of  Nature;  and  these  are 
the  foundations  of  the  whole  of  natural  Magic. 


80 


VOLUME  NINE 


“Of  the  third  Order  are  those  elements  which  originally  and  of  themselves  are  not 
elements,  but  are  twice  compounded,  various,  and  changeable  unto  another.  These  are  the 
infallible  medium,  and  are  called  the  Middle  Nature,  or  Soul  of  the  Middle  Nature;  very  few 
there  are  that  understand  the  deep  mysteries  thereof.  In  them  is,  by  means  of  certain  numbers, 
degrees  and  orders,  the  perfection  of  every  effect  in  what  thing  soever,  whether  natural,  celestial, 
or  super-celestial.  They  are  full  of  wonders  and  mysteries,  and  are  operative  in  Magic,  natural  or 
divine.  For,  from  these,  through  them,  proceeds  the  binding,  loosing,  and  transmutation  of  all 
things  - the  knowledge  and  foretelling  of  things  to  come,  also  the  expelling  of  evil  and  the 
gaining  of  Good  Spirits.  Let  no  one,  therefore,  without  these  three  sorts  of  Elements,  and  the  true 
knowledge  thereof,  be  confident  that  he  can  work  anything  in  the  occult  science  of  Magic  and 
Nature. 

“But  whosoever  shall  know  how  to  reduce  those  of  one  order  into  another,  impure  into 
pure,  compounded  into  simple,  and  shall  understand  distinctly  the  nature,  virtue,  and  power  of 
them,  into  number,  degrees  and  order,  without  dividing  the  substance,  he  shall  easily  attain  to  the 
knowledge  and  perfect  operation  of  all  natural  things,  and  celestial  secrets  likewise;  and  this  is 
the  perfection  of  the  Qabalah,  which  teaches  all  these  before  mentioned;  and  by  a perfect 
knowledge  thereof,  we  perform  many  rare  and  wonderful  experiments.  In  the  original  and 
exemplary  world  all  things  are  all  in  all.  So  also  in  this  corporeal  world.  And  the  elements  are  not 
only  in  these  inferior  things;  but  are  in  the  Heavens,  in  stars,  in  devils,  in  angels,  and  likewise  in 
God  Himself,  the  maker  and  original  example  of  all  things. 

“Now  it  must  be  understood  that  in  these  inferior  bodies  the  elements  are  gross  and 
corruptible,  but  in  the  heavens  they  are,  with  their  natures  and  virtues,  after  a celestial  and  more 
excellent  manner  than  in  sublunary  things.  For  the  firmness  of  the  celestial  earth  is  there  without 
the  grossness  of  water,  and  the  agility  of  Air  without  exceeding  its  bounds.  The  heat  of  fire 
without  burning,  only  shining,  giving  light  and  life  to  all  things  by  its  celestial  heat.” 

Now  the  successive  effect  of  the  passage  of  the  Aces  over  the  Stations  above  the  place  of 
a sign  in  the  excitement  of  the  Forces  of  that  Sign  may  be  readily  calculated  by  the  tables  of  the 
qualities  of  the  elements  simple  and  mixed,  always  being  careful  to  take  also  into  account  the 
effect  of  the  Throne  upon  the  Season  as  well,  and  the  nature  of  the  Sign. 

It  is  said  that  Kether  is  in  Malkuth,  and  again,  that  Malkuth  is  in  Kether  but  after  another 
manner. 

For  downwards  through  the  Four  Worlds  the  Malkuth  of  the  less  material  will  be  linked 
unto  the  Kether  of  the  more  material.  From  the  Synthesis  of  the  Ten  corruscations  of  the  AOUR 
(Fight)  proceedeth  the  influence  unto  EHEIEH,  the  Kether  of  Atziluth.  And  the  connecting 
thread  of  the  AIN  SOPH  is  extended  through  the  worlds  of  the  Ten  Sephiroth  and  is  in  every 
direction.  As  the  Ten  Sephiroth  operate  in  each  Sephirah,  so  will  there  be  a KETHER  in  every 
MALKUTH,  and  MALKUTH  in  every  KETHER.  Thus: 


81 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Adonai  Melekh 

This  will  be  the  Malkuth  of  Atziluth. 

Metatron 

This  will  be  the  Kether  of  Briah. 

Sandalphon  - Metraton  - Nephesch  ha-Messiah 
These  will  be  the  Malkuth  of  Briah. 

Chaioth  ha-Qadesh 

This  will  be  the  Kether  of  Yetzirah. 

Aschim 

This  will  be  the  Malkuth  of  Yetzirah. 

Rashith  ha-Gilgalim 
The  Kether  of  Assiah. 

Cholem  Yesodoth 
The  Malkuth  of  Assiah. 

Thaumiel 

The  Kether  of  the  Qlippoth. 

The  symbol  of  the  connection  between  MALKUTH  of  YETZIRAH  and  KETHER  of 
ASSIAH  will  be  of  a form  somewhat  resembling  that  of  an  hour  glass.  The  thread  of  the  AIN 
SOPH  before  alluded  to,  traversing  the  centre  thereof,  and  forming  the  AIN  SOPH  connection 
between  the  Worlds: 


So  that  the  symbol  of  the  connection  between  the  two  planes  is  this.  And  also  the  modus 
operandi  of  the  translation  of  force  from  one  plane  into  another  is  in  this,  and  hence  doth  the  title 
of  the  Sphere  of  Kether  of  Assiah  signify  the  commencement  of  a whirling  motion. 

Now  also,  in  the  diagram  of  Minutum  Mundum,  there  be  four  colours  attributed  unto 
Malkuth.  Citrine,  russet,  olive,  and  black.  And  if  we  consider  them  as  in  a vertical  sphere,  we 
shall  find  citrine  uppermost  and  horizontal,  russet  and  olive  midmost  and  vertical,  black 
lowermost  and  horizontal. 

And  again,  these  four  represent  in  a manner  the  operation  of  the  four  elements  in 
Malkuth;  for  example: 


82 


VOLUME  NINE 


Citrine 

Air  of  Earth. 

Russet 

Fire  of  Earth. 

Olive 

Water  of  Earth. 

Black 

Earth  of  Earth. 

From  the  diagram  of  the  hour  glass  symbol  it  will  be  manifest  then  that  MALKUTH  of 
YETZIRAH  will  be  the  transmitter  of  the  Yetziratic  forces  unto  KETHER  of  ASSIAH,  and  that 
the  latter  will  be  the  recipient  thereof,  and  that  the  Hour-glass  symbol  or  double  cone,  will  be  the 
translator  from  the  one  plane  unto  the  other.  Here,  therefore,  let  us  consider  the  Yetziratic 
nomenclature  of  the  Tenth  Path  answering  unto  Malkuth,  and  of  the  First  Path  answering  unto 
Kether. 

The  Tenth  Path:  It  is  called  the  Resplendent  Intelligence  and  it  is  so-called  because  it  is 
exalted  above  every  head,  and  sitteth  on  the  Throne  of  Binah,  and  it  illuminateth  the  splendour  of 
all  the  Lights,  and  it  causeth  the  current  of  Influence  to  flow  from  the  Knight  of  Countenances, 
i.e.  Metatron. 

The  First  Path:  It  is  called  the  Wonderful  or  Hidden  Intelligence  (The  Highest  Crown)  for 
it  is  the  Light  to  cause  to  understand  the  Primordial  without  commencement,  and  it  is  the  Primal 
Glory,  for  nothing  created  is  worthy  to  follow  out  its  essence. 

Whence  it  is  plain  that  MALKUTH  is,  as  it  were,  the  collector  together  and  synthesis  of 
all  the  forces  in  its  plane  or  world.  While  KETHER  being  superior  unto  all  else  in  its  plane  or 
world,  will  be  the  recipient  and  arranger  of  the  forces  from  the  plane  beyond,  so  as  to  distribute 
them  unto  its  subordinate  Sephiroth  in  a duly  ordered  manner. 

And  therefore  any  force  of  the  multitudinous  and  innumerable  forces  in  Malkuth  may  act 
through  the  upper  cone  of  the  hour  glass  symbol,  and  by  means  of  the  lower  one  translate  its 
operation  into  KETHER  below,  but  its  mode  of  transmission  will  be  through  the  cones  by  the 
thread  of  the  Am  Soph,  or  of  the  Unformulated. 

So  that  in  the  transmission  of  force  between  two  worlds  the  Formulate  must  first  become 
Unformulate,  ere  it  can  reformulate  in  new  conditions.  For  it  must  be  plain  that  a force 
formulated  in  one  world,  if  translated  into  another  will  be  unformulated,  according  to  the  laws  of 
a plane  different  in  nature.  Even  as  water  in  its  fluid  state  will  be  subject  to  different  laws  to 
those  governing  it  when  in  the  conditions  of  either  ice  or  steam. 

And  as  before  said,  there  being  in  the  Minutum  Mundum  diagram  four  chief  elemental 
divisions  of  the  Sephira  MALKUTH,  each  of  these  will  have  its  correlative  formula  of 
transmission  unto  the  succeeding  Kether.  Hence  also  in  the  Order  Tarot  teaching  is  there  the 
Dominion  of  the  four  Knaves  of  the  Tarot  pack  around  the  North  Pole.  Why  then  is  it  that  it  is 
the  Four  Knaves  answering  unto  the  final  Heh  of  YHVH,  that  are  here  placed,  rather  than  the 
Four  Kings,  Queens  or  Knights,  or  one  of  each  nature? 


83 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


We  are  taught  that  these  are  the  Vice  Regents  of  the  Name  in  the  Four  Worlds,  and  that 
they  are  thus  attributed  among  the  Sephiroth. 

Yod 

Chokmah  and  King. 

Heh 

Binah  and  Queen. 

Vau 

Tiphareth  and  Knight. 

Heh  (final) 

Malkuth  and  Knave. 

Now  as  Kether  of  Assiah  is  to  receive  from  Malkuth  of  Yetzirah,  it  is  necessary  that  in 
and  about  Kether  there  should  be  a force  which  partaketh  of  the  nature  of  Malkuth,  though  more 
subtle  and  refined  in  nature.  And  therefore  is  it  that  the  final  Heh,  or  Knave  force,  has  its 
dominion  placed  about  Kether.  They  are  so  placed  that  they  may  attract  from  the  Malkuth  of  the 
Higher  and  form  the  basis  of  action  for  the  Aces.  So  that  a refined  matter  may  attract  its  like,  and 
the  spiritual  forces  may  not  lose  themselves  in  the  void,  to  produce  but  a mistaken  and  whirling 
destruction  for  want  of  a settled  basis.  And  herein  is  the  mutual  formula  in  all  things,  of  a spirit 
and  of  a body,  seeing  that  each  supplies  unto  each  that  wherein  the  other  is  lacking,  yet  herein 
also  must  there  be  a certain  condition,  otherwise  the  harmony  will  not  be  perfect.  For  unless  the 
body  be  refined  in  nature,  it  will  hinder  the  action  of  a spirit  cognate  unto  it.  And  unless  the  spirit 
be  willing  to  ally  itself  unto  the  body,  the  latter  will  be  injured  thereby  and  each  will  mutually 
react  on  the  other. 


Hourglass  Connection  of  Malkuth  and  Kether. 


84 


VOLUME  NINE 


Therefore,  also,  let  the  Adeptus  Minor  understand  that  there  may  be  fault  of  the  spirit  as 
well  as  of  the  body,  and  that  there  is  little  difference  between  the  material  and  sensuous  person, 
and  the  envious,  malicious  and  self-righteous  person  - save  that  from  their  being  more  subtle  and 
less  evident,  the  sins  of  the  latter  are  more  insidious  than  those  of  the  former,  though  both  are 
alike  evil.  But  it  is  as  necessary  to  govern  the  Spirit  as  to  refine  the  body,  and  of  what  use  is  it  to 
weaken  the  body  by  abstinence,  if  at  the  same  time  uncharitableness  and  spiritual  pride  are 
encouraged!  It  is  simply  translating  one  sin  into  another. 

And  therefore  are  the  final  Heh  forces  so  necessary  in  Kether,  as  it  is  said  in  the  Tenth 
Path  of  the  Sepher  Yetzirah:  “It  is  so  called  because  it  is  exalted  above  every  head,  and  sitteth  on 
the  Throne  of  Binah.”  Now,  in  the  Tree,  the  two  Sephiroth,  Chokmah  and  Binah,  are  referred 
unto  the  Briatic  World  which  is  also  called  the  Throne  or  vehicle,  that  is  of  the  Atzilutic  World 
unto  which  latter  Kether  is  referred  on  the  Tree.  And  referring  unto  the  dominions  of  the  Four 
Knaves,  thou  shalt  find  that  in  the  sphere  they  include  Chokmah  and  Binah  as  well  as  Kether. 

Now  there  will  be,  not  one,  but  four  formulae  of  the  application  of  the  Four  Forces  of 
Malkuth,  unto  the  revolution  of  the  Aces  in  Kether,  and  these  acting  not  singly  but 
simultaneously  and  with  a different  degree  of  force. 

Were  Malkuth  or  Kether  in  the  same  plane  or  world  the  transmission  of  these  forces  from 
the  one  unto  the  other  would  proceed  more  or  less  in  direct  lines.  In  this  case,  seeing  that 
Malkuth  and  Kether  be  in  different  planes  or  worlds,  the  lines  of  transmission  of  these  forces  are 
caught  up  and  whirled  about  by  the  upper  cone  of  the  hour  glass  symbol  into  the  vortex 
wherethrough  passeth  the  thread  of  the  unformulated,  i.e.  the  Am  Soph.  Thence  they  are 
projected  in  a whirling  convolution  (yet  according  unto  their  nature)  through  the  lower  cone  of 
the  hour  glass  symbol  unto  Kether. 

Whence  it  resulteth  that  these  formulae  are  of  the  nature  of  the  Dragon,  that  is  to  say, 
moving  in  convolutions,  and  hence  they  are  called  the  Dragon  or  Serpent  Formulae. 

Now  imagining  MALKUTH  of  Yetzirah  to  be  in  a vertical  position  above  KETHER  of 
Assiah,  it  will  be  plain  that  the  whole  of  the  black  part  of  Malkuth  will  be  towards  Kether,  but 
only  a portion  of  the  russet  and  olive  parts,  and  that  the  citrine  parts  will  be  entirely  removed  and 
on  the  further  side.  Wherefore  the  natural  operation  of  these  four  forces  towards  Kether  will  be: 
black,  rather  horizontal  than  vertical,  and  acting  fully. 

Citrine  rather  horizontal  than  vertical  but  acting  at  the  edge  of  the  circumference  of 
Kether,  and  slightly  rather  than  strongly.  Russet  and  olive  rather  vertical  than  horizontal,  and 
acting  moderately. 

Now  these  four  formulae  will  imply  four  simultaneous  movements  in  the  revolution  of 
the  forces  symbolised  by  the  four  Aces  round  the  Northern  Pole. 

The  first  and  most  forcible  in  its  immediate  action  will  be  that  answering  unto  the  Earth 
of  Malkuth  of  Yetzirah,  transmitting  unto  Kether  of  Assiah,  and  following  the  convolutions  of 
the  Constellation  Draco.  It  is  called  the  Direct  or  Creeping  Formula  and 


85 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


\ 


\ 


tow 


/ 


/ 


l/S’ifMfts- 


A 


DIRECT  OR  CBGEflNG 

for  this  reason  the  Dragon  may  be  wingless  and  footed  as  regards  its  symbolic 
representation.  This  formula  has  been  throughly  explained  in  the  beginning  of  this  section  on  the 
revolution  of  the  Aces.  In  the  expressions  Earth  of  Malkuth,  etc.,  it  should  be  remembered  that 
these  do  not  imply  pure  but  mixed  elemental  natures,  seeing  that  Malkuth  receiveth  the  ultimate 
effect  of  all  the  forces  in  the  Tree  of  Life,  even  as  the  colours  which  be  attributed  thereto  be  not 
primaries,  but  tertiaries.  Therefore  each  element  in  Malkuth  will  be  counter-changed  with  others, 
even  as  the  Kerubim  in  the  Vision  of  Ezekiel  have  each,  not  one  but  four  heads  and 
counterchanged. 

The  second  and  least  forcible  in  its  immediate  action  will  be  the  Dragon  formula 
answering  unto  the  Air  of  Malkuth  of  Yetzirah,  transmitting  unto  Kether  of  Assiah,  and 
following  the  convolutions  of  four  serpents  upon  the  four  triplicities  of  the  elements  in  the 
Zodiac  or  more  properly  speaking,  upon  the  stations  in  the  Dominions  of  the  Knaves  above 
them. 


Now  also  the  Throne  in  each  Dominion  is  marked  in  the  Book  T as  embracing  more  than 
a third  of  each  dominion,  because  of  the  enduring  effect  of  its  force.  This  formula  is  also  called 
the  looped  or  Flying  Formula,  and  hence  the  serpents  may  be  represented  footless,  but  winged. 
Its  action  is  more  round  the  circumference  at  its  edge,  than  that  of  the  other 


86 


VOLUME  NINE 


formulae.  This  formula  of  operation  will  be  readily  understood  on  reference  to  the  diagram 
thereof,  but  more  especially  from  the  four  diagrams  showing  the  change  of  order  and  course  of 
the  aces.  In  this  formula  the  heads  of  the  four  serpents  will  be  above  the  four  cardinal  signs. 

The  Third  Dragon  Formula,  moderately  forcible  in  its  immediate  action,  is  that  answering 
unto  the  Fire  of  Malkuth  of  Yetzirah,  transmitting  unto  Kether  of  Assiah,  and  following  the  law 
of  the  attraction  and  repulsion  of  the  elements  of  the  triplicities  of  the  Zodiac.  This  is  also  called 
the  Leaping  or  Darting  Formula,  and  its  serpents  may  be  represented  both  footed  and  winged  - 
footed  to  represent  the  attraction  of  the  elements,  winged  to  represent  the  repulsion  by  the 
contrary  elements.  This  formula  is  more  vertical  in  action,  while  the  preceding  two  are  more 
horizontal  as  before  shown. 


those  showing  the  change  of  order  in  the  course  of  the  Aces.  As  before  the  heads  of  the  serpents 
rest  upon  the  Stations  above  the  Cardinal  Signs. 

The  explanation  of  the  course  of  one  of  the  four  serpents  will  be  sufficient  to  explain  the 
whole.  Let  us  take  that  of  Fire: 

Fire  is  strongly  attracted  by  the  Station  above  Fire, 

Fire  is  strongly  repelled  by  the  Station  above  Water, 

Fire  is  slightly  attracted  by  the  Station  above  Air, 

Fire  is  slightly  repelled  by  the  Station  above  Earth. 


87 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Head  rests  on  the  Station  above  Aries. 

The  Serpent  is  repelled  into  the  lower  Cone  by  Pisces, 

The  Serpent  is  slightly  attracted  by  Aquarius, 

The  Serpent  is  slightly  attracted  by  Capricorn, 

The  Serpent  is  strongly  attracted  by  Sagittarius, 

The  Serpent  is  strongly  repelled  by  Scorpio, 

The  Serpent  is  slightly  attracted  by  Libra, 

The  Serpent  is  slightly  attracted  by  Virgo, 

The  Serpent  is  strongly  attracted  by  Leo, 

The  Serpent  is  strongly  repelled  by  Cancer, 

The  Serpent  is  slightly  attracted  by  Gemini  and  Taurus. 

The  tail  is  strongly  attracted  by  Aries,  where  it  is  united  with  the  head  again.  (The  course 
of  the  Four  Serpents  is  shown  in  four  different  diagrams  to  avoid  confusion.) 


88 


VOLUME  NINE 


ft£  VQL  VMG  OH  Flo  wind 
rORFtuiH 


The  fourth  Dragon  Formula  and  moderately  forcible,  is  that  answering  unto  the  Water  of 
MALKUTH  of  Yetzirah,  transmitting  into  the  KETHER  of  Assiah,  and  following  the  Law  of  the 
Zodiacal  succession  of  the  Signs  in  gradual  Order.  This  is  also  called  the  Revolving  or  Flowing 
Formula,  and  its  serpent  may  be  represented  neither  winged  nor  footed,  but  with  fins  to 
symbolise  its  flowing  movement.  This  formula  will  be  more  vertical  in  action,  and  can  be  readily 
understood  from  the  diagram  thereof,  and  from  those  showing  the  change  of  order  in  the  course 
of  the  Aces. 

This  formula  may  be  best  symbolically  represented  by  the  four  Aces  revolving  as  in  a 
smaller  wheel  upon  a great  circle  whose  body  is  composed  of  the  powers  of  the  twelve  Signs,  so 
that  this  latter  in  its  turn  revolves  upon  the  stations  above  the  Zodiac.  The  effect  of  the  revolution 
of  the  Wheel  of  the  Aces  will  be  to  excite  by  the  Ace  of  Wands  the  Fiery  Signs,  by  the  Ace  of 
Cups  the  Watery  Signs,  by  the  Ace  of  Swords  the  Airy  Signs,  and  by  the  Ace  of  Pentacles  the 
Earthy  Signs.  Yet  through  the  forces  of  the  revolution  of  the  Serpent  as  well,  the  forces  of  the 
Aces  will  be  in  their  turn  modified  by  the  zodiacal  natures  in  the  body  of  the  Serpent. 

And  as  before  said  the  action  of  these  formulae  will  be  simultaneous  though  differing  in 
degree,  and  of  them  all  that  first  explained  which  followeth  the  convolutions  of  the  Constellation 
Draco  is  the  strongest  in  operation.  And  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in  two  of  these  formulae,  the  heads 
of  the  Serpents  are  with  the  Order  of  the  Signs,  and  in  the  other  two  against  the  natural  order  of 
succession  of  them  in  the  Zodiac. 


89 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Also  the  action  of  the  Spirit  of  Malkuth  of  Yetzirah  transmitting  unto  Kether  of  Assiah 
will  equal  that  of  continued  vibratory  rays,  acting  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference,  and  thus 
bringing  into  action  the  force  from  the  “Thread  of  the  Unformulate”  MEZLA. 

Recall  that  which  is  written  in  the  Chapter  of  the  Chariot  - (Ezekiel,  1.45.) 

“And  I beheld,  and  lo!  a tempestuous  whirlwind  came  out  from  the  North,  a mighty 
cloud,  and  a fire  violently  whirling  upon  itself,  and  a splendour  revolving  upon  itself,  and  from 
the  midmost  as  an  eye  of  brightness  from  the  midst  of  the  fire.  And  from  the  midmost  the  forms 
of  the  Four  Chaioth.” 

THE  TRUE  SYSTEM  OF  ASTROLOGICAL  DIVINATION 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 

(N.B.  This  paper  belongs  to  the  subgrade  of  Theoricus  Adeptus  Minor.  It  is 
mentioned  in  the  preface  to  the  document  relating  to  the  Ring  and  the  Disc.  Six 
diagrams  accompany  this  document,  and  all  relate  to  the  various  signs  of  the  Grades 
- primarily  to  the  Portal  grade  and  the  LVX  Signs  of  the  Adeptus  Minor  grade. 
These  signs  will  be  found  in  the  drawings  of  the  Signs  of  the  Grades  in  this  work. 

IR) 

It  is  written:  "His  Father  was  the  Sun,  his  Mother  was  the  Moon,  the  Air 
carried  him  in  her  bosom,  his  nurse  was  the  Earth."  (The  Smaragine  or  Emerald 
Tablet  of  Hermes.)  Recall  the  analysis  of  the  Keyword  of  the  Adeptus  Minor 
Grade. 

I.N.R.I.  is  Yod,  Nun,  Resh,  Yod. 

The  first  "I"  is  Virgo,  Isis,  Mighty  Mother  - in  this  sense  "Mother"  being  the 
producer  of  seeds  and  fruit  on  the  Earth  when  the  Sun  is  therein. 

"N"  is  Scorpio,  Apophis,  Destroyer  - the  Destructive  Force  which  is  brought 
into  play,  to  check  or  restrict  the  continuation  of  the  action  of  Regenerative  Force. 

"R"  is  Sol. 

The  final  "I"  is  Osiris  Slain  and  Risen  - the  Sun  in  the  Decadence  of  Force 
from  the  Autumnal,  and  his  Increase  of  Force  from  the  Vernal  Equinox. 

The  Isis,  Apophis,  Osiris  is  I.A.O.  The  initials  of  these  three  produce  the 
synthetical  name  IAO.  This  giveth  a fresh  Triad,  of  which  again  the  beginning  is 
Virgo,  namely  Air,  TIPHARETH. 

Now  as  the  Adeptus  Minor  vibrateth  these  Names  and  maketh  these  Signs,  he 
affirmeth  certain  correspondences  in  his  own  Atmosphere.  That  is  to  say  that: 

The  Sign  of  Osiris  slain:  representeth  the  Equinoctial  Forces. 

The  Sign  of  the  Mourning  of  Isis:  the  Force  of  Light  illumining  at  its 
greatest  pitch.  Wherefore  the  space  included  between  the  hands  is  the  "Semi  Arc" 
of  the  Sun  at  the 


90 


VOLUME  NINE 


Summer  Solstice,  which  she  thus  recalleth  as  the  affirmation  of  the  Life  Force 
of  Osiris. 

The  Sign  of  Typhon  and  Apophis:  the  space  between  the  hands  above  the  head 
will  mark  the  diminished  extent  of  the  whole  "Arc"  of  the  Sun  and  his  Winter 
Solstice,  thus  representing  the  corresponding  excess  of  the  Darkness  over  the 
Light. 

The  Signs  of  the  Rending  asunder,  and  of  the  Closing  of  the  Veil:  mark  the 
Arcs  of  Light  midway  between  the  Equinoxes  and  the  Solstices. 

The  Sign  of  Osiris  Risen:  representeth  the  Synthetical  extent  of  the  variation 
between  the  utmost  extent  of  the  Light  of  the  Solstices  and  the  Equinoxes,  as  thus 
affirming  that  the  power  of  the  governance  of  these  Forces  may  be  found  in  the  Self 
when  depending  on  the  higher  illumination,  as  the  New  Name  is  found  from  the 
initials  of  the  others. 

In  the  diagrams  the  Light  is  therefore  shewn  as  coming  from  above  the 
figure;  thus  affirming  its  descent  from,  and  also  the  Solar  course  of  the  Seasons 
dependeth  from  the  movement  of  the  Forces  symbolized  in  the  Book  T,  by  the  4 
Aces  at  the  North  Pole  of  the  Universe,  and  their  convoluted  revolution. 


91 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


VOLUME  TEN 


THE  ENOCHIAN  SYSTEM 


92 


VOLUME  NINE 


93 


VOLUME  TEN 


VOLUME  TEN 

THE  ENOCHIAN  SYSTEM 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ENOCHIAN  TEACHING  AND  PRAXIS 

By 

THOMAS  HEAD,  Ph.D.  (OXON) 

Gabriel  . . .Every  Letter  signifieth  the  Member  of  the  substance 
whereof  it  speaketh.  Every  word  signifieth  the  quiddity  of  the  substance. 

The  Letters  are  separated,  and  in  confusion:  and  therefore,  are  by 
numbers  gathered  together:  which  also  gathered  signifie  a number:  for  as 
every  greater  containeth  his  lesser,  so  are  the  secret  and  unknown  forms  of 
things  knit  up  in  their  parents:  Where  being  known  in  number  they  are 
easily  distinguished,  so  that  herein  we  teach  places  to  be  numbered:  letters 
to  be  elected  from  the  numbered,  and  proper  words  from  the  letters.  .’ 

With  Enochian  magic  the  reader  arrives  at  the  unifying  system  that  underlay 
all  the  practical  work  of  the  Golden  Dawn  as  originally  constituted  in  1887.  All  the 
initiation  ceremonies  of  the  Order,  from  the  grade  of  Zelator  to  that  of  Philosophus, 
contained  references  to  Enochian;  but  not  until  the  level  of  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor 
did  it  become  a subject  of  regular  instruction  and  methodical  investigation.  The 
Order's  interest  in  Enochian  became  semi-public  in  1912,  when  Aleister  Crowley 
issued  a two-part  precis  of  its  material  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  numbers  of  The 
Equinox.  As  an  historical  document  Crowley's  account  was  badly  flawed:  in  the  first 
place  by  his  lumping  together  the  materials  pertaining  to  the  Order  with  those 
pertaining  to  his  personal  research;  and  in  the  second  place  by  his  trick  of  supplying 
verbose  commentaries  to  everything  that  is  obvious,  while  passing  over  the  real 
obscurities  as  though  they  were  self-evident.  As  a piece  of  instruction  the  thing  is 
even  worse  - for  nobody  would  be  able  to  deduce  from  Crowley's  essay  alone 


1 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


how  the  Enochian  system,  or  any  part  of  it,  functions  as  a definite  practical 
scheme.  Consequently  it  was  not  until  1940,  when  Israel  Regardie  published  the 
fourth  volume  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  that  a clear  and  accurate  record  of  the  Order's 
Enochian  teachings  and  magical  techniques  became  available  to  the  public. 

It  should  be  noted  in  passing  that  Regardie  paid  a heavy  price  for  his  candour 
and  his  labours.  His  book  was  greeted  with  an  outpouring  of  negative  criticism, 
and  a frenzy  of  chattered  personal  derision,  which  in  their  inarticulate  fury  were 
quite  exceptional  even  for  a milieu  so  full  of  touchy  egos  as  the  Anglo-American 
world  of  the  occult.  Viewed  in  retrospect  these  "book  reviews"  are  often 
masterpieces  of  unintended  comedy.  Most  of  them,  indeed,  give  the  impression  that 
they  were  written  while  their  authors  were  frothing  at  the  mouth  and  pawing  the  air 
with  their  left  hands.  But  for  a dedicated  and  sensitive  young  author  - and 
Regardie  was  scarcely  thirty  when  he  began  to  publish  the  Golden  Dawn  - it  must 
have  been  extremely  painful  to  be  the  target  of  such  unremitting  vilification. 

The  gravamen  of  all  this  abuse  was  that  Regardie  had  broken  the  oaths  of 
secrecy  by  which  he  had  bound  himself  as  an  Adept  in  the  Hermes  Temple. 
Regardie's  defence  - which  was  actually  printed  two  years  before  he  began  to  make 
the  Order  material  public  - rested  on  three  claims:  first,  that  the  Temple  had  itself 
so  far  degenerated  that  its  Hierophants  could  no  longer  initiate  effectively;  second, 
that  as  a further  consequence  the  teaching  had  become  so  distorted  that  there  was 
clear  and  present  danger  or  its  being  lost  altogther;  and,  third,  that  while  vows  of 
occult  secrecy  are  certainly  meant  to  protect  the  names  of  the  members  and  the 
whereabouts  of  the  organization,  they  do  not  in  principle  extend  to  the  substance  of 
the  teaching  itself2,  which  is  implicitly  addressed  to  whom  it  may  concern.  Today, 
after  the  passage  of  some  forty  years,  it  is  abundantly  clear  the  Regardie  was 
entirely  right  and  his  detractors  entirely  wrong.  The  central  position  that  the  Golden 
Dawn  material  occupies  in  modern  esoteric  studies  and  its  far-reaching  influence 
across  organizational  lines  are  due,  not  at  all  to  the  wisdom  of  its  titular  guardians, 
but  simply  and  solely  to  Regardie's  act  of  preservation.  Of  this  fact  the  Enochian 
teachings,  with  which  alone  we  are  here  concerned,  are  quite  possibly  the  best  case 
in  point.  These,  in  the  Temple  to  which  Regardie  belonged,  were  almost  completely 
ignored.  Today  they  are  so  far  from  being  ignored  that  two  Enochian  dictionaries 
are  currently  in  print,  a third  is  on  the  way,  and  in  both  the  United  States  and 
England  there  are  several  groups  which  (with  varying  results)  are  endeavouring  to 
conduct  serious  research  into  both  the  language  and  the  magic. 

ENOCHIAN  SOURCES 

The  Enochian  system  originated  through  the  ceremonial  skrying  of  Dr.  John 
Dee  and  Edward  Kelley,  whose  sittings  took  place  over  a period  of  seven  years 
beginning  in  1582,  when  Dee  was  54  years  old  and  Kelley  27.  Dee  was  a polyhistor, 
and  his  erudition  was  like  an  imperial  tureen  - wide  and  deep  and  almost 
unbelieveably  capacious.  By  the  standards  of  his  day  he  had  valid  claims  to  expert 
knowledge  of  mathematics,  languages,  geography,  astronomy,  mechanics, 
architecture,  navigation,  theology,  cryptology,  poetry,  painting, 


2 


VOLUME  TEN 


drama,  optics,  music,  philosophy,  genealogy,  medicine  - and  the  Hermetic 
sciences.  With  the  possible  exception  of  Roger  Bacon  in  the  thirteenth  century,  Dee 
came  nearer  than  any  other  Englishman  to  embracing  all  the  knowledge  of  his  age. 
His  library,  which  by  1583  contained  about  2500  books  and  170  manuscripts,  was  the 
largest  in  England  and  a rival  to  almost  all  the  private  Continental  collections.  His 
physical  appearance  was  striking,  This  is  Aubrey's  description:  "Hee  had  a very  faire 
cleare  rosie  complexion;  a long  beard  as  white  as  milke;  he  was  tall  and  slender;  a 
very  handsome  man."3 

Less  is  known  of  Kelley,  for  he  was  not  a public  figure,  and  much  of  what 
was  written  about  him  is  not  well  documented.  The  portrait  that  emerges  from  the 
record  of  his  sittings  with  Dee  is  of  a highly  ambiguous  personality,  wary  and 
mistrustful,  unstable  and  picric,  prone  on  the  one  hand  to  terrifying  fits  of  anger 
accompanied  by  physical  violence,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  sudden  spiritual 
conversions  from  which  he  promptly  relapsed.  Before  attaching  himself  to  Dee's 
household,  Kelley  had  served  as  secretary  to  the  mathematician  and  Hermetic 
scholar  Thomas  Allen,  from  whom  he  may  have  acquired  his  knowledge  of  occult 
philosophy.  He  possessed  a number  of  old  books,  son  ..e  pertaining  to  alchemy  (in 
which  he  was  passionately  interested),  but  most  of  them  apparently  having  to  do 
with  the  recovery  of  buried  treasure  through  the  help  of  evil  spirits.  If  Dee's  mind 
was  the  tureen,  Kelley's  was  the  soup  plate  - somewhat  shallow,  but  wide  enough 
to  hold  a little  bit  of  almost  anything.  Certainly  he  was  intelligent  and  not 
uneducated;  he  had  been  an  undergraduate  at  Oxford  under  the  (false)  name  of 
Edward  Talbot,  though  it  appears  he  was  sent  down  after  some  sort  of  trouble.  A few 
years  later  he  was  pilloried  at  Lancaster  for  forgery.  No  evidence  has  survived 
bearing  on  his  guilt  or  innocence,  but  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  Elizabethan 
England  the  administration  of  justice  - at  least  where  the  poor  and  the  unpopular 
were  concerned  - was  no  less  rough  and  ready  than  the  American  Wild  West. 

Kelley  presented  himself  at  Dee's  house  in  Mortlake  on  Thursday,  8 March 
1582,  and  offered  his  services  as  a skryer.  Two  days  later  Dee  was  giving  him  a 
trial.  Their  preparations  were  of  the  simplest,  consisting  merely  of  setting  up  the 
shewstone  or  crystal  on  the  table  of  practice  and  of  a short  prayer  spoken  by  the 
Doctor.  The  result  was  that  Kelley  received,  on  that  first  day,  a vision  of  the  angel 
Uriel,  who  revealed  his  secret  signature  and  issued  preliminary  directions  for  the 
construction  of  two  magical  talismans:  (1)  the  Sigillum  Dei  Aemeth,  a pentacle  nine 
inches  in  diameter,  to  be  made  of  purified  wax;  and  (2)  the  Tabula  Sancta,  a table  to 
be  made  of  sweet  wood  two  cubits  high  and  two  cubits  square,  on  which  a large 
rectangular  seal  containing  twelve  Enochian  letters  was  to  be  surrounded  with 
seven  circular  seals  attributed  to  the  planetary  powers.  The  two  talismans  - which 
were  in  fact  the  first  two  Enochian  documents  - were  to  be  employed  together,  the 
pentacle  being  placed  on  the  Holy  Table  while  in  use. 

Now  events  moved  swiftly.  On  14  March  a spirit  identified  as  the  angel 
Michael  gave  instructions  for  making  a magic  ring  of  gold  bearing  a seal  said  to  be 
identical  to  that  "wherewith  all  miracles  and  divine  works  and  wonders  were  wrought 

by  Solomon."4  This  is  the  design: 


3 


VOLUME  TEN 


left-hand  corner  one  reads  successive  diagonal  lines  in  a southwesterly 
direction  (downward  and  to  the  left),  thus  producing  the  following  angelic  names: 
Sabathiel,  Zedekiel  (sic),  Madimiel,  Semeliel,  Nogabel,  Corabiel,  and  Levanael. 
Then,  reading  in  still  different  directions  along  the  diagonals,  one  obtains  the 
names  of  another  twenty-eight  spirits  - seven  each  of  Daughters  of  Light,  Sons  of 
Light,  Daughters  of  the  Daughters  of  Light,  and  Sons  of  the  Sons  of  Light.  For  the 
sake  of  simplicity  and  because  the  names  in  question  appear  on  the  Sigillum  Dei 
Aemeth,  I give  all  these  results  in  tabular  form. 


Planet 

Angel 

Filiae  Lucis 

Filii  Lucis 

Filiae  Filiarum 

Lucis 

Filii  Filiorum 

Lucis 

Mercury 

Corabiel* 

Azdobn 

Beigia 

Madimi 

Hagonel 

Luna 

Levanael 

Me 

Ih 

Ab 

An 

Venus 

Nogahel 

Ese 

Ilr 

Ath 

Ave 

Jupiter 

Zedekiel 

Iana 

Dmal 

Ized 

Liba 

Mars 

Madimiel 

Akele 

Heeoa 

Ekiei 

Rocle 

Sol 

Semeliel* 

El 

I 

S 

E 

Saturn 

Sabathiel 

Stimcul 

Stimcul 

Esemeli 

Ilemese 

*In  line  1 the  angelic  name  should  be  Kokabiel,  and  in  line  6 it  should  be 
Semesiel  - to  agree  with  the  Hebrew  names  of  Mercury  and  Sol.  But  I give  the 
names  as  Kelley  wrote  them  since  the  change  of  a single  letter  on  the  square 
necessitates  changing  many  other  names  obtained  through  alternative  modes  of 
permutation. 

Shortly  after  the  transcription  of  these  squares  Kelley  began  to  produce  a 
copious  amount  of  material  concerning  an  angelical  language.  The  Enochian 
alphabet  appeared  first  - twenty-one  characters,  somewhat  like  Ethiopic  in  styling 
though  not  in  formation,  and  written  like  all  Semitic  languages  from  right  to  left. 
This  was  followed  by  a book  containing  almost  one  hundred  squares,  many  of  them 
as  large  as  2,401  characters  (49x49),  whose  dictation  became  the  principal  business 
of  all  the  sittings  for  nearly  fourteen  months.  And  the  material  continued  to  pile  up, 
page  after  page,  book  after  book,  until  the  final  parting  between  Dee  and  Kelley 
in  1589. 

What  are  we  to  make  of  these  angelic  conferences? 

The  classic  answer,  of  course,  takes  a tripartite  form.  First  it  is  suggested 
that  Dee  was  a sincere  and  pious  but  rather  silly  old  man  who  from  first  to  last  was 
thoroughly  cozened  and  deluded.  Next  it  is  alleged  that  Kelley  was  a liar  and  a 
charlatan  whose  "revelations"  were  a conscious  exercise  in  forgery,  a forgery  which 
had,  moreover  the  advantage  of  being  fool-proof  since  it  appears  from  Dee's 
spiritual  diary  that  he  himself  rarely,  if  indeed  ever,  claimed  to  see  or  hear  the 
angelic  visitants.  Third  and  finally,  it  is  concluded  that  the  spirits  answering  to  the 
stone  were  either  (a)  Satanic  imposters  or  (b)  figments  of  Kelley's  fertile 
invention.  Such,  in  bald  outline,  is  the  answer  proposed  by  Casaubon  in  his  54-page 
preface 


5 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


to  A True  and  Faithful  Relation.5  And  since  Thomas  Smith,  in  the  book  that 
for  more  than  two  hundred  years  stood  as  the  standard  biography  of  Dee  followed 
Casaubon's  lead  and  dismissed  the  angelic  conferences  as  "execrable  insanity,"  such 
in  essence  is  the  view  that  prevails  today. 

Having  studied  off  and  on  for  seventeen  years  the  records  of  the  conferences, 
I find  all  this  a gross  distortion  of  the  evidence.  There  is  no  question  that  Kelley  had  a 
broad  streak  of  opportunism:  but  almost  from  the  beginning  we  find  him  openly 
doubting  the  nature  of  his  spiritual  contacts,  protesting  that  their  nature  is  diabolical 
and  not  angelic.  He  tells  Dee  that  they  are  deluders,  that  his  "heart  standeth  against 
them,"  that  their  promises  cannot  be  relied  upon.  During  the  sittings  he  is  constantly 
on  the  alert  to  catch  the  spirits  out  and  embarrass  them.  On  one  occasion  he 
convicts  them  of  plagiarising  from  Cornelius  Agrippa.  To  adopt  the  view,  as  the 
devotees  of  the  fraud  theory  have  done,  that  Kelley's  constant  endeavour  to  break  off 
the  conferences  at  almost  any  cost  was  merely  a clever  way  of  titillating  Dee's 
enthusiasm  is  to  ignore  the  obvious.  For  the  one  thing  more  likely  than  any  other  to 
make  Dee  abandon  the  conferences  would  have  been  a genuine  doubt  as  to  the  nature 
of  the  spirits.  And  if  one  thing  is  clear  from  the  thousands  of  pages  of  manuscript 
records,  it  is  that  Kelley  was  deeply  frightened  and  intimidated  by  the  spiritual  forces 
he  felt  to  be  arrayed  against  him.  For  all  his  vacillation  and  instability,  he  was 
never  really  dissuaded  from  his  conviction  that  they  were  too  dangerous  to  meddle 
with.  As  for  Dee  himself,  it  is  simply  not  the  case  that  he  meekly  accepted  everything 
he  was  told.  Most  of  the  time  he  is  a model  of  caution.  He  notes  every  question  and 
every  answer;  and  if  a discrepancy  appears,  he  demands  that  it  be  explained  before 
going  on.  He  is  all  humility  when  praying  to  God  - but  in  the  matter  of  revelation 
he  is  more  than  ready  to  "try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God." 

Paradoxically  enough,  however,  the  most  substantial  and  convincing  proof 
of  the  essential  genuineness  of  both  Dee  and  Kelley  is  their  monumental  ignorance  of 
what  to  do  with  the  material  they  have  accumulated.  The  thing  that  distinguishes 
Enochian  magic  as  taught  by  the  Golden  Dawn  is  that  it  makes  possible  an 
astonishingly  effective  and  powerful  synthesis  of  both  theoretical  and  practical 
occult  philosophy.  In  the  hands  of  Dee  and  Kelley  the  Enochian  material  remained  a 
useless  mass  of  letters  and  squares;  and  if  Kelley  feared  it  and  Dee  revered  it,  the 
salient  fact  is  that  neither  of  them  ever  accomplished  anything  with  it.  But  in  the 
hands  of  Macgregor  Mathers  and  his  colleagues  the  Enochian  system  stood  revealed 
as  a true  concourse  of  all  the  forces  in  the  macrocosm  Sephirotic,  elemental, 
planetary  and  astral.  It  fused  Kabbalah,  tarot,  astrology,  and  geomancy  into  a 
unified  psychological  field.  Its  map  of  the  planes  is  the  most  comprehensive,  and  at 
the  same  time  the  most  practical,  that  I have  ever  encountered.  In  short,  the  method 
works:  it  unlocks  the  secret  doors  of  the  mind  as  no  other  published  system  has 
ever  done. 

ENOCHIAN  POSSIBILITIES 

At  the  same  time,  I do  not  wish  to  suggest  that  the  Enochian  system  as 
organised  by  the  Golden  Dawn  founders  is  complete  and  perfect  beyond  all 
possibility  of  improvement. 


6 


VOLUME  TEN 


That,  I am  respectfully  convinced,  is  not  the  case.  Over  and  beyond  the  forty- 
eight  Angelic  Keys,  the  four  Watchtowers,  and  the  Tablet  of  Union  there  is  a 
substantial  body  of  Enochian  documents  whose  investigation  will  greatly  repay  the 
student  who  has  already  assimilated  and  understood  the  available  Golden  Dawn 
material.  These  documents  are: 


1.  Sigillum  Dei  Aemeth. 

2.  Tabula  Sancta. 

3.  The  Round  Tablet  of  Nalvage. 

4.  De  Heptarchia  Mystica 

5.  Liber  Scientia  Auxilii  et  Victoria  Terrestris. 

6.  Liber  Mysteriorum  Sextus  et  Sanctus. 

7.  Tabula  Bonorum  Angelorum  Invocationes. 

A few  words  in  description  of  these  may  be  found  useful. 

The  Sigillum  Dei  Aemeth,  which  I reproduce  below,  is  a magical  synthesis  of 
ideas  of  a purely  spiritual  nature  with  regard  to  the  divine,  archangelic,  and  angelic 
names  associated  with  the  celestial  spheres  wherein  the  planetary  forces  operate.  The 
operation  of  the  Sigillum  occurs  in  the  worlds  of  Yetzirah  and  Briah.  Moreover,  the 
four  small  sigils  attributed  to  the  Tablets  of  the  Watchtowers  receive  their 
elucidation  from  this  Sigillum,  whence  they  are  resolved  into  the  names  of  four  great 
Overseer  Angels  of  these  tablets. 


7 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Tabula  Sancta  or  Holy  Table  is  designed  to  be  used  with  the  Sigillum. 
It  operation  occurs  in  the  world  of  Assiah  and  the  lower  planetary  forces, 
rendering  them  open  to  tl%  operation  of  forces  in  higher  worlds.  I have  not  been 
able  to  find  a copy  of  the  Tabula  suitable  for  sending  to  the  printer,  but  readers 
with  access  to  Casaubon  will  find  a magnificent  reproduction  included  just  before 
the  beginning  of  the  main  text.  The  seven  small  sigils,  reading  clockwise  from  the 
top,  are  associated  with  Luna,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Sol,  Venus,  and  Mercury. 

Students  of  the  Angelic  Keys  will  recall  that  of  the  nineteen  calls  the  first  is 
unexpressed,  being  attributed  to  the  Godhead.  The  Round  Tablet  of  Nalvrge,  while 
not  identical  with  the  unexpressed  call,  is  nevertheless  associated  with  it.  This 
tablet  is  reproduced  below,  together  with  a diagram  showing  how  it  is  to  be  read. 


h 

c 

r 

v 

i 

d 

2 

s 

a. 

i 

1 

a 

o 

i 

8 

Q 

d 

h 

V 

m 

z 

r 

V 

V 

r 

c 

A 

b 

n 

a 

f 

o 

s 

a 

S 

d 

a 

• - -1 

z. 

s 

e 

a 

s 

i 

a 

b 

r 

d 

i 

i 

a 

n 

g 

The  book  entitled  Liber  Scientia  Auxilii  et  Victoria  Terrestris  shows  how  to 
extract  from  the  Tablets  of  the  Watchtowers  the  names  of  91  Angelical  Princes 
whose  rule  is  in  the  Thirty  Aethyrs  of  the  Macrocosm.  It  further  attributes  each  of 
these  Angelic  Princes  to  the  governance  of  one  of  the  archangels  ruling  the  signs 
of  the  Zodiac.  They  are  given  in  a special  order  corresponding  to  that  of  the  degree 
of  the  Golden  Dawn.  The  book  also  shows  how  to  draw  the  sigils  of  these  Angelical 
Princes.  The  forces  described  in  the  Liber  Scientia  operate  in  the  world  of  Atziluth. 

The  Liber  Mysteriorum  Sextus  et  Sanctus  exists  only  in  manuscript  form  in 
the  British  Library;  and  the  manuscript  is  in  such  poor  condition  that  many  of  the 
pages  will  not  reproduce  legibly.  It  contains  a large  number  of  angelic  squares  - some 
of  which  I have  been  able  to  solve,  some  of  which  require  further  work,  and  many  of 
which  I cannot  begin  to  read.  It  also  contains  a very  large  number  of  words  in  the 
angelic  language,  some  of  which  I have  been  able  to  translate  in  a tentative  way.  The 
forces  that  are  described  operate  in  all  four  worlds. 


8 


VOLUME  TEN 


Finally,  the  Tabula  Bonorum  Angelorum  Invocationes  describes  angelic  and 
archangelic  operations  that  take  place  in  the  world  of  the  macrocosm.  The  book  is 
relevant  both  to  the  operations  of  the  Four  Watchtowers  and  to  the  Liber  Scientia 
Auxilii,  previously  described. 


ENOCHIAN  NUMBERS 

Having  associated  myself  with  Israel  Regardie's  call  for  greater  openness  with 
occult  teaching  material,  I now  wish  to  share  with  readers  of  this  book  some  of  the 
results  of  my  own  research.  The  quotation  from  John  Dee's  spiritual  diaries  with 
which  I headed  up  this  paper  was  written  at  the  time  the  Angelic  Keys  were  being 
dictated.  Closely  read  and  taken  in  context,  it  suggests  not  only  that  the  Keys  may 
involve  more  than  one  numbering  system,  but  also  that  "the  Letters"  i.e.,  the 
characters  of  the  Enochian  alphabet,  may  be  "in  confusion"  in  the  sense  that  the 
traditional  order  may  not  be  correct.  Much  more  plainly,  in  part  three  of  "The 
Concourse  of  the  Forces"  MacGregor  Mathers  states:  "The  numbers  such  as  456  and 
6739,  etc.  which  occur  in  some  of  the  Calls  contain  mysteries  not  here  to  be 
explained." 

Following  these  and  similar  hints  throughout  Dee's  diaries,  as  well  as  some 
of  the  manuscript  books  discussed  above,  I have  been  able  to  establish  three 
conclusions  with  a rather  high  degree  of  rigour:  first,  that  there  are  in  fact  two 
numbering  systems  in  Enochian,  of  which  one  is  used  for  gematria  and  the  other  only 
for  translating  letters  into  single  digits;  second,  that  the  correct  order  of  characters  in 
the  Enochian  alphabet  resembles  that  in  Greek  and  Coptic;  and,  third,  that  the 
Gematric  Code  (as  I propose  to  call  it)  follows  a pattern  rather  more  like  Hebrew. 
Since  this  is  not  the  place  to  recapitulate  my  reasoning,  I will  say  only  that  after 
checking  it  several  times  and  having  it  checked  for  me  on  an  IBM  370  using  a program 
written  in  LISP  - I think  it  is  right.  Here  are  my  results. 

Character  Cematric  ( ode  Digital  (ode 


A 

B 

(; 

0 
F 
F 
/. 
II 

1 

K 

F 

M 

N 

X 

() 

P 

Q 

R 

S 

T 

D 


1 1 

2 2 

3 3 

4 4 

5 5 

6 6 

7 7 

8 8 

III  1 

20  2 

30  3 

40  4 

50  5 

60  6 

70  7 

80  8 

90  9 

100  1 

200  2 

300  3 

400  4 


9 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  next  step  of  course  is  to  follow  Mathers's  lead,  enter  the  Angelic  Keys 
with  the  Digital  Code,  and  translate  the  numbers  into  their  correct  values.  Here  is 
the  result. 

Letters  Uncorrect  Value  Correct  Value 


A*  F 

19 

16 

A C A M 

7699 

1214 

C I A L 

9996 

2113 

C L A 

456 

231 

D 

3 

4 

D A 0*  X 

5678 

4176 

D A R G 

6739 

4113 

E M 0 D 

8763 

5474 

E R A N 

6332 

5115 

G*  A* 

31 

31 

L 

1 

3 

M 

9 

4 

M A P M 

9639 

4184 

M A T B 

1000 

1000 

MIAN 

3663 

4115 

N 

6 

5 

N I 

28 

51 

N 0 R Z 

6 

6 

0 

5 

7 

0 B 

28 

72 

0 P 

22 

78 

0 S 

12 

12 

0 X* 

26 

76 

p* 

8 

8 

P D 

33 

84 

P E 0 A L 

69636 

85713 

Q U A R 

1636 

9411 

S 

4 

2 

T A X S 

7336 

3162 

V 

2 

4 

V*  X 

42 

46 

The  seven  letters  with  asterisks  are  the  only  ones  for  which  correct  values  were 
given  in  the  text  and  were  presumably  left  there  to  serve  as  clues  of  a sort.  Very 
helpful. 


10 


VOLUME  TEN 


IN  CONCLUSION 

It  is  a joy  to  welcome  The  Complete  Golden  Dawn  System  of  Magic  into 
the  world.  With  its  rich  treasure  trove  of  new  material,  and  illuminated  by  the  ever 
vigorous  and  sapient  writing  of  Israel  Regardie,  the  book  is  clearly  destined  to  attain 
the  stature  of  a classic.  May  it  outstrip  its  predecessor  in  success  and  be  rewarded 
lavishly. 


NOTES 

' Meric  Casaubon,  A True  and  Faithful  Relation  of  What  passed  for  many 
years  Between  Dr.  John  Dee  and  Some  Spirits.  London,  1659,  p.  92. 

"Some  readers  will  challenge  this;  but  it  is  a fairly  common  viewpont  among 
esoteric  teachers.  In  another  tradition  George  Gurdjieff,  at  his  first  meeting  with 
P.D.  Ouspensky,  stipulated  that  the  latter's  pledge  of  secrecy  meant  only  that  he 
would  not  write  about  Gurdjieff's  ideas  until  he  understood  them  clearly.  And  in 
still  another  context  I myself,  though  not  a member  of  any  Masonic  Order,  have  been 
given  access  on  several  occasions  to  material  pertaining  to  the  higher  degrees.  The 
men  who  supplied  the  material  knew  I would  write  about  it.  They  made  it  available 
because  they  judged  I would  write  accurately. 

'John  Aubrey,  Minutes  of  Lives,  essay  on  Dee. 

4British  Library,  Sloane  MS  3677 . 

As  the  Puritan  divine  John  Webster  pointed  out  in  A Displaying  of 
Supposed  Witchcraft  (London,  1677)  Casaubon's  True  & Faithful  Relation  was 
anything  but  an  unbiassed  account.  To  the  contrary,  Casaubon  had  deliberately  set 
out  to  "register  Dee  among  the  damned"  and  for  a perfectly  logical  if  self-serving 
reason.  A few  years  earlier  he  had  argued  in  print  that  all  divine  inspiration  (so 
called)  was  nothing  "but  imposture  or  melancholy  or  depraved  phantasie,  arising 
from  natural  causes."  Cromwell's  government  took  a dim  view  of  that  suggestion, 
and  Casaubon  found  himself  charged  with  atheism;  whereupon  he  decided  to  "leap 
to  the  other  end"  by  publishing  some  sensational  text  that  would  proclaim  the 
existence  of  good  and  bad  spirits  alike.  He  did  not,  as  Webster  carefully  notes, 
endeavour  to  destroy  Dee's  reputation  out  of  personal  malice  or  even  out  of  personal 
conviction.  For  the  true  and  faithful  Casaubon  the  whole  point  was  merely  to  bolster 
his  own  position  as  a good  Christian. 

Thomas  Head 
Box  675 
Atlanta,  Georgia 
30301 


11 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  ENOCHIAN  LANGUAGE 
By 

Y.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 

Our  earliest  knowledge  of  this  alphabet  and  language  is  derived  from  the 
skrying  of  Sir  Edward  Kelley  and  Dr.  John  Dee  towards  the  end  of  the  sixteenth 
century.  This  was  in  the  time  both  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  and  Queen  Elizabeth  the 
First  of  England.  In  point  of  fact,  Dr.  John  Dee  became  Queen  Elizabeth's  friend, 
astrologer  and  confidante.  According  to  some  of  the  latest  research,  Dr.  John  Dee 
was  not  the  gullible,  credulous  spiritualist  as  some  critics  have  alleged,  but  was  in 
fact  a true  man  of  the  Renaissance  - a competent  scientist,  geographer  and 
interestingly  enough,  a secret  agent  under  the  tutelage  of  Sir  Francis  Walsingham. 

This  alphabet  and  language  is  called  Angelic  or  Enochian,  as  the  Angels  who 
instructed  both  Dee  and  Kelley  claimed  to  be  those  who  had  once  conversed  with  the 
patriarch  Enoch  of  the  Bible.  Kelley  was  the  skryer  and  used  a shewstone  or  crystal 
ball,  which  is  now  in  the  British  Museum.  In  this  ball  he  saw  Angels  who  instructed 
him  to  make  large  charts  and  designs  which  Dr.  Dee  would  have  before  him  on  a 
desk,  while  Kelley  was  skrying.  When  an  Angel  in  the  shewstone  would  point  to  a 
certain  letter  on  one  of  his  charts,  Kelley,  in  his  turn,  would  pass  the  information  on 
to  Dr.  Dee  as  for  example:  Tablet  B,  Column  7,  Rank  II,  etc.  Dr.  Dee  would  locate 
the  letter  and  write  it  down,  awaiting  the  next. 

This  was  a slow  and  tedious  method  of  gaining  information.  All  of  these 
conversations  and  instructions  were  recorded  by  Dr.  Dee  in  diaries,  still  to  be 
found  in  the  British  Museum  in  the  Sloane  and  Harleian  collection  of  manuscripts. 
In  the  year  1659,  Meric  Casaubon  published  a large  tome  reproducing  the  details  of 
some  of  these  conversations  and  instructions.  In  this  book  are  to  be  found  dozens  of 
prayers  offered  humbly  by  Dee  that  he  be  guided  in  the  right  direction;  many  are 
beautiful,  others  are  long  and  tedious. 

From  this  basic  material  has  grown  one  of  the  most  complete  systems  of 
magical  endeavor  that  was  ever  so  beautifully  and  systematically  organized, 
beyond  even  the  wildest  dreams  of  Dee  and  Kelley,  by  the  Hermetic  Order  of  the 
Golden  Dawn  towards  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

As  can  be  seen  when  consulting  Meric  Casaubon,  many  of  the  invocations  - or 
Calls  as  they  are  named,  dictated  by  the  Angels,  were  given  in  reverse.  It  was  felt  that 
the  Enochian  words  were  so  powerful  that  direct  dictation  would  call  forth  powers 
and  forces  not  then  desired.  The  present  dictionary  in  this  Volume  of  the  Enochian 
language  has  been  complied  from  words  used  in  the  nineteen  invocations  that  were 
given  to  Dee  and  Kelley.  Over  a period  of  time,  it  has  become  possible  to  separate 
the  prefixes  and  suffixes  from  the  basic  Enochian  words.  Since  I am  no  philologist 
this  was  no  easy  task,  especially  as  it  was  soon  recognized  that  in  the  process  of 
repeated  copyings,  by  uninformed  members  of  the  Golden  Dawn,  many  errors  had 
crept  into  the  text.  Words  in  one  invocation  had  to  be  checked  against  similar 
words  in  another  invocation  to  arrive  at  some  semblance  of  accuracy. 


12 


VOLUME  TEN 


Recently  the  words  in  this  dictionary  have  been  checked  against  those  found 
in  Casaubon's  enormous  tome.  Even  here,  a fantastic  number  of  errors  were 
perceived  and  I became  aware  of  what  a momentous  task  it  had  been  to  compile 
this  dictionary  in  the  mid-thirties. 

Though  ordinarily  1 have  assiduously  avoided  self-praise,  I must  confess,  as 
I examine  this  dictionary  after  a time  interval  of  nearly  fifty  years,  that  as  simple 
dictionaries  go,  this  is  not  such  a bad  job  after  all.  The  separation  of  the  suffixes  and 
prefixes  from  the  proper  rat  words  was,  in  itself,  no  mean  accomplishment, 
especially  when  one  considers  that  no  clue  is  to  be  found  either  in  the  Golden  Dawn 
documents  or  in  Crowley's  renditions  of  the  Calls  in  Equinox  !,  #8.  Languages  are 
not  amongst  my  few  accomplishments.  My  English  is  good,  my  French  is  execrable 
(as  the  maitre  d'  of  a French  restaurant  I used  to  frequent  can  testify),  I know  but 
little  Latin  and  Greek.  So  far  as  Hebrew  is  concerned,  though  I did  study  that 
intensively  years  ago,  with  the  intent  of  translating  some  old  Qabalistic  texts,  that 
project  vanished  into  thin  air  before  my  second  decade  was  out. 

The  Enochian  language  is  not  just  a haphazard  combination  and  compilation 
of  divine  and  angelic  names  drawn  from  the  Tablets.  Apparently,  it  is  a true 
language  with  a grammar  and  syntax  of  its  own.  Only  a superficial  study  of  the 
invocations  suffice  to  indicate  this  to  be  a fact.  The  invocations  are  not  strings  of 
words  and  barbarous  names,  but  are  sentences  which  can  be  translated  in  a 
meaningful  way  and  not  merely  transliterated. 

The  Enochian  language  is  without  any  history  prior  to  the  skrying  of  Edward 
Kelley  and  John  Dee.  There  is  no  record  of  its  prior  existence,  regardless  of  some 
fanciful  theories  which  have  been  invented  to  account  for  it.  Many  present-day 
philologists  have  often  pointed  out  that  it  is  impossible  for  any  single  human  being 
to  invent  a language  of  his  own,  complete  with  errors,  such  as  we  find  in  the 
transcribing  in  Dr.  Dee's  diaries.  Any  inventor  today  would  be  careful  enough  to  be 
more  thorough  in  the  construction  of  his  language  than  were  Dee  and  Kelley,  or 
the  Angels  who  originally  dictated  the  Calls. 

The  Enochian  alphabet  consists  of  twenty-one  letters  which  can  be 
transposed  into  English.  The  individual  letters  are  known  to  us  in  both  the  printed 
or  elaborate  style  and  also  in  a script  or  cursive  form. 

One  of  the  curious  anomalies  about  this  Enochian  alphabet  is  that  each  letter 
has  a name,  as  in  other  languages,  such  as  in  Greek:  Alpha,  Beta,  Gamma,  etc.,  but 
this  Enochian  name  bears  absolutely  no  relationship  to  the  sound  value  of  the  letter 
itself.  Alpha  in  Greek  is  given  the  sound  value  of  A;  in  Hebrew  Gimel  is  given  the 
sound  value  of  G,  etc.:  but  in  Enochian,  Veh,  has  the  sound  value  of  C or  K,  not  of 
V,  as  one  might  at  first  have  supposed. 

Since  the  names  of  the  letters  are  not  commonly  used,  the  use  of  the  English 
alphabetical  order  and  pronunciation  is  recommended  in  order  to  avoid  confusion 
or  unnecessary  complication.  In  the  text  is  shown  the  Enochian  alphabet  in  both 
the  elaborate  and  cursive  style  and  also  in  the  order  given  us  by  tradition.  In 
passing,  I should  note  that  the  cursive  style  is  used  but  rarely,  and  for  that  reason 
is  not  worth  committing  to  memory. 

In  the  original  Golden  Dawn  papers  written  by  MacGregor  Mathers  and 
William  Wynn  Wescott,  certain  rules  were  laid  down  for  the  pronunciation  of  the 
Enochian  words.  Mathers  advised  that  the  consonants  should  be  followed  by  the 
vowel  which  obtains  in  the 


13 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


corresponding  Hebrew  letters.  For  example:  the  word  "sobha"  could  be 
pronounced  soh-bay-hah.  The  god-names,  like  MPH  ARSL  GAIOL,  to  be  found  in 
the  Water  Tablet,  are  pronounced  as:  Em-pay-hay  Ar-sel  Gah-ee-Ohl.  The  one  major 
exception  to  all  rules  is  that  the  letter  Z is  always  pronounced  as  zoad.  So  that  the 
word  Zamran  is  pronounced  as  Zoad-ah-mer-ah-noo. 

Dr.  Wescott  laid  down  similar  rules  in  another  document  he  wrote  for  the 
Adeptus  Minor,  but  his  version  gives  several  variations  which  should  be  noted.  I 
have  found  these  latter  to  be  valid,  making  for  greater  euphony  and  ease  in 
handling.  He  said:  "M  is  pronounced  em;  N is  pronounced  en  (also  Nu  or  Noo  - since 
in  Hebrew  the  vowel  following  the  equivalent  letter  Nun  is  used);  A is  pronounced  ah; 
P is  peh;  S is  ess;  D is  deh."  This  rule,  in  fact,  simplifies  the  entire  procedure,  If  one 
had  no  further  rules  than  these,  the  entire  matter  of  Enochian  pronunciation,  which 
has  been  unnecessarily  obscured  and  rendered  so  difficult,  could  then  be  handled 
with  ease. 

Another  variation  is  that  Y,  J and  I are  similar  to  the  Yod  in  Hebrew  - as  U 
and  V are  similar  to  the  Vau  in  Hebrew.  X has  sometimes  the  value  of  Samekh  and 
at  others  of  Tzaddi,  though  there  is  no  reason  not  to  use  it  as  in  English. 

Usage  and  experience  will  ultimately  dictate  which  one  is  to  be  employed. 
Let  me  give  several  examples  of  words  chosen  relatively  at  random  in  order  to 
exemplify  the  simplicity  of  the  process  of  pronunciation.  These  names  are  to  be 
found  in  the  Tablet  of  Union: 

EXARP  Ex-ar-pay 
HCOMA  Hay-coh-mah 
NANTA  En-ah-en-tah 
BITOM  Bay-ee-toh-em 

Though  it  has  been  suggested  by  Wescott  that  every  letter  should  be 
pronounced  separately,  this  idea  makes  for  clumsiness,  lack  of  euphony  and 
unnecessary  length,  which  creates  fatigue  and  monotony.  Further  examples  are: 

CHIS  Cah- 
hee-sah  CHISGE  Cah- 
his-jee 

The  student  must  use  not  merely  these  rules  but  his  own  sense  of  euphony  and 
intuition  in  dealing  with  this  matter.  Remember,  there  is  no  final  version  which  is 
absolutely  authoritative. 

In  the  Portal  grade  of  The  Complete  Golden  Dawn  System  of  Magic 
(Falcon  Press,  Phoenix  1983)  there  is  a very  short  Enochian  invocation  which  is 
abbreviated  from  the  First  Call,  but  also  contains  the  names  of  three  Archangels 
drawn  from  the  Tablet  of  Union.  I give  the  invocation  first,  followed  by  its 
transliteration  in  pronunceable  phrases. 


14 


VOLUME  TEN 


"OL  SONUF  VAORSAGI  GOHO  IADA  BALTA.  LEXARPH, 
COMANAN,  TABITOM.  ZODAKARA  ERA  ZODAKARE  OD 
ZODAMARAN.  ODO  KIKLE  QAA,  PIAPE  PIAMOEL  OD  VAOAN." 

This  means,  "I  will  reign  over  you,  saith  the  God  of  Justice.  Lexarph, 
Comanan,  Tabitom.  Move  therefore.  Show  yourselves  forth  and  appear.  Declare 
unto  us  the  mysteries  of  your  creation,  the  balance  of  righteousness  and  truth." 

The  pronunciation  of  these  few  lines  of  Enochian  language  is  nowhere  near 
as  formidable  as  may  appear  at  first  sight.  The  following  is  the  pronunciation  I use. 

I might  add  in  passing  that  this  is  an  Invocation  I have  used  frequently  over  the  last 
forty-odd  years,  primarily  in  relationship  to  the  practice  of  the  Middle  Pillar 
technique  (which  I have  improved  and  enhanced,  to  be  published  by  Falcon  Press 
under  the  title  The  Sceptre  of  Power)  and  the  Ritual  of  the  "Watch  Tower 
Ceremony"  in  this  volume. 

Oh-el  Soh-noof  Vay-oh-air-sah-jee,  Goho  Ee-ah-dah  Baltah. 
El-ex-arpayhay.  Cohmah-nah-noo.  Tah-bee-toh-em.  Zoad-a-kah-rah 
ay-kah  zoad-akah-ray  oh-dah  Zoad-a-mer-ah-noo.  Oh-dah  kee-klay 
kah-ah.  Pee-ah-pay  pee-ah-moh-el  oh-dah  vay-oh-ah-noo. 

Using  these  as  an  example,  the  enterprising  student  should  experience  very 
little  difficulty  in  handling  any  words  or  phrases  to  be  found  in  the  various  Calls 
or  in  this  dictionary.  The  major  obstacle  at  first  encountered  is  simply  the 
strangeness  of  the  appearance  of  the  words  and  the  lack  of  experience  in  pursuing 
the  rules  laid  down.  The  sounds  may  seem  very  much  like  pure  gibberish  at  the 
outset.  If  he  persists,  however,  the  student  will  soon  learn  to  disentangle  the 
sounds  from  apparent  chaos  and  find  himself  confronted  by  a meaningful  language 
and  a meaningful  set  of  invocations.  In  any  event,  do  remember  there  is  no  absolute 
or  final  rendition  of  the  way  to  pronounce  these  Calls.  If  he  can  approximate  the 
instructions  laid  down  here,  his  own  version  will  be  as  authoritative  as  any. 

In  1976,  an  Enochian  Dictionary  was  published  by  Leo  Vinci  entitled 
GMICALZOMA  through  the  Regency  Press  in  England.  I have  no  comments  to 
make  about  it,  other  than  that  it  is  a workable  and  usable  dictionary.  It  post-dates 
my  Dictionary  by  many  years,  mine  having  begun  to  circulate  in  the  U.S.  and  the 
United  Kingdom  a score  of  years  earlier. 

Not  too  long  after  that,  Askin  Publishers  in  England  became  interested  in  my 
dictionary  and  a correspondence  ensued  relative  to  having  them  publish  mine.  A 
friend,  a philologist,  promised  to  write  an  Introduction  to  it  with  a view  to 
elucidating  the  origins  of  the  Enochian  language.  Again,  a series  of  mishaps 
occurred  which  prevented  the  Introduction  from  being  written.  It  resulted  in  Askin 
Publishers  taking  the  lead,  and  offering  to  get  Dr.  Laycock  (an  Australian  philologist 
who  had  been  in  touch  with  me  sometime  before  this)  to  do  an  Introduction  for  it. 
When  the  Introduction  arrived,  I was  most  disappointed  in  it,  feeling  that  it 
exuded  contempt  and  ridicule. 


15 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


My  next  step  was  to  telephone  Askin  Publishers  in  London  to  confess  my 
total  disappointment  and  stating  that  if  they  insisted  on  publishing  Laycock's 
Introduction  with  my  Dictionary,  I would  withdraw  the  latter.  So  it  came  to  pass 
that  Askin  Publishers  returned  my  Dictionary  at  my  request.  Sometime  in  the  next 
immediate  period  they  must  have  formulated  a Dictionary  which  they  published 
with  the  Laycock  Introduction. 

These  facts  need  to  be  mentioned  solely  to  establish  the  priority  of  my 
Dictionary.  Not  that  that  matters  very  much.  There  was  a need  for  this  Dictionary 
amongst  students  of  Magic,  and  someone  got  there  first. 

The  history  of  the  Enochian  Dictionary  that  is  being  published  here  should 
not  be  without  interest. 

Shortly  after  having  benn  elevated  to  the  Adeptus  Minor  Grade,  I began  an 
intensive  study  of  the  Enochian  system,  including  the  beginning  of  a Dictionary. 
The  study  of  the  system  resulted  in  my  writing  a paper  entitled  An  Addendum  to 
the  Book  of  the  Concourse  of  Forces,  included  in  this  volume.  Within  a couple  of 
years,  the  Dictionary  had  achieved  a well-defined  form  --  that  is  by  1940-41.  Then 
World  War  II  intervened,  when  it  was  put  aside  with  a number  of  other  similar 
projects  until  the  1950's.  During  that  time,  the  Dictionary  was  loaned  to  a number 
of  different  people  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Ordinarily  I would  not  use  names, 
but  in  this  instance  I feel  it  is  incumbent  upon  me  to  do  so. 

There  was  a young  man  in  Surrey,  a protege  of  an  osteopathic  friend  of 
mine  A.E.  Charles,  to  whom  I lent  it  early  in  the  1 95 0's  --  altogether  apart  from  a 
handful  of  students  here  in  the  U.S.  Somewhere  around  1956,  1 was  visited  in  Los 
Angeles  by  Miss  Tamara  Bourkoun,  a very  ardent  and  knowledgeable  student  of 
Co-Masonry  and  the  occult.  Amongst  other  things,  including  the  Golden  Dawn 
Tarot  Deck,  I loaned  her  the  Enochian  Dictionary  with  my  permission  to  copy  it 
for  her  use  if  she  so  willed.  From  then  on,  it  had  some  kind  of  circulation  here  and 
there  among  the  more  serious  students  of  Magic  who  took  the  Enochian  system 
seriously. 

Early  in  the  1970's  Sangreal  Foundation,  who  had  already  published 
several  of  my  things,  were  toying  with  the  idea  of  seeing  that  the  Enochian 
Dictionary  was  finally  published.  However  again  some  unforeseen  events 
occurred  which  precluded  the  possibility  of  that  happening. 

Now  under  the  direction  of  the  Israel  Regardie  Foundation  and  Falcon  Press, 
this  long  awaited  work  has  found  itself  in  print,  in  this  particular  volume. 


16 


VOLUME  TEN 


A PREFATORY  NOTE 
By 

V.  H.  FRATER,  S.I.A. 

(Note:  Official  documents  H and  S are  omitted  here  by  reason  of  their 
redundancy  and  obscurity,  to  be  replaced  by  this  more  modern  precis.  I.R.) 

To  the  First  Order  little  is  said  of  the  Tablets  of  Enoch.  They  are  mentioned 
in  the  Rituals,  but  do  not  enter  into  the  Knowledge  Lectures.  But  the  detailed  study  of 
the  Tablets  and  their  attributions  and  the  method  of  using  them  for  vision  forms  a 
definite  part  of  the  course  of  work  prescribed  between  5-6  and  the  T.A.M.  degree. 

The  Order  has  in  its  possession  a considerable  mass  of  detailed  instruction 
on  this  subject,  but  as  it  is  contained  in  a number  of  papers,  some  of  considerable 
antiquity  and  others  modern,  wherein  part  of  the  ground  is  covered  two  or  three 
times  over,  while  other  parts  are  by  no  means  clearly  explained,  it  has  been  felt  that  a 
paper  attempting  to  cover  the  whole  ground  in  logical  sequence  may  be  of 
assistance  to  those  beginning  the  study  of  Enochiana  before  they  go  on  to  the  more 
elaborate  and  intricate  papers  on  special  branches  of  the  subject. 

It  is  to  be  understood  that  this  lecture  does  not  claim  to  say  anything  new.  It 
is  a rearrangement  and,  I hope,  a rather  clearer  explanation  of  information  already 
in  possession  of  the  Order,  and  is  intended  to  be  what  it  is  called  - an  Introduction 
to,  not  a substitute  for,  the  other  Enochian  literature. 

The  Order  possesses  a set  of  the  Tablets  completely  worked  out  in  detail, 
which  can  be  consulted  to  illustrate  the  text  where  necessary.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
make  a copy  of  it,  which  would  take  some  months,  but  it  is  strongly  recommended 
that  every  Adeptus  should  make  him  or  herself  a set  of  the  four  Elemental  Tablets 
as  shown  in  the  Temple,  and  a Tablet  of  Union,  and  have  them  by  him  when  reading 
what  follows.  They  may  be  made  of  coloured  paper  or  painted  in  water  colours.  The 
lettering  should  be  accurately  copied  and  in  the  correct  colouring.  Half-inch  squares 
make  a very  convenient  size,  the  whole  Tablet  being  then  6 in.  x 6/  in. 

CHAPTER  ONE 

THE  ANGELIC  SECRET  LANGUAGE 
THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  TABLETS 

It  is  stated  in  the  1-10  Ritual  that  the  Tablet  of  Earth,  (and  of  course  it 
applies  to  the  others)  "is  written  in  what  our  tradition  calls  the  Angelic  Secret 
Language."  The  Tablets  in  use  in  the  Outer  Temple  are  lettered  with  English  letters, 
but  these  are  in  fact  a translation,  or  rather  a transliteration,  of  very  ancient 
characters  belonging  to  what  is  known  as  the  Theban  Alphabet.  There  are  two  forms 
of  the  letters,  the  elaborate  and  the  cursive.  The  Alphabet  is  as  follows: 


17 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Elaborate 

Cursive 

1 

Title 

Power 

V 

V v 

Pe 

B 

13 

K 

Veh 

C or  K 

Id 

L 

Ged 

G 

DC 

y 

Gal 

D 

/ 

Orth 

F 

Z 

i 

Cn 

A 

1 

i 

Graph 

E 

t 

d 

Tal 

M 

1 

T 

Gon 

I,  Y,  or  J 

W 

7t 

Na-hath 

H 

c 

<\ 

Ur 

L 

n 

CL 

Mals 

P 

u 

ZS 

Ger 

Q 

3- 

Drun 

N 

r 

r 

Pal 

X 

L 

u 

Med 

0 

b 

'C 

Don 

R 

•P 

p 

Ceph 

Z 

a 

2 

Vau 

U or  V 

I*r 

lam 

S 

j 

1 

Gisa 

T 

18 


VOLUME  TEN 


Whether  its  origin  is  now  known  is  extremely  doubtful,  but  it  is  possibly  of 
great  antiquity. 

Every  letter  on  the  English  tablets,  therefore,  may  be  replaced  by  the 
corresponding  letter  of  this  alphabet.  These  letters  are  reputed  of  greater  magical 
force  than  Hebrew  or  English  Letters  and  partake  of  the  nature  of  sigils  rather  than 
simple  letters. 

But  this  Angelic  secret  language,  whatever  its  origin,  was  a true  language.  In 
addition  to  the  "numberless  Divine  and  Angelic  Names"  drawn  from  the  Tablets, 
according  to  rules  some  of  which  will  be  dealt  with  later,  there  are  extant  in  this 
language  a number  of  "Enochian  Calls,"  or  invocations  of  the  Forces  of  the  Tablets. 
These  are  not  mere  strings  of  Names,  but  can  be  translated,  not  merely  transliterated 
into  English.  For  example,  the  Call  in  the  opening  of  the  Portal  Ceremony: 

OL  SONUF  VA-ORSAGI  GOHO  IADA  BALATA  ELEXARPEH 
COMANANU  TABITOM:  ZODAKARA  EKA  ZODAKARE  OD  ZODAMRANU: 
ODO  KIKLE  QAA  PIAPE  PIAMOEL  OD  VAOAN. 

This  means:  "I  will  reign  over  you,  saith  the  God  of  Justice,  0 Lexarph, 
Comananu,  Tabitom.  Move,  therefore,  and  show  yourselves  forth  and  appear; 
declare  unto  us  the  mysteries  of  your  Creation,  the  Balance  of  Righteousness  and 
Truth." 


It  is  stated  in  the  5-6  Ritual  that  some  of  our  early  brethren  compiled  a 
dictionary  of  this  language;  whether  it  now  survives,  I do  not  know.  (In  more  recent 
years  I have  compiled  a dictionary  which  will  be  found  towards  the  end  of  this 
volume.  I.R.)  The  language  is  pronounced  by  taking  each  letter  separately, 
whenever  a lack  of  vowels  renders  it  necessary;  but  the  pronunciation  seems  to 
come  to  one  instinctively  when  one  wants  it.  Thus  m,  p,  h is  pronounced  Em-peh, 
Hctga  He-C-Te-Ga.  Z is  always  pronounced  ZOD  (o  as  in  bone).  Thus  in  the  Name 
lc  Zod  Heh  Chal,  Great  King  of  the  North,  the  Zod  is  represented  only  by  a 
single  Z on  the  Tablet  of  Earth. 

Let  us  now  analyse  the  form  and  arrangement  of  the  elemental  Tablets.  You 
may  have  noticed  in  the  Outer  Order  Rituals  that  the  Tablet  of  Earth  was  called  the 
Third  or  Great  Northern  Quadrangle,  Air  the  First,  Water  the  Second  and  Fire  the 
Fourth,  and  possibly  wondered  why  this  order,  and  why  the  Third  was  given  in  the 
First  Grade.  Put  your  four  Tablets  together  in  two  pairs,  thus: 


Basic  Arrangement 
of  the  Four  Tablets 


1 A 

nv 

n V 

- A 

19 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


And  you  will  then  see  that  they  thus  correspond  to  the  four  elemental  angles 
of  the  Pentagram,  the  angle  of  Spirit  answering  to  the  Tablet  of  Union.  Also  this  is 
the  order  of  the  four  lesser  angles  of  each  separate  Tablet,  and  the  four  together 
form  a sort  of  super-Tablet  with  the  elements  similarly  arranged. 

Now  let  us  take  one  of  the  Tablets,  and  examine  it  more  closely.  To  avoid 
confusion,  I will  refer  throughout  to  the  Tablet  of  Air,  it  being  understood  that  my 
remarks  apply,  mutatis  mutandis,  to  the  others,  unless  they  are  specially 
mentioned. 

First  you  will  notice  that  there  are  twelve  squares  horizontally,  and  thirteen 
vertically,  making  156  in  all,  or  624  in  the  four  Tablets  altogether.  Of  these  156,  76 
are  white,  and  80  are  coloured.  The  two  groups  must  be  separately  considered. 
Each  is  divisible  into  two  other  groups. 

(A)  The  White  Squares  into  the  Great  Cross  and  the  Four 
Sephirotic  Crosses. 

(B)  The  Coloured  Squares  into  Kerubic  and  Servient  Squares. 

The  White  Squares. 

These  are  always  lettered  in  black. 

The  Great  Cross.  This  consists  of  the  two  central  vertical  lines,  and  the  central 
horizontal  line  - total,  36  squares.  The  two  vertical  lines  are  called  the  "Linea  Dei 
Patris  Filiique,"  and  the  horizontal  line  as  the  "Linea  Spiritus  Sancti,"  thus  referring 
to  the  Divine  Triad,  and  also  to  the  Spirit  controlling  the  four  elements  in  the  lesser 
angles  which  are  separated  from  each  other  by  the  Great  Cross. 

The  Four  Sephirotic  Crosses.  These  are  formed  of  the  central  vertical  line  and 
the  second  horizontal  line  in  each  lesser  angle.  Some  confusion  has  been 
introduced  into  their  attributions  in  some  of  our  literature,  by  Chesed  and  Geburah 
being  placed  at  the  extremities  of  the  cross-piece  instead  of  Chokmah  and  Binah. 
The  latter  form,  which  is  that  given  in  Azoth,  is  believed  to  be  correct. 

The  Coloured  Squares. 

The  letters  on  these  are  coloured  as  follows: 

(a)  In  the  lesser  angle  corresponding  to  the  Element  of  the  Tablet  itself, 
in  the  complementary  colour  to  the  ground  work  - i.e.  purple  on  the  airy  quarter  of 
Air,  orange  on  the  watery  quarter  of  Water;  green  is  taken  as  the  colour  for  the 
earthy  quarter  of  Earth  (black  having  strictly  no  complementary  colour),  and  green 
on  the  fiery  quarter  of  Fire. 

(b)  In  the  other  three  lesser  angles  of  each  Tablet,  in  the  colour  of  the 
element  of  the  lesser  angle.  The  King's  Scale  is  used,  Air  being  yellow;  Water,  blue; 
Earth,  black;  and  Fire,  red. 

Kerubic  Squares.  These  are  the  four  squares  above  the  Cross-bar  of  the 
Sephirotic  Cross  in  each  lesser  angle.  The  order  of  their  attribution  to  the  Kerubim 
varies  according  to  the  lesser  angle,  in  a manner  presently  to  be  explained. 

The  sixteen  Servient  Squares.  These  are  the  remaining  coloured  squares 
below  the  Cross-bar  of  the  Sephirotic  Cross  in  each  lesser  angle,  and  their  attribution 
is  dependent  on  that  of  the  Kerubic  squares. 


20 


VOLUME  TEN 


These  four  distinct  groups  will  require  to  be  separately  treated  throughout, 
and  in  each  Chapter  I shall  deal  with  them  in  this  Order.  In  general  it  may  be 
remembered  that  the  white  squares  always  have  Spirit  as  one  of  their  attributions,  the 
coloured  squares  never:  they  are  always  elemental. 

The  Tablet  of  Union 

Is  shown  in  the  Portal  Ceremony  consisting  of  20  white  squares,  arranged  in  4 
horizontal  rows  of  5,  and  thus  attributed,  coloured  and  lettered  as  follows: 

1st  Line. 

Air  - Yellow  letters  - E X A 
R P 2nd  Line. 

Water  - Blue  letters  - H C O 
M A 3rd  Line. 

Earth  - Black  letters  -NAN 
T A 4th  Line. 

Fire  - Red  letters  - B 1 T 0 M. 

All  are  attributed  to  Spirit  in  part,  and  the  letters  are  used  in  combination 
with  those  of  the  other  four  tablets  in  the  formation  of  certain  Names  as  explained 
in  the  next  chapter. 

CHAPTER  TWO 

THE  FORMATION  OF  DIVINE  AND  ANGELIC  NAMES  FROM  THE 

TABLETS 

We  now  consider  the  mode  of  forming  the  more  important  of  the  "numberless 
Divine  and  Angelic  Names"  from  the  Tablets. 

The  White  Squares. 

1.  The  Great  Cross.  From  the  Great  Cross  of  each  Tablet  are  formed  ten 
Names  of  importance  for  present  purposes.  1.2.3.  The  "Three  Great  Holy  Secret 
Names  of  God"  occupy  the  whole  of  the  Linea  Spiritus  Sancti,  reading  from  left  to 
right.  They  consist  in  each  Tablet  of  a Name  of  3 letters,  one  of  4 letters,  and  one  of 
5 letters,  thus:  ORO  IB  AH  AOLPI,  answering  to  I.A.O. 

These  are  the  Names  borne  on  the  Three  Banners  carried  before  the  face  of  4, 
the  "Great  King"  of  each  quarter.  This  is  always  a Name  of  eight  letters,  and  occupies 
the  centre  of  the  Cross,  beginning  at  the  5th  letter  of  the  Linea  Spiritus  Sancti,  and 
reading  in  a spiral  through  the  two  letters  of  the  Linea  Dei  Patris  Filiique 
immediately  above  the  Linea  Spiritus  Sancti  to  the  8th  letter  of  the  Linea  Spiritus 
Sancti,  through  the  letters  of  the  Linea  Del  immediately  below  the  Linea  Spiritus 
Sancti,  and  ending  with  the  6th  and  7th  letters  of  the  Linea  Spiritus  Sancti.  Thus: 


21 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


✓ 

/ 

u 

1° 

j* 

0 

\T\ 

Bt 

X 

m 

an 

□ 

a 

i 

1 

E9 

The  King  is  a very  powerful  force,  to  be  invoked  with  due  care.  5.6.7.8.9.10. 
The  Six  Seniors,  whose  Names  begin  from  the  6th  and  7th  squares  of  the  Linea 
Spiritus  Sancti,  and  read  outwards  along  the  three  lines  in  each  direction  to  the  edge 
of  the  Tablet.  Each  is  a Name  of  seven  letters.  Of  the  two  formed  in  the  Linea 
Spiritus  Sancti,  one  will  therefore  be  the  first  two  Names  of  God  reversed,  thus  ORO 
IBAH;  Senior,  HABIORO.  The  other  will  be  the  third  Deity  Name,  prefixed  by  the 
last  two  letters  of  the  second,  thus:  ORO  IBAH  AOZPI,  where  AHAOZPI  is  the 


All  these  Names  belong  to  a different  and  higher  plane  than  those  of  the 
elemental  squares,  and  are  invoked  by  the  Hexagram,  not  the  Pentagram.  The  King 
and  Six  Seniors  are  attributed  to  the  Sun  and  Planets. 


22 


VOLUME  TEN 


2.  The  Sephirotic  Crosses. 

The  Vertical  line  read  downwards  gives  a Deity  Name  of  six  letters,  used  to  call 
forth  the  angels  and  spirits  of  the  lesser  angle.  The  cross-bar  from  left  to  right  gives  a 
Deity  Name  of  five  letters  which  is  used  to  command  the  spirits  called  forth  by  the 
first  Name.  These  two  Names  should  be  used  in  a preliminary  invocation  when 
working  with  a square  of  the  lesser  angle.  If  we  reverse  the  Names,  reading  them 
upwards  and  from  right  to  left,  we  get  those  of  the  evil  forces  calling  forth  and 
controlling  the  evil  angels  of  the  lesser  angle,  which  needless  to  say,  should  not  be 
done  - by  the  Z.A.M.  at  any  rate. 

3.  The  coloured  squares. 

From  each  square  a Name  is  formed  by  taking  the  four  letters  in  the  four 
coloured  squares  of  one  horizontal  row  of  the  lesser  angle,  beginning  with  the  letter 
in  the  square  whose  Name  is  desired,  and  reading  left  to  right.  In  the  Kerubic  squares 
of  the  airy  Angle  of  Air  we  have  RZLA  for  the  first;  ZLAR  for  the  second,  LARZ  for 
the  the  third;  ARZL  for  the  fourth.  Remembering  the  rule  as  to  pronunciation,  these 
will  be  ERZODELAH,  ZODELARE,  LARZOD,  ARZODEL. 

From  each  of  these  four-letter  Names  is  formed  a more  powerful  Name  of  five 
letters  which  rules  it,  by  prefixing  a letter  from  the  Tablet  of  Union  as  follows: 

1.  Kerubic  Squares.  Always  (whatever  the  lesser  angle)  the  first  letter  of  the 
appropriate  line  of  the  Tablet  of  Union:  thus  from  RZLA  we  shall  form  ERZLA, 
from  DOPA  in  the  Tablet  of  Fire  BDOPA.  These  Names  from  the  Kerubic  squares 
rule  those  in  the  servient  squares,  and  the  first,  i.e.  that  of  the  left-hand  Kerubic 
square,  is  the  chief  of  them. 

2.  The  Servient  Squares.  The  remaining  letters  of  the  Tablet  of  Union  are  thus 
allotted:  The  second  letter  of  each  line  to  the  16  squares  of  the  angle  of  Air.  The  third 
letter  of  each  line  to  the  16  squares  of  the  angle  of  Water.  The  fourth  letter  of  each  line 
to  the  16  squares  of  the  angle  of  Earth.  The  fifth  letter  of  each  line  to  the  16  squares 
of  the  angle  of  Fire. 

Evil  names  are  formed  by  taking  two  adjoining  letters  instead  of  four, 
prefixing  the  appropriate  Tablet  of  Union  letter  and  reading  from  right  to  left,  or 
left  to  right. 

The  formation  of  these  Names  is  dealt  with  much  more  fully  in  the  "Clavicula 
Tabularum  Enochi,"  one  of  the  more  ancient  of  our  documents  on  the  Tablets. 

CHAPTER  THREE 

THE  ATTRIBUTION  TO  THE  NAME  YHVH 

The  Great  Name  YHVH  is  the  Key  to  the  whole  system  of  Enochian 
attribution  of  the  squares  to  the  elements.  The  letters  of  the  Name  are  thus 
attributed: 


Yod  to  Fire  and  Wands; 

Heh  to  Water  and  Cups; 

Vau  to  Air  and  Swords; 

Heh  (final)  to  Earth  and  Pentacles. 


23 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Once  more  put  your  Tablets  together  as  in  Chapter  One.  Put  the  appropriate 
letter  at  the  outside  corner  of  each,  and  you  will  find  the  Name  YHVH  reads  round 
counter-clockwise,  beginning  with  the  fiery  angle  of  Fire,  and  taking  in  each  tablet 
the  lesser  angle  of  its  own  element.  Then  fill  in  the  letters  appropriate  to  the  lesser 
angles  of  each  tablet  and  you  will  find  them  also  forming  the  Name  in  the  same  way, 
while  in  the  middle  of  the  Four  Tablets  is  the  Name  again,  beginning  with  the  fiery 
lesser  angle  of  Air.  So  much  for  its  general  attribution.  We  now  consider  it  in 
detail. 


The  White  Squares. 

1.  The  Great  Cross.  Divide  each  vertical  and  horizontal  line  into  four  groups 
of  three  adjoining  squares.  Against  the  two  top  groups  and  the  left  hand  group  put 
the  letter  of  the  Name  corresponding  to  the  element  of  the  Great  Tablet.  In  the  case  of 
Air  this  will  be  Vau.  The  name  reads  upwards  and  from  right  to  left,  so  below  Vau 
and  to  its  right  we  put  Heh;  below  that  and  on  its  right  Yod,  leaving  Heh  Final  for 
the  bottom  and  right  hand  groups.  Thus: 


i] 

n 

n 

V 

!.( 

* 

Ti 

"'l 

j 

n 

n 

1 

*1 

a 

A 

.1 

i 

.n_. 

n_ 



it 

rf 

^1 

:l 

n 

n 

Each  square  represents  three  squares  on  the  Tablets.  This  attribution  is 
perfectly  simple  if  it  be  remembered  that  the  letter  consonant  to  the  Tablet  always 
comes  to  the  top  and  left. 


24 


VOLUME  TEN 


2.  The  Sephirotic  Crosses  represent  the  Sephiroth  modified  by  the  letter  of  the 
lesser  angle.  Thus  they  will  be  Kether  of  Vau  in  the  airy  lesser  angle,  of  Heh  in  the 
watery,  and  so  on.  The  attributions  of  these  Crosses  otherwise  are  constant  in  all 
angles  of  all  tablets.  The  coloured  Squares. 

1.  The  Kerubic  Squares.  The  Attribution  of  the  Letters  of  the  Name  to  the  Four 
Kerubic  Squares  of  each  lesser  angle  is  a little  more  complicated,  but  is  still  quite 
easy  if  the  following  rules  are  remembered. 

(a)  The  outside  square  is  always  attributed  to  the  letter  corresponding  to 
the  element  of  the  lesser  angle.  Thus  in  the  four  airy  lesser  angles  the  left  hand  square 
is  attributed  to  Vau,  in  the  four  watery  the  right  hand  square  always  to  Heh;  in  the 
four  earthy  the  left-hand  square  always  to  Heh  (final);  in  the  four  fiery  the  right 
hand  square  always  to  Yod. 

(b)  In  the  Tablets  of  Air  and  Water  the  Name  reads  right  to  left  in  the  two 
upper  quarters,  left  to  right  in  the  two  lower.  In  the  Tablets  of  Earth  and  Fire,  it  reads 
left  to  right  in  the  two  upper  quarters,  right  to  left  in  the  two  lower.  Thus  if  the  four 
tablets  are  placed  together,  we  have  four  rows,  running  thus: 


Applying  these  rules  to  the  four  lesser  angles  of  Air,  we  get: 

Airy  quarter:  Vau  placed  on  the  left,  by  rule  (a)  in  that  order  in  the  other 
three,  by  rule  (b). 

Watery  quarter:  Heh  placed  on  the  right  by  rule  (a)  on  its  left  in  that  order,  by 
rule  (b). 

Earthy  quarter:  Heh  (final)  placed  on  the  left  by  rule  (a)  on  its  right  in  that 
order  by  rule  (b). 

Fiery  quarter:  Yod  placed  on  the  right,  by  rule  (a)  on  its  left  in  that  order  by 
rule  (b). 

In  the  Earth  and  Fire  Tablets  a curious  result  follows.  Take  the  airy  and  watery 
angles.  In  Air,  Vau,  on  the  left  followed  by  Heh,  Yod,  Heh,  brings  Heh  on  the  right; 
and  in  water,  Heh,  on  the  right  similarly  brings  on  the  left,  so  that  the  attribution  of 
the  Kerubic  squares  (and  hence,  as  we  shall  see,  of  the  servient  squares)  is  alike  in  the 
upper  pair  of  angles  and  in  both  Tablets.  The  same  thing  happens  in  the  earthy  and 
fiery  angles.  Heh  on  the  left  brings 


25 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Yod  on  the  right,  and  vice  versa.  So  the  attributions  of  the  Kerubic  squares  of  the 
right  lesser  angles  of  the  two  lower  tablets  have  only  two  arrangements,  viz:  for  the  upper 
and  for  the  lower  angles.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  squares  will  be  identical;  as  we  shall 
see  later,  their  elemental  composition  will  differ  in  each  lesser  angle. 

1.  The  Servient  squares. 

These,  it  will  be  remembered,  are  in  four  vertical  columns  of  four  squares,  or 

four  horizontal  ranks  of  four  squares.  To  avoid  confusion  the  word  "column"  will  be 

used  to  denote  vertical,  and  the  word  "rank"  to  denote  horizontal  rows  invariably. 

The  four  columns  follow  the  order  of  the  four  Kerubic  squares  always.  The  four 
squares  under  Heh  are  also  attributed  to  Heh  and  so  forth.  The  four  ranks  are  also 
dependent  on  the  four  Kerubic  squares,  and  whatever  order  these  are  in,  right  to  left  is 
the  order  of  the  servient  ranks  downwards.  This  rule  is  invariable,  and  does  NOT 
depend  on  whether  the  Name  reads  right  to  left  or  left  to  right.  Examples: 

Air  of  Air  Air  of  Fire 

Heh  (f)  Yod  Heh  Vau  Heh  Yod  Heh  (f)  Vau 

Heh  (f)  1st  Rank  Heh  1st  Rank 

Yod  2nd  Rank  Yod  2nd  Rank 

Heh  3rd  Rank  Heh  (f)  3rd  Rank 

Vau  4th  Rank  Vau  4th  Rank 


Thus  each  servient  square  has  a double  attribution,  by  column  and  rank,  no  two 
being  alike  in  the  same  lesser  angle.  We  may  get  Heh,  Heh  column  and  Vau,  Vau  Rank, 
or  Vau,  Vau  Column  and  Heh,  Heh  Rank.  The  other  attributions  will  be  quite  different 
in  the  two  cases  (in  one  case  to  Pisces,  the  Moon  of  the  Tarot  Trumps;  Qoph  and  Laetitia; 
in  the  other  to  Aquarius,  the  Star;  Tzaddi  and  Tristitia.) 

But  these  other  attributions  are  dependent  on  those  to  the  Name,  which  are,  as  has 
been  said,  the  key  to  the  system,  and  should  be  thoroughly  mastered  before  going  on  to 
work  out  the  corresponding  Astrological,  Tarot,  and  Geomantic  attributions  as 
explained  in  the  next  chapter. 

CHAPTER  FOUR 

THE  ASTROLOGICAL,  TAROT,  HEBREW  AND  GEOMANTIC  ATTRIBUTIONS 
The  White  Squares. 

1.  The  Great  Crosses  refer  to  the  36  Decans  of  the  Zodiac.  The  squares  allotted  to  Yod 
will  be  fiery  signs,  those  to  Heh  watery  signs,  those  to  Vau  airy,  those  to  Heh  final 
earthy. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  attributing  the  letters  of  the  Name  we  took  groups  of  three 
squares.  Each  group  of  three  represents  one  sign,  the  separate  squares  being  allotted  to 
the 

three  Decans  as  ruled  by  the  Planets.  The  Decans  of  each  sign  go  downwards  or  from  left 
to 


26 


VOLUME  TEN 


right  in  order.  The  four  Kerubic  signs  and  their  Decans  occupy  the  Linea 
Spiritus  Sancti,  the  four  Cardinal  signs  the  left  side  of  the  Linea  Dei  Patris  Filiique, 
and  the  four  mutable  the  right  side.  Those  familiar  with  the  Tarot  papers  will 
remember  that  the  Decans  start  with  the  first  Decan  of  Leo  ruled  by  Saturn,  the 
planets  following  in  their  order,  except  that  Mars  rules  the  last  decan  of  Pisces  and  the 
first  of  Aries.  The  36  smaller  cards  of  the  Tarot  are  also  allotted  to  these  squares,  each 
in  that  of  its  own  decan;  note  that  the  2,  3,  and  4 of  each  suit  go  with  the  Cardinal 
sign;  5,  6,  7 with  the  Kerubic;  and  8,  9,  and  10  with  the  Mutable. 

Thus  in  the  Air  Tablet  we  get: 


LIME* 

sr»  KjTus 
SAnctilS 


X.IN6A  Dei  PATRisriLiiQue, 


KERUBic 

OR. 

fiyEP  S»C*KS 


THE  GREAT  CROSS  OF  THE  AIR  TABLET 


27 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


2.  The  Sephirotic  Crosses. 

The  top  square,  and  the  five  squares  of  the  Cross-bar  are  allotted  to  six  of  the  seven 
planets,  excluding  Saturn.  The  arrangement  is  constant,  but  is  not  the  usual  attribution  of  the 
Planets  to  the  Sephiroth  as  on  the  Hexagram.  It  is  as  follows: 


KCTHER, 


4 

5> 

cf 

o 

? 

¥ 

BINftH  GEBURAM  TtPHAK-ETM  CWESEO  CHOK*ftH 


The  corresponding  Hebrew  letters  and  Tarot  Trumps  are  allotted  to  these  squares. 

The  remaining  four  squares  have  no  astrological  attribution,  but  in  addition  to  the  six 
trumps  the  ten  squares  of  each  Cross  are  allotted  to  the  Ace  and  small  cards  of  the  suit 
attributed  to  the  element  of  the  lesser  angle. 

The  Coloured  squares. 

1.  The  Kerubic  squares.  These  are  allotted,  as  their  Name  implies  to  the  four 
Kerubim  whose  emblems  follow  the  order  of  the  Letters  of  the  Name:  to  Yod;  to  Heh;  to  Vau; 
to  Heh  (final)  in  each  lesser  angle.  They  are  also  allotted  to  the  four  Court  Cards  of  the  Tarot 
suit  which  corresponds  to  the  lesser  angle,  Swords  to  Air,  Cups  to  Water,  Pentacles  to  Earth 
and  Wands  to  Fire  on  each  Tablet.  Of  the  four  Court  Cards  themselves  the  King  is  attributed 
to  Yod,  the  Queen  to  Heh,  the  Knight  to  Vau,  and  the  Knave  to  Heh  (final). 

2.  The  Servient  Squares. 

These  are  allotted  as  follows:  to  the  Twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  with  the  symbols  of 
Air,  Water  and  Fire,  and  Saturn  which  is  also  Earth  and  to  the  corresponding  16  Trumps, 
Hebrew  Letters  and  Geomantic  figures. 

(a)  The  Columns  go  by  triplicity  according  to  the  element  of  the  Kerubic  square  at 
the  head  of  the  column,  e.g.  under  Yod  and  Leo  will  be  Aries,  Leo,  Sagittarius  and  Fire,  with 
Heh,  Tau,  Samekh,  and  Shin,  Emperor,  Strength,  Temperance,  and  Last  Judgment,  and  so  with 
the  other  columns. 

(b)  The  ranks  go  by  Quality: 

To  Yod  and  Fire  are  allotted  the  four  Cardinal  Signs;  Heh 
and  Water  are  allotted  the  four  Kerubic  Signs 

Vau  and  Air  are  allotted  the  four  Mutable  Signs 

Heh  (final)  and  Earth  are  allotted  the  four  Elemental  symbols. 

Thus  under  Heh  in  the  Yod  rank  will  be,  Cancer,  the  Chariot,  Cheth,  and  Populus.  Thus 
under  Heh  in  the  Heh  rank  will  be,  Scorpio,  Death,  Nun,  and  Rubeus.  Thus  under  Heh  in  the 
Vau  rank  will  be,  Pisces,  the  Moon,  Qoph,  and  Laetitia.  Thus  under  Heh  in  the  Heh  (final) 
rank  will  be.  Water,  Hanged  Man,  Mem,  Via  and  so  on. 


28 


VOLUME  TEN 


I work  out  the  Water  Angle  of  Air  as  an  example: 

n in 


n 

n 

The  following  Table  of  Attributions,  repeated  though  it  is  for  the  most  part 
from  earlier  knowledge  which  should  be  familiar,  may  be  useful  for  reference  in 
working  out  the  Squares. 

In  the  following  Table  the  Column  will  be  in  bold  type,  under  which  will  follow 
in  order,  the  Rank,  the  Letter,  the  Trump,  Astrological  symbol  and  finally  the 
Geomantic  figure. 


KNIGHT 

w 

PRINCESS 

nn  r 

ACE 

l/lAV 

Kino 

AA 

Q UEEAl 

(king)  or  Cur’S 

of  GUPS 

OF 

CUPS 

(ptilNCt  ) OF  CliRS 

of  CUPS 

D 

cT 

O 

? 

£ 

nr  2 

mi:; 

niNfin 

ncn 

H22n 

5 OF  CUPS 

5 ofGUP5 

6 or  CURS 

2/  of  CUPS 

2.  ofCUPS 

STRENGTH 

b 

HIEROPHANT 

rm 

STAR 

ms 

Death 

7 of  cups 

2 

ft 

W 

TEMPERANCE 

TTJ 

HERMIT 

T.n 

X 

LOVERS. 

JE 

MOON 

2 

' " 

g ofCURS 

m 

1 - - 

P 

A 

A 

V 

LA'ST 

JUDGMENT 

UNIVERSE 

nr 

FOOL 

HANGED 

mN 

I2T 

n 

9 of  ci/PS 

N 

2 

<Y> 

=2= 

EMPEROR 

PEV/L 

m2‘?2 

JUSTICE 

chariot 

n 

. - 

> 

10  or  CUPS 

5 V 

n 

29 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


BASIC  ATTRIBUTIONS 

Vau. 

Heh  (f),  Aleph,  Fool,  Air,  Fortuna  Minor.  Sephirotic  Cross  (S.C.) 
Chokmah,  Beth,  Magician,  Mercury,  no  figure. 

S.  C. 

Binah,  Gimel,  High  Priestess,  Moon,  no  figure. 

S.  C. 

Chesed,  Daleth,  Empress,  Venus,  no  figure. 

Yod. 

Yod,  Heh,  Emperor,  Aries,  Puer. 

Heh  (final). 

Heh,  Vau,  Hierophant,  Taurus,  Career. 

Vau. 

Vau,  Zayin,  Lovers,  Gemini,  Albus. 

Heh. 

Yod,  Cheth,  Chariot,  Cancer,  Populus. 

Yod. 

Heh,  Teth,  Strength,  Leo,  Fortuna  Major. 

Heh  (final). 

Vau,  Yod,  Hermit,  Virgo,  Conjunctio. 

S.  C. 

Kether,  Caph,  Wheel  of  Fortune,  Jupiter,  no  figure.  Vau. 

Yod,  Lamed,  Justice,  Libra,  Puella. 

Heh. 

Heh  (f),  Mem,  Hanged  Man,  Water,  Via. 

Heh. 

Heh,  Nun,  Death,  Scorpio,  Rubeus. 

Yod. 

Vau,  Samekh,  Temperance,  Sagittarius,  Acquisitio.  Heh  (final). 
Yod,  Ayin,  Devil,  Capricorn,  Career. 

S.  C. 

Geburah,  Peh,  Tower,  Mars,  no  figure. 

Vau. 

Heh,  Tzaddi,  Star,  Aquarius,  Tristitia. 

Heh. 

Vau,  Qoph,  Moon,  Pisces,  Laetitia. 

S.  C. 

Tiphareth,  Resh,  Sun,  no  figure. 


30 


VOLUME  TEN 


Yod. 

Heh,  Shin,  Last  Judgement,  Fire,  Cauda 
Draconis.  Heh  (final). 

Heh  (f),  Tau,  Universe,  Saturn  (Earth),  Caput  Draconis. 

GENERAL  NOTE  ON  THE  TAROT  ATTRIBUTIONS. 

Since  156  equals  78  x 2,  it  might  have  been  expected  that  each  Tarot  card 
would  come  twice  on  each  Tablet  and  no  more,  but  it  will  be  seen  that  this  is  not 
so,  for: 

(a)  The  22  Trumps  occur  4 times,  once  in  each  lesser  angle.  The  12 
allotted  to  Simple  Letters,  the  3 allotted  to  the  Three  Mothers,  and  the  Universe 
allotted  to  Tau  and  Saturn,  come  in  the  Servient  squares,  and  the  other  six  of  the 
Double  Letters  on  the  six  uppermost  squares  of  the  Sephirotic  Cross.  The  apparent 
anomaly  of  the  position  of  Saturn  is  thus  explained  in  the  "Book  of  the  Concourse 
of  Lorces".  "Now  in  the  attribution  of  the  Tarot  Keys  hereunto,  Universe  is 
attributed  to  Earth  and  Saturn  though  one  of  the  seven  'Lords  who  wander'  is  yet  here 
classed  with  those  who  abide,  because  he  is  the  heaviest  of  the  seven,  and  thus  formeth 
a link  between  the  Wanderers  and  the  Abiders." 

The  reason  for  the  other  attributions  are  also  given  at  some  length  in  the  same 
paper,  and  it  is  not  worth-while  to  copy  them  here. 

(b)  The  Aces  and  Court  Cards  occur  once  only,  on  the  Kether  squares  of 
the  Sephirotic  Cross,  and  the  four  Kerubic  squares  of  each  lesser  Angle. 

(c)  The  36  small  cards  occur  twice  each,  on  the  Great  Cross,  and  on  the 
nine  lower  Sephiroth  of  the  Sephirotic  Crosses. 


TAQLZT  UNION 


£ 

71 

7 

R 

V 

H 

C 

0 

M 

A 

N 

A 

nI 

T 

IA 

B 

I 

T 

0 

The  Tablet  of  Union. 

Is  allotted  to  the  Aces  and  Court  Cards  thus: 


A 

V 

V 
A 


© A V V A 


IKE 

SUlopOS 

Prince 

Sujopos 

queen 

Su/O/tQS 

PKWC&S 

Si-JOPDS 

King 

Su/OAOS 

/tee 

Cups 

PPttfce 

Cups 

Queers 

curs 

A*wce  Sr 
CUPS 

kin  a 

Cups 

qce 

fENrs 

PP-ttice 

petrrs 

QUEEN 

petfns 

PPtNCff? 

perns 

Kin  6 
pairs 

/\ce 

U/mo  s 

wands 

QUEEN 

(JflNDS 

r*wc.  ks 

VPMos 

Kink. 

31 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  foregoing  methods  of  attributing  the  Enochian  squares  should  be  thoroughly 
grasped  before  proceeding  further,  as  it  is  essential  to  understand  the  principles  before 
beginning  the  working  out  of  the  Pyramids  of  each  square. 

CHAPTER  FIVE 

THE  PYRAMIDS  OF  THE  SQUARES 

We  have  hitherto  treated  each  square  as  a single  whole  and  flat,  but  in  reality  it  represents 
a Pyramid,  shaped  like  the  Pyramid  of  the  elements  in  the  Philosophus  Grade  with  a square 
base  and  four  sides  composed  of  equilateral  triangles  truncated  or  cut  off  so  as  to  leave  a flat 
top.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  attribution  of  the  sides  of  these  Pyramids.  They  will,  among 
them,  include  all  the  attributions  of  the  square  already  worked  out  in  the  previous  chapter 
(save  that  the  Letter  of  the  Name  on  which  the  rest  depend  does  not  actually  appear);  in 
addition,  each  side  of  the  Pyramid  is  coloured  according  to  its  own  appropriate  element,  or 
left  white  for  Spirit.  Hence  it  by  no  means  follows  that  a square  from  the  airy  angle  of  Air 
will  have  an  all  yellow  pyramid  - only  two  (one  Kerubic  and  one  Servient)  in  fact,  do  so.  But 
every  square  of  the  Air  Tablet  has  at  least  one  airy  side  to  its  Pyramid;  and  every  square  of 
the  Airy  Angle  of  any  Tablet  has  at  least  one  airy  side;  every  square  in  Air  of  Air  having  at 
least  two  airy  sides  (similarly  in  Water  of  Water,  Earth  of  Earth,  and  Fire  of  Fire).  The 
elements  of  the  Tablet  and  of  the  Lesser  Angle,  therefore,  always  predominate  over  the 
others. 

For  example,  in  the  airy  angle  of  Air,  out  of  30  pyramids,  with  120  sides:  (This 
Schema  applies  mutatis  mutandis  to  the  lesser  angle  corresponding  to  the  Element  of  the 
Tablet  itself.  Also  note  that  the  Earthy  sides  may  be  coloured  in  the  four  colours  of  Malkuth, 
Queen  scale,  if  preferred.) 

70  sides  are  yellow  for 
Air  10  sides  are  blue  for 
Water  10  sides  are  black  for 
Earth  10  sides  are  red  for 
Fire  10  sides  are  white  for 
Spirit 

10  sides  are  either  white  or  in  the  Sephirotic  colours  from  the 
Minutum  Mundum. 

In  Water  of  Air: 

40  sides  are  yellow  for 
Air  40  sides  are  blue  for 
Water  10  sides  are  black  for 
Earth  10  sides  are  red  for 
Fire  10  sides  are  white  for 
Spirit 

10  are  either  white  or  in  Sephirotic  colour. 


32 


VOLUME  TEN 


On  a flat  surface,  the  Pyramid  is  represented  by  dividing  the  square  into  four 
triangles,  leaving  a small  square  in  the  centre  to  represent  the  flat  top.  On  this,  if 
desired,  the  appropriate  Theban  letter  may  be  placed. 


The  Pyramid  is  supposed  to  be  in  position  on  the  Tablet,  so  that  Triangle  No. 
2 is  towards  the  top  of  the  Tablet.  To  work  out  the  pyramid  of  any  square 
completely,  it  is  necessary  to  know  the  attributions  of  the  four  Triangles  and  the 
element  of  each.  They  are  usually  given  in  the  order  shown. 

The  White  Squares.  No.  2 is  always  Spirit,  and  white. 

The  Great  Cross. 

No.  1.  Sign  of  Zodiac,  small  card  of  Tarot. 

No.  2.  Spirit. 

No.  3.  Planet  of  Decan. 

No.  4.  Elemental  Symbol  of  the  Great  Tablet  concerned. 

I give  the  three  left  hand  squares  of  the  Linea  Spiritus  Sancti  of  the  Air 
Tablet: 


For  the  Great  Cross  there  are  two  alternative  methods;  for  both  of  which 
there  is  high  authority. 

In  both  No.  2 is  left  white,  and  No.  4 coloured  according  to  the  element  of  the 
Tablet.  It  is  only  in  the  two  side  triangles  that  they  differ. 


33 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


(a)  No.  1 may  be  coloured  in  the  elemental  colour  of  the  Triplicity  to  which  the  sign 
belongs,  and  No.  3 in  that  of  the  Triplicity  ruled  by  the  Planet  i.e.,  Saturn,  Mercury  for  Air; 
Jupiter,  Sun  for  Fire;  Venus,  Moon  for  Earth,  and  Mars  for  Water. 

This  method  keeps  the  colouring  throughout  the  Tablets  to  the  elemental  colours  of  the 
King’s  Scale,  the  attributions  being  always  painted  in  the  complementary  colour  to  the 
ground. 

(b)  No.  1 may  be  coloured  in  the  colour  of  the  Sign  itself,  and  No.  3 in  that  of  the  Planet 
itself,  according  to  the  Minutum  Mundum  diagram.  In  the  set  of  Tablets  worked  out  for 
reference,  I adopted  (a)  but  give  here  one  square  worked  out  in  both  ways  for  comparison.  I 
take  the  second  decan  of  Libra  on  the  Air  Tablet. 


GROUND 

P \JKnt  JY' A|06£S 


The  Sephirotic  Crosses: 

No.  1.  Elemental  Emblem  of  Great  Tablet 

No.  2.  Emblem  of  Spirit 

No.  3.  Elemental  Emblem  of  lesser  angle. 

No.  4.  Name  of  Sephirah,  modified  by  letter  of  Name  in  lesser  Angle.  Tarot 
Ace  or  small  card  of  suit.  In  first  6 only  Planet,  Hebrew  Letter,  and  Tarot 
Trump. 

Colouring: 

No.  1.  Elemental  colour  of  Great  Tablet. 

No.  2.  White. 

No.  3.  Elemental  colour  of  Lesser  Angle. 

No.  4.  Either  white  or  in  colour  of  Sephirah  from  Minutum  Mundum. 
Square  of  Chesed  in  Fiery  Lesser  Angle  of  Air. 


34 


VOLUME  TEN 


The  bottom  Triangle  may  be  coloured  blue  and  lettered  in  orange  if  preferred. 

The  Coloured  Squares  including  the  Kerubic  and  Servient  squares. 

No.  1.  Tarot  Court  Card  of  appropriate  suit  of  lesser  angle.  Card  will 
correspond  with  Kerubic  Emblem  in  3. 

No.  2.  Elemental  Emblem  of  Great  Tablet. 

No.  3.  Kerub  answering  to  Letter  of  Name  to  which  the  square  is  attributed.  No. 
4.  Elemental  emblem  of  lesser  angle. 

Colouring. 

No.  1.  Agrees  with  No.  3.  (This  appears  to  be  correct;  in  working  out  the 
Tablets  for  the  Order  I coloured  No.  1 of  the  Kerubic  Squares  according  to  Element  of 
Suit,  instead  of  Element  of  Court  Card  corresponding  to  Kerub.  This  is  probably 
wrong,  and  the  diagrams  are  incorrect  in  this  respect.) 

No.  2.  Elemental  Colour  of  Great  Tablet. 

No.  3.  Elemental  Colour  of  Kerub. 

No.  4.  Elemental  Colour  of  Lesser  Angle. 

The  Square  of  Eagle  Kerub  in  watery  lesser  Angle  of  Air: 


35 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Servient  Squares: 

No.  1.  Elemental  Emblem  of  Great  Tablet.  Astrological 
attribution.  No.  2.  Elemental  Emblem  of  letter  ruling  Column.  Tarot 
Trump.  No.  3.  Elemental  Emblem  of  Lesser  angle.  Geomantic  Figure. 

No.  4.  Elemental  Emblem  of  Letter  ruling  Rank.  Hebrew  letter 
corresponding  to  Trump  in  2. 

Each  triangle  is  coloured  according  to  its  elemental  emblem.  This  method  may  sound 
fearfully  complex,  but  it  is  actually  much  easier  than  it  sounds.  It  takes  far  less  time  to  work  out  a 
square  than  to  describe  how  it  is  done. 

Let  us  take  at  random  the  3rd  square  in  the  3rd  rank  of  the  2nd  Lesser  angle  of  Air.  (I 
have  not  at  this  moment  the  slightest  idea  what  it  is.) 

Air  Tablet  - therefore  No.  1.  Yellow 

Water  angle  - therefore  No.  3.  Blue.  Heh  on  right  of  Kerubim,  therefore 
Vau  at  head  of  our  column,  and  Heh  (final)  for  3rd  rank. 

Therefore  No.  2.  Yellow,  No.  4.  black  or  citrine.  Air  column,  earth 
rank,  therefore  Air,  Fool,  Aleph,  and  Fortuna  Minor  and  we  can  put  the 
square  together  thus: 


By  pure  accident  I lit  on  a square  which  illustrates  a doubtful  point,  viz:  whether  black 
should  be  used  throughout  for  earth,  or  whether  the  four  colours  of  Malkuth  from  the  Minutum 
Mundum  are  more  correct.  It  introduces  the  Queen's  Scale,  which  seems  against  it.  but  they  are 
used  in  the  Sigil  of  the  Earth  Tablet,  and  I have  used  them  in  working  out  the  complete  Tablets.  If 
they  are  used,  citrine  should  be  used  for  the  lesser  angle  of  earth  in  the  Air  Tablet  wherever  the 
lesser  angle  Element  determines  the  colour.  Also  wherever  in  any  angle  Earth  column  crosses 
Air  rank  or  vice  versa.  So  with  the  olive,  russet  and  black. 

The  Tablet  of  Union. 

Nos.  2 and  4 always  Spirit. 

No.  I.  Element  of  column  (Spirit  in  first 
column)  No.  3.  Element  of  rank  and  so  coloured. 


36 


VOLUME  TEN 


£QUAEUe  A 
orexAgJP 


In  the  first  part  of  Examination  F the  Candidate  may  be  required  to  work  out  all  the 
attributions  of  any  lesser  angle  or  squares  selected  by  the  Examiner.  It  is  hoped  that  the  foregoing 
will  be  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  do  so. 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  CONCOURSE  OF  THE  FORCES 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 


It  is  demonstrated  in  the  book  called  "T"  that  when  the  10  Sephiroth  in  their 
grouping  which  is  called  the  Tree  of  Life  are  projected  in  a Sphere  (Kether  coinciding 
with  the  North  Pole,  Malkuth  coinciding  with  the  South  Pole,  the  Pillar  of  Mildness 
with  the  Axis),  then  the  Pillars  of  Severity  and  of  Mercy  are  quadrupled,  i.e.  there  are 
5 Pillars  instead  of  3 Pillars. 

The  same  scheme  is  therefore  applicable  to  the  Celestial  heavens,  and  the  mode 
of  the  governance  of  these  Tablets  in  the  Heavens  is  also  set  forth  in  the  Book  "T."  But 
as  before  and  there  is  said,  the  rule  of  these  Four  Tablets,  Terrestrial  as  well  as  in  the 
Heavens,  is  in  the  Spaces  between  the  4 Pillars.  That  is  between  the  double  Pillars  of 
Severity  and  Mercy.  In  these  vast  spaces  at  the  ends  of  the  Universe  are  these  Tablets  placed 
as  Watch-Towers,  and  therein  is  their  dominion  limited  on  either  side  by  the  Sephirotic 
Pillars,  and  having  the  great  central  cross  of  each  Tablet  coinciding  with  one  of  the  4 
Tiphareth  points  in  the  Celestial  Heavens.  Therefore  even  in  the  small  squares  into 
which  each  Tablet  is  divided,  each  represents  a vast  area  of  dominion,  having  the 
correlation  therefore  in  the  Universe,  in  the  Planets,  in  our  Earth,  in  the  Fixed  Stars,  and 
even  in  Man,  in  animals,  vegetables,  and  minerals. 

A knowledge  of  these  tablets  will  then,  if  complete,  afford  an  understanding  of 
the  Laws  which  govern  the  whole  creation.  The  dominion  of  the  Tablet  of  Union  is 
above  that  of  the  4 Terrestrial  Tablets  and  towards  the  North  of  the  Universe. 

The  difference  between  the  mystical  names  of  the  Angels  of  the  Tablets  and  the 
Hebrew  Names  such  as  Kerub,  Auriel,  and  Michael,  etc.  are  here  explained.  Those 
Hebrew  Angel  Names  which  have  been  taught  unto  the  First  Order  are  rather  general 
than  particular,  attending  especially  to  an  office  or  rule  whereunto  such  an  Angel  is 
allotted.  As  it  is  written:  "One  Angel  doth  not  undertake  two  messages."  For  these 
mighty  Angels  do  rather  shew  forth  their  power  in  the  governance  of  the  4 Great 
Sephirotic  Columns  as  aforesaid,  viz:  the  double  columns  of  Severity  and  Mercy  when 
projected  in  a sphere,  and  this  also  is  under  the  Presidency  of  the  Sephiroth.  But  the 
Names  of  the  Angels  of  the  Tablets  do  rather  express  particular  adaptations  of  Forces 
shewing  forth  all  variations  and  diverse  combinations  of  those  which  are  in  the  other 
case  manifested  in  a more  general  way. 

Notanda.  Of  the  letters  of  the  Tablets,  some  be  written  as  capitals.  These  are  the 
initial  letters  of  certain  Angels  names  drawn  forth  by  another  method,  not  now  explained, 
and  the  offices  of  these  do  not  concern  a Z.A.M.  The  mystical  meaning  of  certain  letters 
which  are  reversed  is  also  not  now  declared. 


38 


VOLUME  TEN 


Some  squares  have  more  than  one  letter.  In  these  cases,  either  letter  characterises 
the  Square.  The  higher  one  is  preferable.  The  lower  is  weaker.  If  two  letters  are  side  by  side, 
the  presumption  is  in  favour  of  equality.  Where  two  letters  are  in  one  square,  the  best  plan  is 
to  employ  both.  But  one  alone  may  be  used  with  effect. 


OF  THE  FOUR  MIGHTY  AND  VAST  OVERSEER  ANGELS  OF  THESE 

TABLETS 

It  will  be  found  written  in  the  Clavicula  Tabularum  Enochi: 

"Now  we  are  to  understand  that  there  are  4 Angel  overseers,  each  one  of  these 
Angels  is  a mighty  Prince,  a Mighty  Angel  of  the  Lord  and  they  are  of  Him.  They  are  as 
chief  Watchmen  and  Overseers,  set  over  several  and  respective  parts  of  the  World,  viz: 
East,  West,  North,  South,  as  under  the  Almighty,  their  Governor,  Protector,  Defender.  And 
the  seals  and  authority  of  whom  are  confirmed  in  the  beginning  of  the  world.  To  them 
belong  Four  Characters  being  tokens  of  the  Son  of  God,  by  whom  all  things  are  made  in 
the  Creation  and  are  the  natural  marks  of  his  Holiness." 

Now  thou  shalt  observe  in  the  Book  of  the  Concourse  of  the  Forces  that  unto  each  of 
the  4 Tablets  of  the  Elements  is  there  a sign  annexed;  i.e.:  Unto  the  Tablet  of  Air  a symbol  of  a 
T having  four  Yods  above  it. 

Unto  the  Tablet  of  Water  being  a Cross  Potent,  having  two  letters  b.b.,  a figure  4 
and  a figure  6,  in  the  angles  thereof. 

Unto  the  Tablet  of  Earth,  a simple  Cross  Potent  without  additions. 

Unto  the  Fire  Tablet  there  is  a circle  having  12  rays  allotted. 


These  be  the  sacred  seals  or  characters  alluded  to 
thou  shalt  know  that  these  4 seals  be  taken  from  the 
according  unto  "one  certain  guidance  and  letters  which 
Ameth  vel  Sigillum  Dei'  that  is  the  Book  of  Truth,  or  the 
knowledge  of  a Z.A.M. 


in  the  preceeding  quotation.  Now 
"Sigillum  Dei  Ameth"  after  and 
is  there  set  forth,  and  this  Tiber 
Seal  of  God"  entereth  not  into  the 


39 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  letters  of  the  Word  Ameth,  Truth,  are  the  three  Elements,  Earth,  Water  and  Air 
for  Tau  is  Earth,  as  Aleph,  Mem,  Shin,  are  Air,  Water,  and  Fire. 

These  three  letters  or  Elements  are  disposed  together  for  the  receiving  of  that  Divine 
Fire  which  should  enlighten  them  when  thus  harmonised  so  that  therein  may  be 
manifested  which  is  Emethsh  or  Amethsh,  herein  as  the  Shin  of  the  Fire  Divine  entered, 
and  this  order  of  the  Letters  is  that  of  the  Angles  of  the  Tablets,  and  of  the  4 Tablets 
themselves,  viz: 

First  - is  Air  and  Aleph. 

Second  - is  Water  and  Mem. 

Third  - is  Earth  and  Tau. 

Fourth  - is  Fire  and  Shin. 

This  again  is  the  Order  of  the  Elements  in  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  of  the  Qabalah. 
From  these  4 Sigils  there  are  the  4 Names  drawn  forth  as  may  follow  in  order. 

From  the  Tau  with  4 Yods  or  a (T)  surmounted  by  four  Yods  of  the  Sigillum  Ameth, 
(T)  and  4 other  letters  counting  by  the  rule  of  4,  22,  20,  18:  this  yields  T'haolog  - Tahaoelog, 
for  the  Air  Tablet.  (The  4th  Square  each  time  from  the  last  will  shew  the  letter  and  figure 
given.  You  are  not  to  count,  say  22  or  20  or  18,  but  4 only.  N.O.M.) 

These  names  are  not  to  be  lightly  pronounced. 

From  the  cross  in  whose  angles  are  2 (b's)  a 6 and  a 4 - see  previous  diagram,  note  that 
(T)  equals  a (t),  while  the  cross  equals  (th). 

The  counting  goes  from  Cross  to  (h),  then  b4,  then  6b,  and  continues  by  six.  4 is  Th, 
22  is  (h),  (b)  is  4,  (y)  is  14,  6 is  (b),  6 is  (A),  (a)  is  5,  (t)  is  9,  (n)  is  14,  then  (n)  finishing  the 
counting,  yielding  the  name  Thahebyobeaatanun  for  the  Water  Tablet. 

To  explain  further,  four  moves  from  (T)  yields  22.  (h)  (b)  4 is  specially  put;  (y)  14 
moves  to  22,  from  (t).  Then  6 (b)  is  special.  From  6 (b)  it  is  all  plain  moving  by  6 to 
right. 

From  the  Cross  equals  (th)  4,  and  proceed  counting  in  each  case  forwards  as  by 
numbers,  and  proceed  counting  in  each  case  forwards.  4 is  (Th),  22  is  (h),  1 1 is  (a),  (a)  is  5,  (o) 
is  10,  (t)  is  1 1,  with  a final  letter  of  (h)  which  yields  the  name  Thahaaothe,  for  the  Earth 
Tablet. 

(Count  here  not  by  4 or  6,  but  by  numbers  given  to  right  if  over;  to  left  if 

under.) 

From  the  Fire  Tablet  Sigil  count  to  the  middle  circle  which  is  the  Greek  Omega,  the 
long  (o),  and  proceed  in  the  Sigillum  Ameth  counting  12  in  each  case,  for  the  number  of 
rays  is  12  around  the  circle.  6 is  Omega,  12  is  (h),  (o)  is  8,  (o)  is  17,  (o)  is  20,  (h)  is  12,  6 is  (A), 
(t)  is  9,  ending  with  an  (n),  which  yields  the  name  OhOOOhaatan  for  the  Fire  Tablet. 

(Count  12  in  any  case  neglecting  the  numbers  over  or  under,  always  forward.  S.A.) 

THE  LAW  OF  THE  ALLOTMENT  OF  THE  ANGLES,  CROSSES 
AND  SQUARES  OF  THESE  TABLETS. 

The  key  of  all  and  every  allotment  and  combinations  of  the  various  subdivisions  of 
the  4 Terrestrial  Tablets  is  to  be  found  in  the  transposition  of  the  Letters  of  the  Great  Name. 
For  the  position  of  these  Tablets  together  with  the  Tablet  of  Union  in  the  midst  and 
governing 


40 


VOLUME  TEN 


them,  recalleth  the  Pentagram  with  the  allotment  of  its  angles  under  the  presidency  of 
the  Great  Name  Yeheshuah.  (The  colours  in  the  King  Scale  are  White,  Red,  Blue,  Yellow, 
and  Black.) 

Each  Colour  is  again  subdivided  into  its  4 Lesser  Angles,  representing  the  other  3 
elements  mingled  with  and  differentiating  the  Elements  of  the  Tablet  itself  under  the 
Presidency  of  the  5 Crosses  therein  thus: 


1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

— 4— 

i 

1 

1 

1 

1 

i 

i 

i 

Also  the  word  Aemeth  is  compounded  of  the  1st  letter  of  the  Alphabet  and  the 
last  letter,  and  of  a middle  one,  as  though  we  affirm  that  Truth  is  to  be  found  by  the 
reconciliation  of  the  extremes  through  the  knowledge  of  the  means. 

Forget  not  that  this  Aleph  is  the  Spiritual  and  Etherial,  and  Tau  is  the 
Universe,  and  Mem  is  the  Sacrificial  Man,  placed  between  them  so  as  to  affirm  the 
Reconciliation  of  the  Natural  to  the  Spiritual  through  self-sacrifice.  And  lastly  that 
when  Shin  is  added,  there  is  an  affirmation  of  the  judgment  set  and  the  Book  of  Life 
opened  which  is  in  YHVH  and  that  the  Keys  answering  unto  these  4 letters  are: 

Aleph  is  the  Spirit  of  Aether 

Mem  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Mighty  Waters. 

Tau  is  The  Great  One  of  the  Night  of 
Time.  Shin  is  the  Spirit  of  Primal  Fire. 

As  it  would  affirm  firstly,  the  Aetherial  and  Divine  Spirit  brooding  over  the 
mighty  Waters  in  the  Silence  of  the  Abyss  of  the  Night  of  that  Great  One,  before 
Creation,  and  before  Time.  And  lastly,  the  Judgment  of  the  Universe  through  Fire, 
when  the  End  of  the  Ages  shall  be.  Therefore  is  it  that  the  numbering  of  the  Angles 
followeth  this  order  of: 


Shin  is  Fire. 

Tau  is  Earth. 

Mem  is  Water. 

Aleph  is  Air. 

The  above  is  the  correct  order  and  not  the  order  of  the  attribution  of  the 
Elements  to  Tetragrammaton. 

Yet  perchance  thou  mayst  say,  wherefore  are  the  letters  of  the  name 
allotted  as  in  the 


41 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


usual  attribution  to  YHVH,  since  its  letters  are  applied  in  a different  manner 
in  the  Rose  and  in  the  Sepher  Yetzirah,  YHVH  is  equal  to  Aries,  Taurus,  Aries, 
Virgo. 

Now  the  reason  is  this.  It  is  true  that  Aleph,  Mem,  Tau,  Shin  equal  Air, 
Water,  Earth,  and  Fire,  the  purely  terrestrial  action,  but  YHVH  is  a certain  Name 
added  unto  them  to  control  their  vehemence.  So  that  over  the  violent  Element  Fire  is 
placed  the  gentle  letter  of  Yod  - Virgo  to  calm  and  purify  its  raging.  Over  the  quiet 
and  peace  loving  element  Water  is  placed  the  strong  letter  Heh  - Aries  to  awaken  it 
unto  a fitting  display  of  energy.  Over  the  changing  and  whirling  element  of  Air  is 
placed  the  firm  and  resolute  Vau,  - Taurus.  Over  the  stable  and  abiding  earth  is 
placed  the  exciting  force  of  Heh  - Aries. 

So  that  with  these  letters  from  among  the  12  Simple  Letters  hath  the 
Almighty  administered  the  government  and  combination  of  the  Elements.  Therefore 
is  it  that  in  these  Tablets  sheweth  the  law  of  their  combination,  and  not  Aleph, 
Mem,  Tau,  and  Shin.  Therefore  is  it  that  the  name  YHVH  is  a name  of  vehemence 
of  all  the  Elements  and  this  vehemence  is  held  bound  by  it.  But  when  the  holy  letter 
Shin  of  the  Divine  Spirit  is  placed  therein  it  is  rendered  calm,  seeing  that  the 
judgment  is  then  set  and  the  Book  of  Life  opened.  Herein  also  is  a great  Arcanum  for 
it  is  a knowledge  of  the  mystery  of  life. 

Now  each  of  these  Terrestrial  Tablets  of  the  Elements  is  divided  into  4 Lesser 
Angles  by  the  Great  Central  Cross  which  cometh  forth  as  from  the  Gate  of  the 
Watch  Tower  of  the  Element  itself.  The  Horizontal  Line  of  each  of  these  Three 
Great  Crosses  is  named  "Linea  Spiritus  Sancti."  The  Perpendicular  is  called  "Linea 
Dei,"  the  Line  of  God,  of  Father  and  Son,  the  "Patris  Filiique,"  Macroprosopus  and 
Microprosopus  combined.  For  these  4 Vertical  lines  resemble  4 mighty  Pillars  each 
divided  into  twain  by  a light  line  shewing  this  forth;  The  Father  Himself,  in  the 
absence  of  the  line.  And  in  its  presence  shewing  the  Son.  And  as  aforesaid  the 
central  points  of  these  4 Great  Crosses  do  shew  in  the  Celestial  Heavens,  and  do 
correspond  unto  the  4 Tiphareth  points  referred  to  in  the  Book  of  the  Astronomic 
view  of  the  Tarot.  Naturally  then  the  Linea  Spiritus  Sancti  coincides  with  the 
Zodiacal  Belt  wherein  is  the  Path  of  the  Sun  who  is  the  administrant  of  The  Spirit  of 
Life,  and  "The  Lord  of  the  Fire  of  the  World."  The  Four  Linea  S.  S.  then  form  the 
complete  circle  of  the  Ecliptic,  a circle  at  the  centre  of  the  Zodiacal  Circle. 

Therefore  do  the  4 Perpendicular  or  Vertical  Lines  of  the  4 Crosses  represent 
4 Great  Currents  of  Force  passing  between  North  above  and  South  below, 
intersecting  the  Tiphareth  points  and  thus  affirming  the  existence  of  the  Hidden 
Central  Pillar  of  the  Tree  of  Life  forming  the  Axis  of  the  Sphere  of  the  Celestial 
Heavens. 

Therefore  are  these  Linea  which  are  vertical  called  Linea  Dei  Patris 
Filiique,  as  manifesting  that  Central  Column  wherein  are  Kether  and  Tiphareth, 
Macroprosopus  and  Microprosopus.  The  Calvary  Cross  of  10  Squares  which  are  in 
each  of  the  4 Lesser  Angles  of  each  Tablet  are  attributed  unto  the  action  of  the 
Spirit  through  the  10  Sephiroth  herein. 

This  Cross  of  10  squares  is  the  admission  badge  of  the  27th  Path  leading  unto 
the  Grade  of  Philosophus,  the  only  Grade  of  the  First  Order  in  which  all  the  Tablets 
are  shewn.  It  represents  the  Sephiroth  in  balanced  disposition,  before  which  the 
Formless  and  Void  rolled  back.  It  is  the  form  of  the  opened  out  double  cube  and  altar 
of  incense.  Therefore  it  is  placed  to  rule  each  of  the  Lesser  Angles  of  each  Tablet. 


42 


VOLUME  TEN 


THE  KEYS  OF  THE  GOVERNANCE  AND  COMBINATIONS 
OF  THE  SQUARES  OF  THE  TABLETS. 

They  are  the  Sphynx  and  the  Pyramid  of  Egypt,  that  is  the  combination  of 
the  Kerubs  being  the  Sphynx.  The  combination  of  the  Pyramid  being  the  Elements. 

Now  learn  a mystery  of  the  Wisdom  of  Egypt:  "When  the  Sphynx  and  the 
Pyramid  are  united,  thou  hast  the  formulae  of  the  Magic  of  Nature." 

"These  are  the  keys  of  the  wisdom  of  all  Time  and  its  beginnings  - who 
knoweth  it?  In  their  keeping  are  the  sacred  mysteries  and  the  knowledge  of  Magic 
and  all  the  Gods." 

In  the  Ritual  of  the  32nd  Path  leading  unto  the  Theoricus  Grade,  it  is  thus 
written:  "The  Sphynx  of  Egypt  spake  and  said:  I am  the  synthesis  of  the  Elemental 
Forces.  I am  also  the  symbol  of  Man.  I am  Life.  I am  Death.  I am  the  Child  of  the 
Night  of  Time." 

The  solid  Pyramid  of  the  Elements  again  is  the  Admission  Badge  of  the  28th 
Path  leading  to  the  Philosophus  Grade.  It  is  attributed  to  the  Four  Elements. 
Therefore  on  its  base  is  the  word  Olahm,  meaning  World,  and  upon  its  sides  are  the 
names  of  the  Elements:  Aesh,  Ruach,  Mayim,  Aretz  or  Ophir.  Yet  the  Apex  is  not 
allowed  to  remain  vacant,  not  quite  acute  in  shape,  but  is  cut  off  and  so  a small 
square  is  formed  at  the  Apex,  and  the  Letters  Eth,  meaning  Essence  are  placed 
therein. 

This  small  square  maketh  of  the  pyramid  a certain  Throne  or  shrine.  On  this 
throne  a certain  ruling  force  is  seated.  Within  the  Throne  is  a sacred  Symbol.  Place 
then  its  Sphynx  within  each  Pyramid,  and  the  image  of  its  God  above.  Take  thou  each 
Pyramid  as  the  key  of  the  nature  of  each  Tablet  Square.  The  sphynx  of  each  will 
vary  in  form  according  to  the  proportion  of  the  Elements  comprising  the  Square,  and 
the  God  of  Egypt  whose  image  is  to  be  placed  above  each  Pyramid  shall  represent 
the  force  ruling  under  the  direction  of  the  Great  Angel  of  the  Square.  This  Angelic 
Name  may  be  typified  by  the  correspondences  of  the  four  letters  of  the  Angel's 
Name,  adding  AL  to  the  end  of  the  Name  - the  letters  of  the  Name  standing  for 
head,  bust,  and  arms,  body,  lower  limbs.  Place  the  Name  in  Theban  letters  on  the 
girdle. 

This  God  shall  be  the  symbol  of  the  Power  of  the  Light  acting  therein,  as  the 
Angel  shall  be  the  descent  of  that  Light  itself.  The  Four  forms  of  the  Sphynx  are: 

The  Bull  - Wingless 
The  Eagle  or  Hawk  - Winged 
The  Angel  - Winged 
The  Lion  - Wingless 

This  variation  as  to  wings  is  another  reason  why  in  grouping  the  Tablets  and 
the  lesser  angles  of  the  same,  the  two  forms  of  Air  and  Water  are  placed  above  the 
two  Tablets  of  Earth  and  Fire. 

The  symbolic  form  of  each  Sphynx  is  thus  formed  from  the  Pyramid  of  the 
Square.  The  upmost  of  4 triangles  (into  which  a square  falls  when  the  diagonals  are 
inscribed)  sheweth  the  Head  and  neck,  and  if  it  is  to  be  Angel  or  Eagle,  these  are 
unto  the  form  of  the 


43 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Sphynx.  The  two  triangles  right  and  left  show  the  Body  with  the  arms  or  fore 
limbs  here  also.  If  Angel  or  Eagle  there  are  Wings  added  unto  the  representation  of 
the  Figure.  The  lowest  triangle  adds  the  lower  limbs  and  the  tail  of  the  Bull,  Hawk 
and  Lion. 

When  Air  and  Fire  predominate  there  is  a male  tendency.  When  Water  and 
Earth  the  type  tendeth  to  female.  Then  as  the  symbolic  forms  of  the  Egyptian  Gods 
who  rule  above  the  Pyramid,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  what  is  here  written 
regarding  the  Sphynx  of  the  Pyramid  and  the  God  of  Egypt  ruling  above  is 
applicable  especially  unto  the  16  squares  of  the  Servient  Angels  in  each  lesser 
angle. 


TWO  EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  CONCOURSE  OF  THE 

FORCES 

I.  Of  squares  marked  by  reversed  letters,  the  full  understanding  hereof 
belongeth  unto  a more  advanced  grade  than  that  of  Z.A.M.  Wherefore  in  this  place  it 
is  enough  to  say  that  a reversed  Letter  signifieth  that  a certain  more  isolated  action 
of  the  square  is  distinguished,  so  that  it  doth  as  it  were  not  so  much  complete  and 
harmonise  with  the  other  squares  about  it,  as  that  it  expresseth  a certain  faculty  or 
faculties  which  do  not  entirely  harmonise  with  them,  and  which  for  this  reason  are 
kept  apart.  They  do  not  necessarily  represent  an  evil  form  of  action,  though  in  one 
sense  the  evil  forces  grasp  them  more  readily  than  through  their  lesser  harmony 
with  the  other  surrounding  squares  of  the  Tablet,  that  is  in  what  are  termed  the 
"Battle  Formulae." 

II.  Of  the  skrying  of  the  squares  servient  in  the  spirit  vision.  Having  in 
readiness  the  necessary  implements  and  insignia,  and  the  symbol  of  the  Pyramid  of 
the  Square,  having  rehearsed  the  Angelic  calls  appropriate  thereunto,  and  having 
invoked  the  appropriate  names  governing  the  Plane  and  division  thereof  in 
question,  let  the  Z.A.M.  imagine  unto  himself  that  he  is  enclosed  within,  or 
believe  that  he  is  voluntarily  standing  within  an  atmosphere  corresponding  unto 
that  symbolised  by  the  Pyramid  of  the  Square,  whether  of  Heat  or  Moisture,  of 
Cold  or  Dryness,  or  of  combinations  of  these. 

Let  him  endeavour  to  follow  the  Ray  therefrom  unto  the  limits  of  the 
Macrocosmic  World  and  to  find  himself  in  a scene  corresponding  unto  the  nature  of 
the  Pyramid  Square.  That  is,  either  of  landscape,  or  clouds,  or  water  or  Fire,  or 
Ether,  or  vapour,  or  mist,  or  raying  light,  or  a combination  or  combinations  of 
these,  according  unto  the  nature  of  the  Plane. 

For  the  Pyramids  of  the  Squares  are  not  solid  pyramids  of  brick  or  stone, 
built  by  the 


44 


VOLUME  TEN 


hand  of  man.  But  rather  the  symbolical  representation  of  the  Elemental 
formula  governing  the  plane  of  that  particular  square. 

Having  arrived  at  the  plane  required,  let  the  Z.A.M.  invoke  the  God  of  Egypt 
who  ruleth  above  the  Pyramid  by  the  power  of  the  Angel  of  the  Square,  especially 
vibrating  at  the  same  time,  the  Egyptian  name  of  the  God  or  Goddess.  Then  he  shall 
perceive  before  him  the  colossal  symbolic  form  of  the  God  or  Goddess.  Let  him  again 
use  the  Angelic  formulae,  and  test  it  by  the  power  of  symbols  and  signs.  If  it  abide 
these  tests,  thus  shewing  that  it  is  a true  image,  let  him  then  request  it  to  make 
manifest  before  him  the  Sphynx  of  its  power. 

This  shall  also  appear  in  a colossal  figure  and  shape,  and  should  be  tested  by 
the  proper  formula.  He  shall  continue  his  invocations,  until  he  can  behold  it  clearly, 
ever  invoking  the  Angel  of  the  Plane  by  the  Superior  names,  and  the  God  of  Egypt,  by 
the  name  of  the  Angel,  and  by  his  own  name,  and  by  the  knowledge  of  his  symbolic 
image,  and  the  Sphynx  and  by  the  name  of  the  God  of  Egypt,  and  by  his  own 
particular  symbolic  form,  according  to  the  formula  of  the  Square.  Thus,  therefore  in 
this  manner  only,  if  thou  wishest  to  escape  from  delusion  shalt  thou  be  able  to 
discern  truly  by  skrying,  the  nature  of  the  Plane  and  of  its  operation,  for  standing 
before  the  Sphynx  and  saluting  it  with  the  proper  signs  and  invoking  the  God  of 
Egypt  by  his  proper  and  true  names,  shalt  thou  ask  by  the  virtue  and  power  of  those 
symbols  and  names,  for  the  true  knowledge  of  the  operations  and  influences  of  that 
Plane. 

Such  as  the  special  attributes  of  that  vast  portion  of  the  confines  of  the  universe 
included  in  that  sphere;  of  its  varying  natures;  of  its  elemental  nature;  of  its 
inhabitants,  elemental  and  spiritual,  etc;  of  the  operation  of  its  rays  through  the 
Greater  World;  i.e.,  the  Universe;  of  its  influence  upon  this  particular  planet;  upon 
animals,  plants,  minerals;  lastly  upon  man  the  microcosm. 

And  when  thou  shalt  have  obtained  all  this  reflect  that  even  then  it  is  but  a 
small  part  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Wisdom  of  the  Formulae  contained  in  the  plane, 
even  of  that  one  Square. 

DIRECTIONS  FOR  MAKING  THE  PYRAMID 


45 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


1.  The  Pyramid  should  be  of  white  card-board,  fairly  strong  and  having 
about  a 4 inch  base. 

2.  In  the  centre  of  the  cardboard  describe  a square  for  the  base. 

3.  On  each  side,  draw  an  equilateral  triangle  and  from  the  apex  of  each 
triangle  mark  off  a small  portion. 

4.  On  one  of  these  apex  lines  draw  a small  square  and  mark  a place  for  a 
slot  to  receive  the  foot  of  the  God-form. 

5.  Cut  the  figure  out  and  then  half-cut  the  square  base,  so  that  the  card- 
board will  fold  without  breaking.  Bind  the  edges  with  strips  of  paper  except  one  side 
and  fix  the  square  top  to  three  sides,  leaving  one  to  fall  down  as  a door,  inside 
which  you  place  your  Sphynx. 

NOTES  BY  S.R.M.D. 

For  quick  working,  make  16  triangles:  4 - red;  4 - blue;  4 - yellow;  4 - black. 

1.  Make  a shallow  inverted  pyramid  of  card-board.  Fill  the  sides  as 
required  with  coloured  triangles  for  the  several  squares.  Let  it  be  shallow  enough  to 
show  all  four  sides  at  once. 

2.  Make  a Red  Lion  - Black  Bull  - Blue  Eagle  - Yellow  Angel.  Divide  each 
into  three;  the  centre  being  halved.  From  these  make  composite  sphynxes  to  lay 
under  the  pyramid. 

3.  Make  small  Egyptian  Gods  to  put  standing  on  cork  above  the  Pyramid. 


46 


VOLUME  TEN 


By 

G.  H.  FRATER,  S.  A. 

1.  Prepare  for  private  use  Four  Tablets  with  correct  lettering  as  given  in 
Official  Lecture;  and  a Tablet  of  Union. 

2.  Make  four  Tablets  coloured  as  brilliantly  and  as  flashingly  as 
possible,  and  in  proportion;  this  should  be  done  with  coloured  papers.  They  may  be 
done  in  water-colours,  but  this  is  not  so  good.. 

3.  The  Four  minor  implements  are  to  be  used  with  the  Enochian 
Tablets,  and  a small  Altar  should  be  arranged  in  the  room  at  the  time  of  working, 
draped  with  Black  cloth,  with  a lighted  candle  by  the  wand,  incense  burning  by  the 
dagger,  gold  and  silver  or  salt  with  the  Pentacle,  and  Water  in  the  Cup. 

4.  Use  the  Ritual  of  the  Hexagram  for  the  Invocation  of  the  King  and  the 
Six  Seniors. 

5.  Use  the  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram  for  the  Spirit  and  the  Four  Elements. 

6.  In  pronouncing  the  Names  take  each  letter  separately:  M is 

pronounced  EM;  N is  pronounced  EN;  A is  AH;  P is  PEH;  S is  ESS;  D is  DEH. 
NRFM  is  pronounced  EN-RA-EF-EM  or  EN-AR-EF-EM.  Z IS  PRONOUNCED 
ZOD.  ZIZA  is  pronounced  ZOD-EE-ZOD-AH.  ADRE  is  AH-DEH-REH  or  AH- 
DEH-ER-REH.  SISP  is  ESS-EEESS-PEH.  GMNM,  GEH-EM-EN-EM.  TAAASD, 
TEH-AH-AH-AH-ESS-DEH.  AIAOAI,  AH-EE-AH-OH-AH-EE.  BITOM,  BEH-EE- 
TO-EM  or  BEH-EE-TEH-OO-EM.  NANTA,  EN-AH-EN-TAH.  HCOMA,  HEH- 
CO-EM-AH.  EXARP,  EX-AR-PEH. 


47 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


PJ5AG 

RULED  by 

BPSAC 

sncp 

Ruled  by 

BSACP 

HCPS 

RULED  BY 

brcps 

CP5A 

ruled  by 

BCPSB 

□ATT 

RULED  BY 

IDATT 

ATTH 

TTDA 

RULED  BY 

ITTD/1 

TOUT 

Dion 

RULED  By 

IDIOM 

I 

o 

n 

o 

OOPZ 

O 

p 

pzoo 

Ruled  by 

OPZOO 

z 

R 

RGRN 

RULED  BY 

mr&am 

G 

A 

AN  KG 

Ruled  BV 

manrg 

N 

7.  The  Lesser  Angle  of  Earth  in  the  Southern  or  Fire  Quadrangle.  Each  of 
the  Lesser  Angles  may  be  thus  divided.  The  foregoing  analysis  will  require  careful 
study  with  the  Tablets  before  it  is  fully  understood.  It  will  be  observed  that  the 
Elements  are  arranged  in  blocks  of  four  words  of  four  letters  each.  The  Spirit  names 
consist  each  of  five  letters,  the  fifth  being  taken  from  the  Tablet  of  Union. 

Thus  in  the  Quadrangle  of  Fire,  or  Great  Southern  Quadrangle,  we  have 
BEH-EE-TOEM  from  the  Tablet  of  Union,  BITOM.  BEH-DEH-OH-PEH-AH  from 
Top  of  Calvary  Cross  is  B,  1st  Angle,  Bdopa.  BEH-AH-EN-AH-AH  from  Top  of 
Calvary  Cross  is  B,  2nd  Angle,  Banaa.  BEH-PEH-ESS-AC  from  Top  of  Calvary 
Cross  is  B,  3rd  Angle,  Bpsac.  BEH-ZOD-EE-ZOD-AH  from  Top  of  Calvary  Cross 
is  B,  4th  Angle,  Bziza. 

8.  The  Calvary  Cross  Names  call  forth  with  a word  of  Six  letters  and 
command  with  a Word  of  Five.  They  rule  the  Lesser  Angles  in  which  they  are 
situated,  and  should  be  used  in  the  preliminary  Invocation. 

9.  The  Six  Seniors  and  the  King  are  on  a higher  plane  and  should  be 
invoked  with  the  Hexagram  Ritual.  The  Names  of  the  Six  Seniors  are  each  of  Seven 
Letters,  that  of  the  King  8. 

10.  The  Deity  names  consist  of  a Name  of  Three  Letters,  Four  letters,  and 
Five  letters,  respectively.  The  Supernal  Triad,  IAO.  YHVH,  YHShVH,  YUVShH. 

11.  The  Name  of  the  King  and  the  Letters  from  the  centres  of  the  Crosses 
initiate  the  Whirl,  and  should  not  be  used  by  those  who  do  not  understand  its 
action. 


48 


VOLUME  TEN 


With  these  elements  of  knowledge  the  intellect  alone  tells  one  much, 
though  the  intuitional  and  clairvoyant  faculties  are  of  course  absolutely 
essential  in  working.  The  following  is  an  example  of  working: 


S 


When,  you  go  to  seek  Spirits  or  Forces  on  their  own  planes,  the 
attribution  of  the  Elements  to  the  Cardinal  Points  is  as  follows: 


SOUTJiXS  EARTH 


As  in  the  Zodiac. 

Bearing  this  in  mind,  place  yourself  in  the  centce  of  ahollow 
cube.standinginthe  centre  of  the  Tablet  of  Union  between  the  0 of  HCOMA 
and  the  second  N of  NANTA,  thus: 

EX 

ARP 

HCOMA 

Imagine  yourself  standing  under  (0). 

NA 

NTA 

BITOM 


49 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Now  imagine  the  Four  Elemental  Tablets  standing  round  you  like  the  four 
walls  of  a room,  at  the  four  cardinal  points.  This  is  subjective  working. 

Another  method  is  to  imagine  a moonstone  spheroid,  containing  the  Universe, 
yourself  standing  as  it  were  in  the  centre,  and  the  Spirit  Tablet  or  the  Tablet  of 
Union  at  the  North  and  South  Poles,  at  the  same  time  dividing  the  surface  into  four 
quarters,  imagining  yourself  outside  the  spheroid.  This  is  objective  working. 

These  Tablets  can  be  applied  to  the  Universe,  to  the  Solar  System,  to  the 
Earth,  or  to  Man  himself.  "As  above,  so  below." 

Perhaps  the  most  convenient  method  for  a beginner  to  adopt  is  to  apply  this 
scheme  to  the  Earth,  treating  the  Three  Deity  Names  as  the  Three  Signs  of  the 
Zodiac  in  one  quarter.  Thus:  take  the  Fire  Tablet  and  place  OIP  on  Leo,  TEAA  on 
Virgo,  PDOCE  on  Libra,  and  so  on  with  the  other  God  Names,  treating  the  Kerubic 
Sign  as  the  "point  de  depart,"  one  quarter  of  a 1-louse  in  Astrology  will  also  be 
roughly  equal  to  the  square  of  each  letter. 

Each  of  these  spaces  would,  under  these  circumstances,  appear  to  be 
governed  by  a heroic  figure  of  say  twelve  feet  high,  not  winged.  But  the  Spirit  Names 
and  the  Names  above  the  Calvary  Cross,  even  on  the  Earth  plane,  bring  forth 
Figures  of  tremendous  size  and  beauty,  which  could  easily  lift  a human  being  in  the 
palm  of  the  hand.  I have  seen  from  the  fiery  lesser  angle  of  Fire  AZODIZOD,  the 
Figure  being  fiery  red  with  emerald  green  flaming  wings  and  hair.  ZODAZODEE, 
Black  and  white,  flashing  and  flaming.  EEZODAHZOD,  Blue  and  Orange,  with  a 
mist  of  flame.  ZODEEZODAH,  Orange,  hazy  gold  wings  like  gold  gauze,  and  nets 
of  gold  around  him. 

Having  selected  one  of  the  methods  given,  perform  the  Lesser  Banishing 
Ritual  with  the  Sword. 

Invoke  with  Minor  Implement  the  Element  required. 

Our  example  being  the  Square  of  OM  DI,  a watery  and  earthy  square  in  the 
lesser  Angle  of  Earth  in  the  Great  Southern  or  Fire  Quadrangle,  we  take  the  Fire 
Wand,  and  in  the  four  Quarters  invoke  with  the  equilibriating  Pentagram  for 
Actives,  and  the  Fire  Pentagram  using  only  the  Tablet  names,  saying:  EDEL 
PERNA  - VOLEXDO  and  SIODA.  "I  command  ye  in  the  Divine  Name  OIP  TEEA 
PEDOCE  and  BITOM  that  the  Angel  that  governs  the  Watery  and  Earthy  Square  of 
OMEDEHEE  shall  obey  my  behest  and  submit  to  me  when  I utter  the  Holy  Name 
TEHOMEDEHEE." 

Having  repeated  this  Invocation  in  the  Four  Quarters,  turn  to  the  East  if  you 
wish  to  go  to  the  plane,  or  to  the  South  if  you  wish  to  invoke  the  Spirits  to  come  to 
you.  Look  at  the  painted  Tablet  which  you  have  prepared  until  you  can  carry  it  in 
your  mind,  then  close  the  eyes  and  vibrate  the  names  OMEDHEE  OEMDEHEE  until 
your  whole  body  trembles  and  you  almost  feel  a sensation  of  burning.  The  items 
which  follow  are  quite  open  to  discussion  and  are  simply  my  own  personal 
experience.  Then  pass  through  the  Tablets  and  try  to  see  some  sort  of  landscape.  My 
experience  of  this  particular  plane  was  a dull  red  crumbling  earth.  I first  found 
myself  in  a Cave.  As  a symbol  I was  told  that  this  Square  of  OM  DI  was  like  the  roots 
of  a tiger  lily;  the  Square  M DI  O,  to  the  right,  representing  the  Life  working  in 


50 


VOLUME  TEN 


it;  the  Square  IOMD  to  the  left,  the  sap  flowing  through  the  stalk  and  leaves; 
the  Square  DIOM,  to  the  left  of  that,  the  Orange  flower  with  the  black  spots  upon  it, 
fitly  representing  Air,  Fire,  and  Earth,  Yellow,  Red  and  Black. 

Afterwards  I invoked  the  King  and  Six  Seniors  to  explain  the  general 
bearings  of  the  Quadrangle.  After  passing  through  several  fire  planes,  each  of  them 
of  greater  Whiteness  and  Brilliance  than  the  last,  I seemed  to  be  stationed  on  a high 
tower  situated  in  the  centre  of  the  Quadrangle  between  the  two  A's  around  the  tower 
and  I was  told  by  the  Six  Seniors  that  they  were  partly  representative  of  the  Planets, 
but  that  their  Names  should  really  be  read  in  a circle,  in  a way  we  shall  be  taught 
later.  At  present,  all  I could  gather  was,  that  the  Greek  Cross  was  allotted  somewhat 
in  the  way  represented  here,  and  the  centre  was  the  King. 


* f 
- o — ? 


I also  got  an  idea  that  the  letters  on  the  Crosses  were  opposed  in  power, 
positive  or  negative,  as  the  case  might  be,  to  the  letters  in  the  Squares.  From  the 
Lectures  circulated  among  the  Adepts,  I have  gathered  that  the  Angels  placed  over 
the  Lesser  Angles  of  the  Great  Quadrangle  have  the  following  properties: 

Knitting  together 

Lire  - Centrifugal  and  centripetal  forces. 

Destruction 

Expansion  and  contractive,  etc. 

Moving  from  place  to  place. 

Water  - Motion,  vibration,  changing  of  forms. 

Mechanical  crafts 

Earth  - Creative,  or  productive  of  results  on  the  material 
plane.  Secrets  of  Humanity 

Lire  - Controlling  human  nature,  clear  vision,  etc. 


51 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


That  the  subservient  Angels  of  these  Angles  rule: 

Elixirs 

Air  - Purification  from  illusions,  diseases,  sins  by  sublimation. 

Metals 

Water  - The  right  methods  of  polarising  the  Soul  so  as  to  attract  the  LVX. 

Stones 

Earth  - The  fixing  of  the  Higher  Self  in  the  purified  body. 

Transmutation 

Fire  - The  consecration  of  the  body,  and  the  transmutation  brought  about  by 
consecration. 


52 


VOLUME  TEN 


THE  FORTY-EIGHT  ANGELICAL  KEYS  OR  CALLS 

By. 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 

These  Calls  or  Keys  which  follow  are  only  to  be  made  use  of  with  the  greatest  care  and 
solemnity;  especially  if  they  be  pronounced  in  the  Angelical  Language  as  given.  Anyone 
profaning  them  by  using  them  with  an  impure  mind,  and  without  a due  knowledge  of  their 
attribution  and  application,  shall  be  liable  to  bring  serious  spiritual  and  physical  harm  unto 
himself.  The  first  Nineteen  Calls  or  Keys,  of  which  18  alone  are  expressed,  are  attributed  unto, 
and  to  be  used  with,  The  Tablet  of  Union  and  the  Four  other  Terrestrial  Enochian  Tablets.  The 
first  Key  hath  no  number  and  cannot  be  expressed,  seeing  that  it  is  of  the  God-Head.  And 
therefore  it  hath  the  number  of  0 with  us,  though  in  the  Angelic  Orders  it  is  called  First. 
Therefore,  their  Second  Key  is  with  us  the  First.  Unto  the  Tablet  of  Union  are  attributed  Six 
Calls,  of  which  the  First  is  the  highest  and  above  the  other  five.  The  remaining  Twelve  Calls, 
together  with  Four  of  those  belonging  unto  the  Tablet  of  Union,  are  allotted  unto  the  Four 
Tablets  of  the  Elements. 

The  First  Key  governeth  generally,  that  is  as  a whole,  the  Tablet  of  Union.  It  is  to  be  used 
first  in  all  invocations  of  the  Angels  of  that  Tablet  but  not  at  all  in  the  invocations  of  the  Angels 
of  the  other  four  Tablets.  The  Second  Key  is  to  be  used  as  an  invocation  of  the  Angels  of  the 
Letters  E.H.N.B.  representing  the  especial  governance  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Tablet  of  Union.  It  is 
also  to  precede  in  the  second  place  all  invocations  of  the  Angels  of  that  Tablet.  Like  the  First 
Key  it  is  not  to  be  employed  in  the  invocations  of  the  Angels  of  the  four  other  Tablets.  (The 
Numbers  such  as  456  and  6739,  etc.  which  occur  in  some  of  the  Calls  contain  mysteries  which 
are  not  here  to  be  explained.)  The  next  Four  Keys  or  Calls  are  used  both  in  the  Invocations  of  the 
Angels  of  the  Tablet  of  Union,  and  in  those  of  the  Angels  of  the  Four  Terrestrial  Tablets  as  well. 
Thus:  The  Third  Key  is  to  be  used  for  the  invocation  of  the  Angels  of  the  letters  of  the  line 
EXARP,  for  those  of  the  Air  Tablet  as  a whole,  and  for  the  Lesser  Angle  of  this  Tablet  which  is 
that  of  the  Element  itself  - Air  of  Air.  The  Fourth  Key  is  to  be  used  for  the  Invocation  of  the 
Angels  of  the  letters  of  the  line  HCOMA,  for  those  of  the  Water  Tablet  as  a whole,  and  for  the 
Lesser  Angle  of  this  Tablet  - Water  of  Water.  The  Fifth  Key  is  to  be  used  for  the  Invocation  of 
the  Angels  of  the  letters  of  the  line  NANTA,  for  those  of  the  Tablet  of  Earth  as  a whole,  and  for 
the  Lesser  Angle  of  this  Tablet  - Earth  of  Earth.  The  Sixth  Key  is  to  be  used  for  the  Invocation  of 
the  Angels  of  the  letters  of  the  line  BITOM,  for  those  of  the  Tablet  of  Fire  as  a whole,  and  for 
the  Lesser  Angle  of  this  Tablet  - Fire  of  Fire.  This  finishes  the  employment  of  the  Keys  of  the 
Tablet  of  Union.  The  remaining  Twelve  Keys  refer  to  the  remaining  Lesser  Angles  of  the  Four 
Terrestrial  Tablets,  as  hereafter  set  forth  in  the  following  Table. 


53 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


FIRST  KEY 

I reign  over  you,  saith  the  God  of  Justice.  This  is  for  the  Tablet  of  Union  as  a whole. 

SECOND  KEY 

Can  the  Wings  of  the  Winds  understand  your  Voices  of  Wonder.  This  is  for  the  line 
EHNB. 

THIRD  KEY 

Behold,  saieth  your  God,  I am  a Circle,  on  whose  hands  stand  Twelve  Kingdoms.  This  is 
for  the  line  EX  ARP  and  for  the  Tablet  of  Air,  IDOIGO,  Air  of  Air. 

FOURTH  KEY 

I have  set  my  feet  in  the  South  and  have  looked  about  me,  saying.  This  is  for  the  line 
HCOMA  and  NELGPR,  Water  of  Water. 

FIFTH  KEY 

The  Mighty  Sounds  have  entered  into  the  Third  Angie.  This  is  for  the  line  NANTA  and 
the  Tablet  of  Earth,  CAB ALPT. 

SIXTH  KEY 

The  Spirits  of  the  Fourth  Angle  are  Mine,  Mighty  in  the  Firmament  of  Waters.  This  is  for 
the  line  BITOM  and  Tablet  of  Fire.  RZIONR,  Fire  of  Fire. 

SEVENTH  KEY 

The  East  is  House  of  Virgins  singing  praises  amongst  the  Flames  of  First  Glory.  This  is 
for  the  line  of  Water  of  Air,  LILACZO. 

EIGHTH  KEY 

The  mid-day,  the  First,  is  as  the  Third  Heaven  made  of  Hyacinthine  Pillars.  This  line  is 
for  Earth  of  Air,  AIAOAI. 

NINTH  KEY 

A mighty  God  of  Fire  with  two  edged  Swords  Flaming.  This  line  is  for  Fire  of  Air, 
OAUVRRZ. 


54 


VOLUME  TEN 


TENTH  KEY 

The  Thunders  of  Judgement  and  Wrath  are  numbered  and  are  harboured  in  the  North  in 
the  likeness  of  an  Oak.  This  line  is  for  Air  of  Water,  OBLGOTCA. 

ELEVENTH  KEY 

The  Mighty  Seats  groaned  aloud  and  there  were  five  thunders  which  flew  into  the  East. 
This  line  is  for  Earth  of  Water,  MALADI. 

TWELFTH  KEY 


O you  that  reign  in  the  South  and  are  28,  the  Lanterns  of  Sorrow.  This  line  is  for  Fire  of 
Water,  IAAASD. 


THIRTEENTH  KEY 


O you  Swords  of  the  South  which  have  42  eyes  to  stir  up  the  Wrath  of  Sin.  This  line  is 
for  Air  of  Earth,  ANGPOI. 

FOURTEENTH  KEY 

O you  Sons  of  Fury,  the  Children  of  the  Just  which  sit  upon  24  Seats.  This  line  is  for 
Water  of  Earth,  ANAEEM. 

FIFTEENTH  KEY 

Thou,  the  Governor  of  the  First  Flame,  under  whose  Wings  are  6739  which  weave.  This 
line  is  for  Fire  of  Earth,  OSPMNIR. 

SIXTEENTH  KEY 

O Thou,  Second  Flame,  the  House  of  Justice,  which  hath  thy  Beginnings  in  Glory.  This 
line  is  for  Air  of  Fire,  NOALMR. 

SEVENTEENTH  KEY 

O Thou,  Third  Flame,  whose  Wings  are  Thrones  to  stir  up  vexations.  This  line  is  for 
Water  of  Fire,  V AD  ALI. 

EIGHTEENTH  KEY 

O Thou  Mighty  Light,  and  burning  Flame  of  Comfort.  This  line  is  for  Earth  of 
Fire,UVOLBXDOr 


55 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


And  unto  the  Tablet  of  FIRE,  the  6th,  16th,  17th  and  18th  KEYS.  So  that,  to  invoke,  for 
example,  the  Angels  of  the  Line  NANTA  of  the  Tablet  of  Union,  thou  shalt  first  read  the  First 
and  Second  Keys,  and  then  the  5th  key,  and  them  employ  the  necessary  Names.  And  to  invoke 
the  Angels  of  the  Lesser  Angle  IDOIGO,  Air  of  Air  of  the  Tablet  of  Air,  thou  shalt  read  the 
Third  Key  only,  and  then  employ  the  necessary  Names.  But  to  invoke  the  Angels  of  the  lesser 
Angle  CAD  ALL  Water  of  FIRE  of  the  Tablet  of  FIRE,  thou  shalt  first  read  the  sixth  Key,  and 
then  the  17th  Key,  and  after  that  use  the  necessary  Names.  Whereas,  for  the  Angle  of  FIRE  OF 
FIRE  therein,  the  6th  Key  alone  would  suffice,  as  also  for  the  King  and  Angelical  Seniors  of  that 
Tablet.  And  so  of  the  other  Angles  of  the  other  Tablets,  these  rules  shall  suffice.  Now,  though 
these  CALLS  are  thus  to  be  employed  to  aid  thee  in  the  Skrying  of  the  Tablets  in  the  Spirit 
Vision,  and  in  magical  working  therewith,  yet  shalt  thou  know  that  they  be  allotted  unto  a much 
higher  plane  than  the  operation  of  the  Tablets  in  the  Assiatic  World.  And,  therefore,  are  they  thus 
employed  in  bringing  the  Higher  Light  and  the  All-Potent  Forces  into  action  herein;  and  so  also, 
are  they  not  to  be  profaned,  or  used  lightly  with  an  impure  or  frivilous  mind  as  before  said. 

THE  FIRST  KEY 
ENGLISH 

I reign  over  you  Saith  the  God  of  Justice.  In  power  exalted  above  the  firmament  of 

Wrath. 

In  Whose  hands  the  Sun  is  as  a sword  and  the  Moon  as  through-thrusting  fire: 

Who  measureth  your  garments  in  the  midst  of  my  vestures  and  trussed  you  together  as 
the  palms  of  my  hands: 

Whose  seats  I garnished  with  the  fire  of  gathering: 

Who  beautified  your  garments  with  admiration: 

To  Whom  I made  a law  to  govern  the  Holy  Ones:  Who  delivered  you  a rod  with  the  Ark 
of  Knowledge. 

Moreover  Ye  lifted  up  Your  voices  and  sware  obedience  and  faith  to  Him  that  liveth  and 
triumpheth: 

Whose  beginning  is  not  nor  end  cannot  be:  which  shineth  as  a flame  in  the  midst  of  your 
Palaces  and  reigneth  amongst  you  as  the  balance  of  righteousness  and  truth. 

Move  therefore  and  show  yourselves:  open  the  mysteries  of  your  creation.  Be  friendly 
unto  me.  For  I am  the  servant  of  the  same  your  God,  the  true  worshipper  of  the  Highest. 

THE  FIRST  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

01  Sonf  Vorsag  Goho  lad  Bait,  Lonsh  Calz  Vonpho  Sobra  Z-OL  Ror  I Ta  Nazps  Od 
Graa  Ta  Maiprg  Ds  Hol-Q  Qaa  Nothoa  Zimz  Od  Commah  Ta  Nobioh  Zien.  Soba  Thu 
Gnonp  Prge  Aldi  Ds  Vrbs  Oboleh  G Rsam;  Casarm  Ohorela  Taba  Pir  Ds  Zonrensg  Cab 
Erm  Iadnah  Pilah  Farzm  Znrza  Adna  Gono  Iadpil  Ds  Horn  Od  To  h Soba  Ipam  Lu  Ipamis 


56 


VOLUME  TEN 


Ds  Loholo  Vep  Zomd  Poamal  Od  Bogpa  Aai  Ta  Piap  Piamol  Od  Vaoan  Zacare  Eca  Od 
Zamran  Odo  Cicle  Qaa  Zorge  Lap  Zirdo  Noco  Mad,  Hoath  laida. 

THE  FIRST  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Oh-el  Soh-noof  Vay-oh-air-sahjee  Goh-hoh  Ee-ah-dah  Bahl-tah,  Elon-shee  Kahi-zoad 
Von-pay-hoh: 

Soh-bay-rah  Zoad-oh-lah. 

Roh-ray  Ee  Tah  Nan-zoad-pay-ess,  Oh-dah  Jee-rah-ah  Tah  Mahi-  peer-jee: 

Dah-ess  Hoh-el-koh  Kah-ah  No-thoh-ah  Zoad-ee-mah-zoad  Oh-dah  Koh-mah-mahhay  Tah  Noh- 
bloh-hay  Zoad-ee-aynoo; 

So-bah  Tah-heelah  Jee-noh-noo-pay  Peer-jee  Ahi-dee;  Dah-ess  Ur-bass  Oh-boh-lay  Jee 
Rah-sah-may; 

Cahs-armay  Oh-hor-raylah  Tah-bah  Peer;  Dah-es  Zoad-oh-noo-ray-noo-sah-jee  Kahbah 
Air-may  Ee-ad-nah. 

Peelah-hay  Far-zoad-mee  Zoad-noo-ray-zoad-ah  Ahd-nah  Goh-noh  Ee-ah-dah-pee-ayl 
Dah-ess  Hoh-may  Oh-dah  Toh  hay; 

Soh-bay  Ee-pah-may  Loo  Ee-pah-mees;  Dah-ess  Loh-hoh-loh  Vay-pay  Zoad-oh-Maydah 
Po-ah-may-ell,  Oh-dah  Boh-jee-pay  Ah-ah-ee  Tay-ah  Pee-ah-pay  Pee-ah-moh-ayl  Oh-dah  Vay- 
oh-ah-noo. 

Zo,ad-a-kah-ray  Ay-kah  Oh-dah  Zoad-a-mer-ahnoo.  Oh-dah  Kee-klay  kah-ah.  Zoadorjee 
Lah-pay  Zoad-eer-raydoh  Noh-koh  Mahdah,  Hoh-ah-tah-hay  Ee-ah-ee-dah. 

THE  SECOND  KEY 
ENGLISH 

Can  the  Wings  of  the  Winds  Understand  your  voices  of  wonder.  0 You  the  Second  of  the 
First,  Whom  the  burning  flames  have  framed  within  the  depth  of  my  jaws: 

Whom  I have  prepared  as  cups  for  a wedding  or  as  the  flowers  in  their  beauty  for  the 
Chamber  of  the  Righteous. 

Stronger  are  your  feet  than  the  barren  stone  and  mightier  are  your  voices  than  the 
manifold  winds. 

For  ye  are  become  a building  such  as  is  not  save  in  the  mind  of  the  All-Powerful. 

Arise,  saith  the  First.  Move,  therefore,  unto  thy  servants.  Show  yourselves  in  power  and 
make  me  a strong  seer  of  things,  for  I am  of  Him  that  liveth  forever. 

THE  SECOND  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Adgt  Vpaah  Zong  Om  Faaip  Said  Vi-I-V  L Sobam  Ial-Prg  I-Za-Zaz  Pi-Adph.  Casarma 
Abrang  Ta  Talho  Paracleda  Q Ta  Lorslq  Turbs  Ooge  Baltoh. 


57 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Givi  Chis  Lusd  Orri  Od  Micaip  Chis  Bia  Ozongon. 

Lap  Noan  Trof  Cors  Ta  Ge  0 Q Manin  la-Idon. 

Torzu  Gohe  L Zacar  Eca  C Noqod  Zamran  Micaizo  Od  Ozazm  Vrelp  Lap  Zir  Io-lad. 

THE  SECOND  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Ahd-gee-tay  Oo-pah-hay  Zoad-oh-noo-jee  Oh-mah  Fah-ah-ee-pay  Saldah,  Vee-ee-vee 
Ayl,  S oh-bah-may  Ee-ahl-peer-jee  Ee-zoad-ah-zoad-ah-zoad  Pee-ahd-pay-hay; 

Cah-sarmah  Ah-brahn-jee  Tah-hoh  Paraclaydah,  Koh  Tah  Lor-es-sel-koh  Toor-bay-ess 
Oh-oh-jee  Bahi-toha. 

Jee-vee  Kah-hee-sah  Loos-dah  Ohr-ree  Oh-dah  Mee-cal-pah  Kah-hees-ah  Bee-ah  Oh- 
zoad-oh-noo-goh-noo. 

Lah-pay  Noh-ah-noo  Troh-eff  Corsay  Tah  Jee  Oh  Koh  Mah-nee-no  Ee-ah-ee-doh-noo. 
Tohr-zoad-oo  Goh-hay  Ayl.  Zoad-a-kar-ray  Ay-Kah  Kah  Noh-Kwoh-dah.  Zoad-amerah-noo. 
Me-kah-el-zoad-oh  Oh-dah  Oh-zoad-ah-zoad-may  Oo-rel-pay,  Lah-pay  Zoadee-ray  Ee-oh  Ee- 
ah-dah. 

THE  THIRD  KEY 
ENGLISH 

Behold  saith  your  God.  I am  a Circle  on  whose  hands  stand  Twelve  Kingdoms.  Six  are 
the  seats  of  Living  Breath,  the  rest  are  as  sharp  sickles  or  the  horns  of  Death,  wherein  the 
creatures  of  Earth  are  and  are  not,  except  Mine  own  hands  which  also  sleep  and  shall  rise. 

In  the  first  I made  you  stewards  and  placed  you  in  the  seats  Twelve  of  Government, 
giving  unto  every  one  of  you  power  successively  over  Four,  Five  and  Six,  the  true  Ages  of  Time: 
to  the  intent  that  from  the  highest  Vessels  and  the  corners  of  your  governments  ye  might  work 
My  power:  Pouring  down  the  Fires  of  Life  and  increase  continually  upon  the  Earth. 

Thus  ye  are  become  the  Skirts  of  Justice  and  Truth. 

In  the  Name  of  the  same  your  God  lift  up,  I say  yourselves.  Behold,  His  mercies  flourish 
and  His  Name  is  become  mighty  amongst  us,  in  Whom  we  say:  Move,  Descend  and  apply  your 
selves  unto  us,  as  unto  the  Partakers  of  the  Secret  Wisdom  of  your  creation. 

THE  THIRD  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Micma  Goho  Mad  Zir  Comselha  Zien  Biah  Os  Londoh  Norz  Chis  Othil  Gigipah  Vnd-L 
Chis  ta  Pu-Im  Q Mospleh  Teloch  Qui-I — N Toltorg  Chis  I Chis-Ge  In  Ozien  Ds  T Brgdo  Od 
Torzul 

I Li  E 01  Balzarg  Od  Aala  Thiln  Os  Netaab  Dluga  Vonsarg  Lonsa  Cap-Mi  Ali  Vors  CLA 
Homil  Cocasb  Fafen  Izizop  Od  Miinoag  De  Gnetaab  Vaun  Na-Na-E-El  Panpir  Malpirg  Pild 
Caosg. 


58 


VOLUME  TEN 


Noan  Vnaiah  Bait  Od  Vaoan.  Do-O-I-A  p Mad  Goholor  Gohus  Amiran.  Micma  Iehusoz 
Ca-Cacom  Od  Do-O-A-In  Noar  Mica-Olz  A-Ai-Om,  Casarmg  Gohia.  Zacar  Vnigiag  Od  Im-Va- 
Mar  Pugo  Piapii  Ananael  Qa-A-An. 

THE  THIRD  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Meek-mah!  Goh-hoh  Mah-dah.  Zoad-eeray  Kohm-sayl-hah  Zoad-ee-ay-noo  Be-ahhay 
Oh-ess  Lon-doh-hah.  Nohr  -zoad  Kah-heesah  Otheeiah  Jee-jee-pay-hay,  Oon-dah-iah  Kah- 
heesah  Tah  Poo-eem  Kwo-Mohs-piay  Tayiohk-hay,  kwee-eenoo  Tohl-torjee,  Kahees  Ee  Kah- 
hees-jee  Ee-noo  Oh-zoad-ee-ay-noo,  Day-ess  Tay  Bray-jee-dah  Oh-dah  Tor-zoad-oo-lah. 

Ee-Lee  Ay  Oh-Lah  Bahl-zoad-ahr-jee  Oh-dah  Ah-ah-iah,  Tay-heeinoo  Oh-ess  Nay- 
tahah-bay,  Dah-loo-gahr  Vohn-sahrjee  Lohn-sah  Cahpeemee-ahiee  Vor-sah  Cah  Ayl  Ah.  Hoh- 
meei  Koh-kahs-bay;  Fah-faynoo  Ee-zoad-ee-zoad-oh-pay  Oh  Dah  Mee-ee-noh-ahjee  Day  Jee- 
nay-tah-ah-bah  Vah-oo-noo  Nah-nah-ay-ayl;  Pahn-peer  Mahi-peerjee  Pee-el-dah  Kah-ohs-gah. 

Noh-ah-noo  Oo-nah-iah  Baitah  Oh-dah  Vay-oh-ah-noo. 

Doo-oh-ee-ah-pay  Mah-dah,  Goh-hoh-ior  Goh-hoos  Ah-mee-rah-noo.  Meek-mah 
Yehhoo-soh-zoad  Kah-Kah-komah  Oh-dah  Doh-oh-ah-ee-noo  Noh-ahr  Mee-kah-ohl-zoad  Ah- 
ah-ee-oh-mah,  Kah-sarmjee  Goh-hee-ah; 

Zoadah-kah-ray  Oo-nee-giah-jee  Oh-dah  Eem-vah-mar  Poojoh,  Plahplee  Ah-nah-nahayl 
Kah-ah-noo. 

THE  FOURTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

I have  set  my  feet  in  the  South  and  have  looked  about  me  saying: 

Are  not  the  Thunders  of  Increase  numbered  thirty-three  which  reign  in  the  Second 

Angle? 

Under  Whom  I have  placed  Nine  Six  Three  Nine,  Whom  None  hath  yet  numbered  but 

One: 

In  Whom  the  Second  Beginning  of  things  are  and  wax  strong,  which  also  successively 
are  the  numbers  of  Time,  and  their  powers  are  as  the  first. 

Arise  ye  Sons  of  Pleasure  and  visit  the  Earth:  For  I am  the  Lord  your  God  which  is  and 
liveth  for  ever. 

In  the  Name  of  the  Creator,  move  and  show  yourselves  as  pleasant  deliverers  that  you 
may  praise  Him  amongst  the  Sons  of  Men. 

THE  FOURTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 


59 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Othil  Lusdi  Babage  Od  Dorpha  Gohol 

G-Chis-Gee  Avavago  Cormp  P D Ds  Sonf  Vi-vi-Iv? 

Casarmi  Oali  MAPM  Soham  Ag  Cormpo  Crp  L 

Casarmg  Cro-Od-Zi  Chis  Od  Vgeg,  Ds  T Capmiali  Chis  Capimaon  Od  Lonshin  Chis  Ta 
L-0  CLA,  Torzu  Nor-Quasahi  Od  F Caosga  Bagle  Zire  Mad  Ds  I Od  Apila 

Do-0 — A — Ip  Qaal  Zacar  Od  Zamran  Obelisong  Rest-El- Aaf  Nor-Molap. 

THE  FOURTH  KEY 

PHONETIC 

Oh-thee-iah  Loos-dee  Bah-bah-jee  Oh-dah  Dor-pay-hah  Goh-hoh-lah: 

Jee-kah-hees-jee  Ah-vah-vah-goh  Kohr-em-pay  Pay-Dah  Dah-ess  SohnoofVee-vee- 
eevah  Kas-ahrm-ee  Oh-ah-lee  Em-Ah-Pay-Em  Soh-bah-mah  Ah-gee  Kohr-em-poh  Kah-arpay 
Ayl: 

Kah-sahrmjee  Kroh-oh-dah-zoadee  Kah-heesah  Ohdah  Vah-jeejee,  Dah-ess  Tay  Kahpee- 
mah-lee  Kah-heesah  Kapee-mah-ohnoo,  Oh-dah  Lon-sheenoo  Kah-heesah  Tay-ah  Aylo-oh  Kay- 
El-Ah. 

Tor-zoad-oo  Nohr-kwah-sahee,  Oh-dah  Eff  Kah-ohs-gah;  Bah-glay  Zoad-eeray  Mahdah 
Dah-ess  Ee  Ohdah  Ahpeelah. 

Doo-ah-ee-pay  Kah-ah-lah,  Zoad-a  karah  Oh-dah  Zoadamerahnoo  Oh-bayleesonjee, 
Raystellah  Ah-ah-eff  Nohr-moh-lahpay. 

THE  FIFTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

The  mighty  sounds  have  entered  in  the  Third  Angie  And  are  become  as  Olives  in  the 
Olive  Mount,  Looking  with  Gladness  upon  the  Earth,  and  dwelling  in  the  Brightness  of  the 
Heavens  as  continual  comforters. 

Unto  Whom  I fastened  19  Pillars  of  Gladness  and  gave  them  Vessels  to  water  the  Earth 
with  all  her  creatures: 

And  they  are  the  brothers  of  the  First  and  the  Second,  and  the  beginning  of  their  own 
Seats  which  are  garnished  with  69636  Continual  Burning  Lamps,  whose  numbers  are  as  the 
First,  the  Ends,  and  the  Contents  of  Time. 

Therefore  come  ye  and  obey  your  creation.  Visit  us  in  peace  and  comfort. 

Conclude  us  Receivers  of  your  Mysteries,  For  why?  Our  Lord  and  Master  is  the  All  One. 

THE  FIFTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Sapah  Zimii  DU1Y  od  noas  ta  quanis  Adroch,  Dorphal  Caosg  od  faonts  Piripsol  Ta  blior. 

Casarm  am-ipzi  nazarth  AF  od  dlugar  zizop  zlida  Caosgi  toltorgi: 


60 


VOLUME  TEN 


Od  z chis  e siasch  L ta  Vi-u  od  Iaod  thild  ds  Hubar  PEOAL,  Sobo-Cormfa  chis  Ta  LA, 
Vis  od  Q Cocasb. 

Eca  niis,  od  darbs  qaas.  F etharzi  od  bliora.  Ia-Ial  ednas  cicles.  Bagle?  Ge-lad  I L. 

THE  FIFTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Sah-pah-hay  Zoad-ee-mee-ee  Doo-ee-vay,  Oh-dah  Noh-ahs  Tay-ah  Kah-nees  Ah- 
drohkay,  Dohr-pay-hal  Kah-ohs-gah  Oh-dah  Fah-ohn-tay-ess  Pee-reep-sohl  Tay-ah  Blee-ohr. 

Kah-sarmay  Ah-mee-eep-zoad-ee  Nah-zoad-arth  Ah-eff  Oh-dah  Dahloo-gahr  Zoad- 
eezoad-oh-pay  Zoad-leedah  Kah-ohs-jee  Tohi  -torjee; 

Oh-dah  Zoad  Kah-heesah  Ay-See-ahs-kay  Ayl  Tah  vee-oo-Oh-dah  Ee-ah-ohdah 
Tayheeldah  Dah-ess  Hoobar  Pay  Ay  Oh  Ah  Ayl. 

Soh-bah  Kohr-em-fah  Kah-heesah  Tay-ah  El-ah  Vah-less  Oh-dah  Koh-Koh-Kahs-bay. 
Ag-kah  Nee-ee-sah  Oh-dah  Dahr-bay-ess. 

Kah-ah-sah  Eff  Aythar-zoadee  Oh-dah  Blee-ohr-ah.  Ee-ah-ee  -ah-ayl.  Ayd-nahss 
Keeklay-sah.  Bah-glay?  Jee-Ee-Ahdah  Ee-el! 

THE  SIXTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

The  Spirits  of  the  Fourth  Angle  are  Nine,  mighty  in  the  firmament  of  waters:  Whom  the 
First  hath  planted  a torment  to  the  wicked  and  a garland  to  the  Righteous: 

Giving  unto  them  fiery  darts  to  Vanne  the  Earth,  and  7699  Continual  workmen  whose 
courses  visit  with  comfort  the  Earth,  and  are  in  government  and  continuance  as  the  Second  and 
the  Third. 

Wherefore,  hearken  unto  my  voice.  I have  talked  of  you  and  I move  you  in  power  and 
presence;  Whose  works  shall  be  a Song  of  Honour  and  the  Praise  of  your  God  in  your  Creation. 

THE  SIXTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Gah  S diu  chis  Em  micalzo  pilzin:  Sobam  El  harg  mir  Babalon  od  obloc  Samvelg: 

Dlugar  malprg  Ar  Caosgi  od  ACAM  Canal  sobol  zar  fbliard  Caosgi,  od  chisa  Netaab  od 
Miam  ta  VIV  od  D. 

Darsar  Solpeth  bi-en.  Brita  od  zacam  g-micalza  sobol  ath  trian  lu-Ia  he  od  ecrin  Mad 

Qaaon. 


61 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  SIXTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Gah-hay  Ess  Dee-oo  Kah-heesah  AY-Em,  Mee-kahl-zoadoh  Peel-zoadeenoo;  Soh-bah 

may  Ayl  Harjee  Meer  Bah-bah-lohnoo  Oh-dah  Oh-bloh-kah  Sahm-vay-lanjee: 

Dah-loogar  Mah-lah-peerjee  Ahray  Kah-ohsjee,  Oh-dah  Ah  Kah  Ah  Em  Kah-nahl  So- 
bolah  Zoad-ah-ray  Eff  Blee-ahr-dah  Kah-ohs-jee,  Oh-dah  Kah-heesay  Naytah-ah-bay  Oh-dah 
Mee-ah  may  Tay-ah  Vee-ee-vah  Oh-dah  Dah. 

Dahr-sahr  Sohi-pet-hay  Bee-aynoo.  Bay-reetah  Oh-dah  Zoad-ah-kahmay  Jee-meekahel- 
zoadah  So-boh-lah  Aht-hay  Tre-ah-noo  Loo  -EE-ah  Hay  Oh-dah  Aykreenoo  Mahdah  Kah-ah- 
ohnoo. 

THE  SEVENTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

The  East  is  a House  of  Virgins  singing  praises  amongst  the  Flames  of  First  Glory, 
wherein  the  Lord  hath  opened  His  mouth  and  they  are  become  28  Living  Dwellings  in  whom  the 
strength  of  man  rejoiceth,  and  they  are  apparelled  with  Ornaments  of  brightness  such  as  work 
wonders  on  all  Creatures. 

Whose  kingdoms  and  continuance  are  as  the  Third  and  Fourth,  strong  towers  and  places 
of  comfort,  the  Seat  of  Mercy  and  continuance. 

O ye  servants  of  Mercy,  Move,  Appear,  Sing  praises  unto  the  Creator!  And  be  mighty 
amongst  us!  For  to  this  remembrance  is  given  power,  and  our  strength  waxeth  strong  in  our 
Comforter! 

THE  SEVENTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Raas  i salman  paradiz  oecrimi  aao  Ialpirgah,  quiin  Enay  Butmon  od  I Noas  NI  Paradial 
casarmg  vgear  chirlan  od  zonae  Luciftian  cors  ta  vaul  zirn  tolhami. 

Sobol  londoh  od  miam  chis  ta  I od  ES  vmadea  od  pibliar,  Othil  Rit  od  miam.  C noqol  rit, 
Zacar  zamran  oecrimi  Qaada!  od  0 micaolz  aaiom!  Bagle  papnor  i dlugam  lonshi  od  vmplif 
vgegi  Bigl  1AD ! 

THE  SEVENTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Rah-ahs  Ee  Salmahnoo  Pahr-ahdeezoad,  Oh-ay  Kah-reemee  Ah-ah-oh  Ee-ahl-peergah, 
Kwee-ee-ee-noo  Ayn-ah-yee  Boot-mohnah  Oh-dah  Ee  Noh-ah-sah  Nee  Pahr-ah-deeahlah  Kah- 
sahr-emjee  Vay-jee-ahr  Kah-heer-lahnoo  Oh-dah  Zoad-oh-nah-kah  Loo-keeftee-ahnoo  Kohr-say 
Tay-ah  Vah-oo-lah  Zoad-ee-raynoo  Tohl-hahmee. 

Soh-boh-lah  Lohn-d-do-hah  Oh-dah  Mee-ahmay  Kah-heesah  Tay-ah  Dah-Oh-dah 


62 


VOLUME  TEN 


Ay-ess,  Oomah-day-ah  Oh-dah  Pee-blee-ahray  Otheelah,  Reetah  Oh-dah  Mee-ahmay. 

Kah-noh-kolah  Reetah,  Zoadakahray  Mee-kah-ohl-zoad  Ah  -ah-ee-ohm!  Bahglay 

Pahp-nohr  ee  Day-loo-gahm  Lon-shee  On-dah  Oomplee-fah  Oo-gay-jee  Beeglah  Eeah- 

dah. 

THE  EIGHTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

The  mid-day,  the  First,  is  as  the  Third  Heaven  made  of  hyacinthine  Pillars  26,  in  whom 
the  Elders  are  become  strong,  which  I have  prepared  for  my  own  Righteousness,  Saith  the  Lord. 

Whose  long  continuance  shall  be  as  buckles  to  the  Stooping  Dragon  and  like  unto  the 
Harvest  of  a Widow. 

How  many  are  there  which  remain  in  the  glory  of  the  Earth,  which  Are,  and  Shall  not  see 
Death  until  this  house  fall,  and  the  Dragon  sink? 

Come  away!  For  the  Thunders  have  spoken! 

Come  away!  For  the  Crown  of  the  Temple  and  the  robe  of  Him  that  Is,  Was,  and  Shall  be 
Crowned  are  divided. 

Come!  Appear  unto  the  terror  of  the  earth  and  unto  our  comfort  and  of  such  as  are 
prepared. 

THE  EIGHTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Bazm  ELO  i ta  Piripson  oln  Nazavabh  OX  casarmg  vran  chis  vgeg  ds  abramg  baltoha 
goho  lad, 

Soba  mian  trian  ta  lolcis  Abaivovin  od  Aziagiar  nor.  Irgil  chis  da  ds  paaox  busd  caosgo, 
ds  chis,  od  ipuran  teloch  cacrg  oi  salman  loncho  od  voviva  carbaf? 

Niiso!  Bagle  avavago  gohon! 

Niiso!  Bagle  momao  siaion  od  mabza  1AD  01  as  Momar  Poilp. 

Niis ! Zamran  ciaofi  caosgo  od  bliors  od  corsi  ta  abramig. 

THE  EIGHTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Bah-zoad-em  Ayloh,  Eetah  Peeripsohnoo  Ohlnoo  Noh-zoad-ah-vah-bay-hay  Oh-Ex, 

Cah-sarm-jee  Oo-rahnoo  Kah-heesah  Vah-jeejee,  Dah-ess  Ah-brahmjee  Bahi-toha  Goho 

Ee-ah-dah,  Soh-bah  Mee-ahnoo  Tree-ahnoo  Tay-ah  Lohl-kees  Ah-bah-ee-voh-veenoo 

Oh-dah  Ah-zoadee-ahjee-ahr  Ree-ohray. 

Eer-jeelah  Kah-heesah  Day-ah  Dah-ess  Pa-ah-Oh-Ex  Boos-dah  Kah-ohs-goh,  Dah-ess 
Kah-heesah,  Oh-dah  Ee-poor-ahnoo  Tay-lohk-ah  Kah-karjee  Oh-ee  Sahl-mahnoo  Lohnkah-hoh 
Oh-dah  Voh-vee-nah  Kar-bahfay. 


63 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Nee-eesoh!  Bahglay  Ah-vah-vah-goh  Goh-hoh-noo. 

Nee-ee-soh!  Bahglay  Moh-mah-oh  See-ah-see-ohnoo  Oh-dah  Mahb  zoad-ah  Ee-ah-dah 
Oh  Ee  Ahsah  Moh-maray  Poh  eelahpay. 

Nee-ee-sah,  zoadamerahnoo  Kee-ah-oh-fee  Kah-ohs-goh  Oh-dah  Blee-ohr-sah,  Oh-dab 
Kor-see  Tay-ah  Ah-brah-meejee. 

THE  NINTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

A mighty  guard  of  fire  with  two-edged  swords  flaming,  which  have  eight  Vials  of  Wrath 
for  two  times  and  a half,  whose  wings  are  of  wormwood  and  of  the  marrow  of  Salt,  have  settled 
their  feet  in  the  West  and  are  measured  with  their  9996  Ministers. 

These  gather  up  the  moss  of  the  earth  as  the  rich  man  doth  his  treasures. 

Cursed  are  they  whose  iniquities  they  are.  In  their  eyes  are  millstones  greater  than  the 
Earth,  and  from  their  mouths  run  seas  of  blood. 

Their  heads  are  covered  with  diamonds  and  upon  their  hands  are  marble  sleeves. 

Happy  is  he  on  whom  they  frown  not!  For  Why?  The  God  of  Righteousness  rejoiceth  in 
them.  Come  away!  And  not  your  vials,  for  the  time  is  such  as  requireth  comfort. 

THE  NINTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Micaolz  bransg  prgel  napea  lalpor,  ds  brin  P Efafage  Vonpho  olani  od  obza,  sobol  vpeah 
chis  tatan  od  tranan  balie,  alar  lusda  soboin  od  chis  holq  c Noquodi  CIAL. 

Unal  alson  Mom  Caosgo  ta  las  ollor  gnay  limlal.  Amma  chis  sobca  madrid  z chis 
ooanoan  chis  aviny  drilpi  caosgin,  od  butmoni  parm  zumvi  cnila. 

Dazis  ethamza  childao,  od  mire  ozol  chis  pidiai  collal.  Vicinina  sobam  vcim. 

Bagle?  1AD  Baltoh  chirlan  par.  Niiso!  Od  ip  efafafe  bagle  a cocasb  i cors  ta  vnig  blior. 

THE  NINTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Mee-kah-ohl-zoad  Brahn-sahjee  Peer-jee-lah  Nah-pay-tah  Ee-ahl-poh-ray  Dah-ess  Bree- 
noo  Pay  Ay-fah-fah-fay  Vohn-pay-ho  Oh-lah-nee  Oh-dab  Ohb-zoad-ah,  Soh-bohlah  Oopah-ah 
Kah-heesah  Tah-tahnoo  Oh-dah  Trah-nah-noo  Bah-lee-ay,  Ah-laray  Loosdah  Soh  -bohlnoo  Od- 
dah  Kah-heesah  Hohi-kew  Kah  Noh-koh-dee  Kah-ee  -ah-lah. 

Oo-nahl  Ahl-dohnoo  Moh-mah  Kah-ohs-goh  Tay-ah  Lah-sah  Ohi-loray  Jee-nayoh  Lee- 
may-lah-lah. 

Ahm-mah  Kah-heesah  Soh-bay-kah  Mah-dreedah  Zoad  Kah-heesah.  Oo-ah-nohahnoo 
Kah-heesah  Ah-veenee  Dree-lahpee  Kah-ohs-jeenoo  Oh-dab  Boot-mohnee  Parmay  Zoad- 
oomvee  Kah-neelah. 


64 


VOLUME  TEN 


Dah-zoad-eesah  Ayt-hahm-zoadah  Kah-hil-dah-oh  Oh-dah  Meer-kah  Oh-zoad-ohlah 

Kah-hees-ah  Pee-dee-ah-ee  Kohl-lah-lah. 

Vahl-kee-neenah  Soh-bahmay  Ookeemay.  Bahglay?  Ee-ah-dah  Bahi-toha  Kar- 

heerlahnoo 

Pahray.  Nee-ee-soh!  Oh-dah  Ee-pay  Ay-fah-fah-fay  Bahglay  Ah  Koh-Kahs-bay  Ee 
Korsay  Tay-ah  Oo-neegay  Blee-ohrah. 

THE  TENTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

The  thunders  of  Judgment  and  Wrath  are  numbered,  and  are  harboured  in  the  North  in  the 
likeness  of  an  oak  whose  branches  are  22  nests  of  Lamentation  and  Weeping  laid  up  for  the 
Earth,  which  burn  night  and  day. 

And  vomit  out  the  heads  of  scorpions  and  live  sulphur,  mingled  with  Poison.  These  be 
the  thunders  that  5678  times  (in  ye  24th  part  of  a moment)  roar  with  an  hundred  mighty 
earthquakes  and  a thousand  times  as  many  surges,  which  rest  not,  neither  know  any  echoing  time 
herein. 

One  rock  bringeth  forth  a thousand,  even  as  the  heart  of  man  doth  his  thoughts. 

Woe!  Woe!  Woe!  Woe!  Woe!  Woe!  Yea  Woe!  be  to  the  earth,  for  her  iniquity  is,  was, 
and  shall  be  great. 

Come  away!  But  not  your  mighty  sounds. 

THE  TENTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Coraxo  chis  cormp  od  blans  lucal  aziazor  paeb  sobol  ilonon  chis  OP  virq  eophan  od 
raclir,  maasi  bagle  caosgi,  di  ialpon  dosig  od  basgim; 

Od  oxex  dazis  siatris  od  saibrox,  cinxir  faboan. 

Unal  chis  const  ds  DAOX  cocasg  ol  oanio  yorb  voh  m gizyax,  od  math  cocasg  plosi 
molvi  ds  page  ip,  larag  om  dron  matorb  cocasb  emna. 

L Patralx  yolci  matb,  nomig  monons  olora  gnay  angelard. 

Ohio!  Ohio!  Ohio!  Ohio!  Ohio!  Ohio!  Noib  Ohio!  Casgon,  bagle  madrid  i zir,  od  chiso 

drilpa. 

Niiso!  Crip  ip  Nidali. 

THE  TENTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Koh-rahx-oh  Kah-heesah  Kohr-em-pay  Oh-dah  Blah-noos  Loo-kahlah  Ah-zoad-ee- 
ahzoad-ohra  Pah-ay-bah  Soh-bohlah  Eeloh-nohnoo  Kah-heesah  Oh-pay  Veer-kwoh  Ay- 
ohfahnoo  Oh-dah  Rah-cleerah,  Mah-ahsee  Bahglay  Kah-ohs-jee,  Dah-ess  Ee-ah-la-pohnoo  Doh- 
seejee  Oh-dah  Bahs-jeemee. 

Oh-dah  Oh  Ex-Ex  Dah-zoadeesah  See-ah-treesah  Oh-dah  Sahlbrox,  Keenoo-tseerah  Fah- 
boh-ahnoo. 


65 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Oo-nah-lah  Kah-heesah  Koh-noo-stah  Dah-ess  Dah-Ox  Koh-kasjee  Oh-eli  Oh-ah-nee 

oh  Yohr-bay  Voh-heemah  Jee-zoad-ee-ax  Oh-day  Ay-orsah  Koh-kasjee  Pay-loh-see 
Mohi-vee  Dah-ess  Pah-jay  Ee-pay,  Lah-rah-gee  Oh-em  Dah-rohl-noo  Mah-tor-bay  Kohkasjee 
Em-nah. 

Eli  Pah-trah-laxa  Yohi-kee  Maht-bay,  Noh-meegee  Moh-noh-noos  Oh-loh-rah  Jeenah- 
yee  Ahn-jee-lar-dah. 

Oh-hee-oh!  Oh-hee-oh!  Oh-hee-oh!  Oh-hee-oh!  Oh-hee-oh!  Oh-hee-oh!  Noh-eebay 
Ohhee-oh!  Kah-ohs-gohnoo,  Bah-glay  Mah-dree-dah  Ee,  Zoadeerah,  Oh-dah  Kah-heesoh  Dah- 
reel-pah. 

Nee-eesoh!  Kah-ahr-pay  Ee-pay  Nee-dah-lee. 

THE  ELEVENTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

The  mighty  seat  groaned  aloud,  and  there  were  five  thunders  which  flew  into  the  East, 
and  the  Eagle  spake  and  cried  with  a loud  voice. 

Come  away!  And  they  gathered  themselves  together  and  became  the  House  of  Death,  of 
whom  it  is  measured,  and  it  is  31. 

Come  away!  For  I have  prepared  for  you  a place. 

Move  therefore  and  show  yourselves.  Open  the  mysteries  of  your  creation!  Be  friendly 
unto  me,  for  I am  the  servant  of  the  same  your  God,  the  true  worshiper  of  the  Highest. 

THE  ELEVENTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Oxyiayal  holdo,  od  zirom  0 coraxo  dis  zildar  Raasy,  od  Vabzir  camliax,  od  bahal. 

Niiso!  Salman  teloch,  casarman  hoiq,  od  t i ta  Z soba  cormf  I GA. 

Niiso!  Bagle  abrang  noncp. 

Zacar  ece  od  zamran.  Odo  cicle  qaa!  Zorge  lap  zirdo  noco  Mad,  hoath  laida. 

THE  ELEVENTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Ohx-ee-ah-yah-iah  Hol-doh  Oh-dah  Zoad-eer-oh-mah  0 Kohr-ahxo  Dah-ess  Zoad-eeldar 
Rah-ahs-ee  Oh-dah  Vahb-zoad-eer  Kahm  -lee-ahx  Oh-Dah  Bah-hahi. 

Nee-ee-soh!  Sahi-mah-noo  Tay-ioh-kah  Kah-sahr-mahnoo  Hohei-koh  Oh-dah  Tay  Ee 
Tay-ah  Zoad  Soh-bah  Kohr-em-fah  Ee  Gee-ah! 

Nee-ee-soh!  Bah-glay  Ah-brahn-jee  noh-noo-kah-pay. 

Zoad-akarah  Ay-kah  Oh-dah  Zoadamerahnoo.  Oh-doh  Kee-klay  Kab-ah.  Zoad-orjee 
Lah-pay  Zoadeereedoh  Noh-koh  Mahdah,  Hoh-ah-tah-hay  Ee-ah-ee  dah. 


66 


VOLUME  TEN 


THE  TWELFTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

O You  that  reign  in  the  South,  and  are  the  28  Lanterns  of  Sorrow,  bind  up  your  girdles 
and  visit  us. 

Bring  down  your  train  3663,  that  the  Lord  may  be  magnified,  Whose  Name  amongst  you 
is  Wrath. 

Move,  I say,  and  show  yourselves.  Open  the  mysteries  of  your  creation. 

Be  friendly  unto  me!  For  lam  the  servant  of  the  same  your  God,  the  true  Worshipper  of 
the  Highest. 

THE  TWELFTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Nonci  ds  sonf  babage,  od  chis  OB  Hubardo  tibibp,  allar  atraah  od  ef ! 

Drix  fafen  MIAN,  ar  Enay  ovof,  sobol  ooain  vonph. 

Zacar  gohus  od  zamran.  Odo  cicle  qaa. 

Zorge  lap  zirdo  noco  Mad,  hoath  Iaida. 

TWELFTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Noh-noo-kee  Dah-ess  Soh-noof  Bah-bah-jee,  Oh-dah  Kah-heesah  Oh-bay  Hoo-bardoh 
fee-bee-bee-pay,  Ah-lah-lahr  Ah-trah-ah-hay  Oh-day  Ay-eff.  Dah-reex  Fah-fah-aynoo  Meeah- 
noo  Ah-ray  Ay-nah-ee  Oh-voh-fah,  Soh-oh-lah  Doo-ah-ee-noo  Ah-ah  Von-payhoh.  Zoad-ah- 
kahray  Goh-hoo-sah  Oh-dah  Zoad-ah-mer-ahnoo,  Oh-doh  Kee-klay  Kahah. 

Zoadorjee  Lahpay  Zoadeereedoh  Noh-koh  Mah-dah.  Hoh-ah-tah-hay  Ee-ah-ee-dah. 

THE  THIRTEEN  KEY 
ENGLISH 

O you  Swords  of  the  South,  which  have  42  eyes  to  stir  up  the  Wrath  of  sin:  making  men 
drunken,  which  are  empty. 

Behold  the  promise  of  God  and  his  power,  which  is  called  amongst  you  a Bitter  Sting! 

Move  and  show  yourselves.  Open  the  mysteries  of  your  creation. 

Be  friendly  unto  me!  For  lam  the  servant  of  the  same  your  God,  the  true  worshipper  of 
the  highest. 


67 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  THIRTEENTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Napeai  babage  ds  brin  VX  ooaona  iring  vonph  doalim:  eolis  ollog  orsba,  ds  chis  affa. 

Micma  Isro  Mad  od  Lonshi  Tox,  ds  i vmd  aai  Grosb. 

Zacar  od  zamran.  Odo  cicle  qaa. 

Zorge  lap  zirdo  noco  Mad,  hoath  laida. 

THE  THIRTEENTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Nah-pay-ah-ee  Bah-bah-jee  Dah-ess  Bay-ree-noo  Vee  Ex  Oo-ah-oh-nah  Lah-reen-gee 
Vohn-pay-hay  Doh-ah-Ieem;  Ay-oh-leesah  Oh-loh-jee  Ohrs-bah,  Dah-ess  Kah-heesah  Ahf-fah. 
Meek-mah  Ees-roh  Mahdah  Oh-dah  Lohn-shee  Toh-tza. 

Dah-ess  Ee-Vah-mee-dah  Ah-ah-ee  Grohs-bay! 

Zoad-a-kah-rah  Oh-dah  Zoad-a-mer-ahnoo.  Oh-doh  Kee-klay  Kah-ah.  Zoad-orjee  Lah- 
pay  Zoad-eer-eedoh  Noh-koh  Mah-dah,  Hoh-ah-tah-hay  Ee-aa-ee-dah. 

THE  FOURTEENTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

o you  Sons  of  Fury,  the  Child  of  the  Just,  which  sit  upon  24  seats,  vexing  all  creatures  of 
the  earth  with  age,  which  have  under  you  1636. 

Behold  the  Voice  of  God!  The  promise  of  Him  who  is  called  amongst  you  Fury  or 
extreme  Justice. 

Move  therefore  and'  show  yourselves.  Open  the  mysteries  of  your  creation!  Be  friendly 
unto  me,  for  I am  the  servant  of  the  same  your  God,  the  true  worshipper  of  the  Highest. 

THE  FOURTEENTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Noromi  baghie,  pashs  0 lad,  ds  trint  mire  OL  thil,  dods  tol  hami  caosgi  homin,  ds  brin 
oroch  QUAR. 

Micma  bialo  lad!  Isro  tox  ds  I vmd  aai  Baltim. 

Zacar  od  zamran.  Odo  cicle  qaa. 

Zorge  lap  zirdo  noco  Mad,  hoath  laida. 

THE  FOURTEENTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Noh-roh-mee  Bahg-hee-ay,  Pahs-hay-sah  Oh-ee-ah-dah,  Dah-ess  Tree-ndo-tay  Meerkay 
Oh-el  Tah-heelah,  Doh-dah-sah  Tol-hah-mee  Kah-ohs-jee  Hoh-mee-noo,  Dah-ess  Bay-ree-noo 
Oh-roh-chah  Kwah-ah-ray,  Meek-mah  Bee-ah-loh  Ee-ah-dah! 


68 


VOLUME  TEN 


Ees-roh  Tohx  Dah-ess  Ee  Va-mee-dah  Ah-ah-ee  Bahl-tee-mah. 

Zoad-a-kah-rah  Oh-dah  Zoad-a-mer-ahnoo.  Oh-doh  Kee-klay  Kah-ah. 

Zoad-orjee  Lah-pay  Zoad-eer-eedoh  Noh-koh  Mah-dah,  Hoh-ah-tah-hay  Ee-aa-ee-dah. 

THE  FIFTEENTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

O Thou,  the  Governor  of  the  First  Flame  under  whose  wings  are  6739  which  weave  the 
earth  with  dryness; 

Which  knowest  the  great  name  Righteousness  and  the  Seal  of  Honour! 

Move  and  show  yourselves ! Open  the  mysteries  of  your  Creation. 

Be  friendly  unto  me,  for  lam  the  servant  of  the  same  your  God,  the  true  worshipper  of  the 
Highest. 

THE  FIFTEENTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Ils  tabaan  L lalpirt,  casarman  vpaachi  chis  DARG  ds  oado  caosgi  orscor: 

Ds  oman  baeouib  od  emetgis  Iaiadix! 

Zacar  od  zamran.  Odo  cicle  qaa. 

Zorge  lap  zirdo  noco  Mad,  hoath  laida. 

THE  FIFTEENTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Ee-lah-  sah  Tah-bah-ah-noo  Ayl  Ee-ahl-peer-tah,  Kas-ahr-mah-noo  Oo-pah-ah-chee  Kah- 
heesah  Dahr-jee  Dah-ess  Oh-ah-doh  Kah-ohs-jee  Ohrs-koh-ray:  Dah-ess  Oh-Mahnu  Bah-ay-oh- 
oo-ee-bay  Oh-dah  Ay-mayt-gees  Ee-ah-ee-ah-dix. 

Zoad-a-kah-rah  Oh-dah  Zoad-a-mer-ahnoo.  Oh-doh  Kee-klay  Kah-ah.  Zoad-orjee  Lah- 
pay  Zoad-eer-eedoh  Noh-koh  Mah-dah,  H oh-ah-tah-hay  Ee-aa-ee-dah. 

THE  SIXTEENTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

O Thou  of  the  Second  Flame,  the  house  of  Justice,  Who  hast  Thy  Beginning  in  glory,  and 
shall  comfort  the  Just,  Who  walkest  on  the  Earth  with  8763  feet,  which  undertand  and  separate 
creatures. 

Great  art  Thou  in  the  God  of  Conquest. 

Move  therefore  and  show  yourselves.  Open  the  mysteries  of  your  creation!  Be  friendly 
unto  me,  for  I am  the  servant  of  the  same  your  God,  the  true  worshipper  of  the  Highest. 


69 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  SIXTEENTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Ils  viv  Iaiprt,  Salman  Bait,  ds  a croodzi  busd,  od  bliorax  Balit,  ds  insi  caosgi  iusdan 
EMOD,  ds  om  od  tiiob. 

Drilpa  geh  us  Mad  Zilodarp. 

Zacar  od  zamran.  Odo  cicle  qaa. 

Zorge  lap  zirdo  noco  Mad,  hoath  laida. 

THE  SIXTEENTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Ee-lah-sah  Vee-ee-vee  Ee-ahl-peert,  Sahi-mahn-oo  Bal-toh,  Dah-ess  Ah  Cro-oh- 
dahzoad-ee  Boosdah,  Oh-Dah  Blee-ohr-ahx  Bah-lee-tah,  Dah-ess  Ee-noo-see  Kah-ohs-jee  Loos- 
dah-noo  Ah-Em-Oh-Day,  Dah-ess  Oh-Em  Oh-dah  Tah-lee-oh-bah. 

Dah-reei-pah  Gay-hah  Ee-lah-sah  Mah-dah  Zoad-ee-loh  dahr-pay.  Zoad-a-kah-rah  Oh- 
dah  Zoad-a-mer-ahnoo.  Oh-doh  Kee-klay  Kah-ah. 

Zoad-orjee  Lah-pay  Zoad-eer-eedoh  Noh-koh  Mah-dah,  Hoh-ah-tah-hay  Ee-aa-ee-dah. 

THE  SEVENTEENTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

O Thou  third  Flame  whose  wings  are  Thorns  to  stir  up  vexation. 

And  who  has  7336  living  lamps  going  before  Thee. 

Whose  God  is  Wrath  in  Anger. 

Gird  up  thy  Loins  and  hearken. 

Move  therefore  and  show  yourselves.  Open  the  mysteries  of  your  creation!  Be  friendly 
unto  me,  for  I am  the  servant  of  the  same  your  God,  the  true  worshipper  of  the  Highest. 

THE  SEVENTEENTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

Ils  D lalpirt,  soba  vpaah  chis  nanba  zixiay  dodseh,  od  ds  brint  TAXS  Hubardo  tastax  ilsi. 
Soba  lad  i vonpho  vonph. 

Aldon  dax  il  od  toatar. 

Zacar  od  zamran.  Odo  cicle  qaa. 

Zorge  lap  zirdo  noco  Mad,  hoath  laida. 

THE  SEVENTEENTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Ee-loh-sah  Dah  Ee-ahl-peer-tah  Soh-boh  Oo-pah-ah-hay  Kah-heesah  Nah-noo-bah 

Zoad-eex-lah-yoh  Dohd-say-hah:  Oh-dah  Dah-ess  Bay-reen-tah  Tah-ah-ex-sah  Hoo- 
bahr-doh  Tahs-tax  Ee-lah-see.  Soh-bah  Es-ah-dah  Ee  Von-pay-hoh  Oon-pay-hoh. 
Ahl-doh-noo  Dahx  Eelah  Oh-dah  Toh-ah-tahray. 

Zoad-a-kah-rah  Oh-dah  Zoad-a-mer-ahnoo.  Oh-doh  Kee-klay  Kah-ah. 

Zoad-orjee  Lah-pay  Zoad-eer-eedoh  Noh-koh  Mah-dah,  Hoh-ah-tah-hay  Ee-aa-ee-dah. 


THE  EIGHTEENTH  KEY 
ENGLISH 

O Thou  mighty  Light  and  burning  Flame  of  Comfort  which  openest  the  Glory  of  God 
unto  the  centre  of  the  Earth. 

In  Whom  the  6332  secrets  of  Truth  have  their  abiding,  which  is  called  in  Thy  Kingdom 
Joy,  and  not  to  be  measured. 

Be  Thou  a window  of  comfort  unto  me. 

Move  therefore  and  show  yourselves.  Open  the  mysteries  of  your  creation!  Be  friendly 
unto  me,  for  1 am  the  servant  of  the  same  your  God,  the  true  worshipper  of  the  Highest. 


70 


VOLUME  TEN 


THE  EIGHTEENTH  KEY 
ENOCHIAN 

lis  micaolz  Olprt  od  lalprt,  bliors  ds  odo  Busdir  O lad  ovoars  caosgo,  casarmg  ERAN  la 
lad  brints  cafafam,  ds  1 vmd  Agio  Adohi  Moz  od  Maoffas. 

Bolp  como  bliort  pambt. 

Zacar  od  zamran.  Odo  cicle  qaa. 

Zorge  lap  zirdo  noco  Mad,  hoath  laida. 

THE  EIGHTEENTH  KEY 
PHONETIC 

Ee-loh-sah  Mee-kah-ohl-zoad  Ohl-peertah  Oh-dah  Ee-ahl-peertah  Blee-ohr-sah  Dah- 
ess  Oh-doh  Boos-dee-rah  Oh-ee-ah-day  Oh-voh-ahrsah  Kah-ohs-goh,  Kass-armjee  Ay- 
rahnoo  Lah  ee-andah  Breen-tas  Kah-fah-fay-may  Dah-ess  EE  Oo-may-day  Ahk-loh  Ah- 
doh-hee  Moh-zoad  Oh-dah  Mah-oh-fah-fah-sah. 

Boh-lah-pay  Koh-moh  Blee-ohrta  Pahm-bay-tay. 

Zoad-a-kah-rah  Oh-dah  Zoad-a-mer-ahnoo.  Oh-doh  Kee-klay  Kah-ah. 

Zoad-orjee  Lah-pay  Zoad-eer-eedoh  Noh-koh  Mah-dah,  Hoh-ah-tah-hay  Ee-aa-ee-dah. 


71 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


TITLES  OF  THE  30  AETHYRS 


1 

LIL 

16 

LEA 

2 

ARN 

17 

TAN 

3 

ZOM 

18 

ZEN 

4 

PAZ 

19 

POP 

5 

LIT 

20 

KHR 

6 

MAZ 

21 

ASP 

7 

DEO 

22 

LIN 

8 

ZID 

23 

TOR 

9 

ZIP 

24 

NIA 

10 

ZAX 

25 

VTI 

11 

1CH 

26 

DES 

12 

LOE 

27 

ZAA 

13 

ZIM 

28 

BAG 

14 

UTA 

29 

RII 

15 

OXO 

30 

TEX 

THE  CALL  OF  THE  THIRTY  AETHYRS 
ENGLISH 

The  heavens  which  dwell  in  the  (First  Aire),  (or  name  the  Aire  required)  are  mighty  in  the 
Parts  of  the  Earth,  and  execute  the  judgment  of  the  Highest! 

Unto  you  it  is  said:  Behold  the  Face  of  your  God,  the  beginning  of  Comfort,  whose  eyes 
are  the  Brightness  of  the  Heavens,  which  provided  you  for  the  Government  of  Earth  and  her 
Unspeakable  Variety,  furnishing  you  with  a Power  Understanding  to  dispose  all  things 
according  to  the  Providence  of  Him  that  sitteth  on  the  Holy  Throne,  and  rose  up  in  the 
heginning  saying: 

The  Earth,  let  her  be  governed  by  her  parts  and  let  there  be  division  in  her  that  the  glory  of 
her  may  be  always  drunken  and  vexed  in  itself. 

Her  course,  let  it  round  (or  run)  with  the  heavens,  and  as  an  handmaiden  let  her  serve 
them. 

One  season,  let  it  confound  another,  and  let  there  be  no  creature  upon  or  within  her  one 
and  the  same.  Al!  her  members  let  them  differ  in  their  qualities,  and  let  there  be  no  one 
creature  equal  with  another. 

The  reasonable  creatures  of  Earth,  or  Man,  let  them  vex  and  weed  out  one  another;  and 
their  dwelling  places,  let  them  forget  their  names. 

The  work  of  Man  and  his  pomp,  let  them  be  defaced.  His  buildings,  let  them  become 
caves  for  the  beasts  of  the  field!  Confound  her  understanding  with  Darkness.  For  why? 
It  repenteth  Me  that  I have  made  Man. 

One  while  let  her  be  known,  and  another  while  a stranger.  Because  she  is  the  bed  of  an 
harlot,  and  the  dwelling  place  of  Him  that  is  Fallen. 


72 


VOLUME  TEN 


O ye  Heavens,  Arise!  The  lower  Heavens  beneath  you,  let  them  serve  you!  Govern  those  that 
govern.  Cast  down  such  as  Fall.  Bring  forth  with  those  that  increase,  and  destroy  the  rotten. 

No  place,  let  it  remain  in  one  number.  Add  and  diminish  until  the  Stars  be  numbered. 

Arise ! Move ! And  appear  before  the  Covenant  of  His  Mouth  which  He  hath  sworn  unto  us  in  His 
justice.  Open  the  Mysteries  of  your  creation,  and  make  us  partakers  of  the  Undefiled  Knowledge. 

THE  CALL  OF  THE  THIRTY  AETHYRS 
ENOCHIAN 

Madriaax  ds  praf  LIL  (or  name  the  Aethyr  required)  chis  micaolz  saanir  caosgo  od  fisis  balzizras 

laida! 

Nonca  gohulim:  Micma  adoian  Mad,  Iaod  bliorb,  soba  ooaona  chis  Lucifitias  Piripsol,  ds  abraassa 
noncf  netaaib  caosgi  od  tilb  adphaht  damploz,  tooatnoncfg  Micalz  Oma  Irasd  tol  glo  marb  Yarry  Idoigo 
od  torzulp  Iaodaf  gohol: 

Caosga  tabaord  saanir  od  christeos  yrpoil  tiobi  busdir  tilb  noaln  paid  orsba  od  dodrmni  zylna. 

Elzap  tub  parm  gi  Piripsax,  od  ta  qurist  booapis. 

L nibm  ovcho  symp  od  christeos  ag  toltorn  mire  q tiobi  1 el.  Tol  paomd  dilzmo  as  pian  od 
christeos  ag  L toltorn  parach  asymp. 

Cordziz,  dodpal  od  fifalz  L smnad:  od  fargt  bams  omaoas. 

Conisbra  od  avavox,  tonug.  Orsca  tbl  noasmi  tabges  levithmong.  Unchi  omp  tibi  ors. 

Bagle?  Modoah  ol  cordziz.  L capimao  izomaxip,  od  cacocasb  gosaa.  Baglem  pii  tianta  a 
babalond,  od  faorgt  teloc  vovim. 

Madriiax,  torzu!  Oadriax  orocho  aboapri!  Tabaori  priaz  ar  tabas.  Adrpan  cors  ta  dobix.  lolcam 
priazi  ar  coazior,  od  Quasb  Qting. 

Ripir  paoxt  sa  la  cor.  Vml  od  prdzar  cacrg  aoiveae  cormpt. 

Torzu!  Zacar!  Od  zamran  aspt  sibsi  butmona,  ds  surzas  tia  balta. 

Odo  cicle  qaa,  Od  ozozma  plapli  ladnamad. 

THE  CALL  OF  THE  THIRTY  AETHYRS 
PHONETIC 

Mah-dree-ahx  dah-ess  pay-rah-fay  (NAME  AETHYR)  Kah-hees  mee-kah-ohl-zoad  sah-ah-neer 
kah-ohs-goh  oh-dah  fee-see-sah  bahl-zoad-ee-zoad-rah-sah  Ee-ah-ee-dah! 

Noh-nooh-kah  goh-hoo-leem;  mee-kah-mah  ah-doh-ee-ah-noo  Mah-dah;  Ee-ah-oh-dah  blee-ohr- 
bay,  soh-bah  oo-ah-oh-nah  kah-hees  Loo-kif-tee-ahs  Pee-rip-sohlah,  dah-ess  ah-brah-ahs-sah  noh-noo- 
kah-fay  nay-tah-ah-ee-bay  kah-ohs-jee  oh-dah  teelah-bay  ahd-phah-hay-tah  dah-mah-ploh-zoad,  too-ah- 
tah  noh-noo-kah-fay,  jee  meekahl-zoad  oh-rnah  ayl-rah-sahd  toh-lah  jee-loh-hah  em-ah-bay  yah-ree  Ee- 
doh-ee-goh  oh-dah  tor-zoad-ool-pay  Ee-ah-oh-dah-eff  goh-hol; 


73 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Kah-ohs-gah  tah-bah-ohr-dah  sah-ah-neer  oh-dah  krees-tee-ohs  eer-poh-eelah  tee-ohbe ! boos-deer  teel- 
bay  noh-ahl-noo  pah-ee-dah  ohrs-bah  oh-dah  doh-dahr-mee-nee  zoad-ee-lah-nah. 

Ayl-zoad-ah-pay  teel-bay  pahr-mayjee  Pee-reep-sax,  oh-dah  tah  kew-rel-saht  boo-ah-pees.  Ay! 
nee-bah-may  oh-vah-choh  see-mah-pay  oh-dah  krees-tee-ohs  ah-jee  tohl-tor-noo  mee-rah-kah  goh  tee-oh- 
be!  Ay!  ay-lah,  toh4ah  pah-ohm-dah  dee!-zoad-moh  Ah-ess  peeah-noo  oh-dah  krees-tee-ohs  ab-jee  Ay! 
tohtornoo  pah-rah-chah  ah-seem-pah. 

Kohr-dah-zoad-ee-zoad,  doh-dah-pah-lay  oh-dah  fee-fah!-zoad  Ayl  ess-mah-noo-ahd;  oh-dah 
fahr-gee-tah  bah-em-sah  ohm-ah  -oh-ah-sah. 

Koh-nees-brah  oh-dah  ah-vah-vah-ohtza,  toh-noo-gee.  Ohrs-kah  tee-bay-ayl  noh-ahsmee  tah-bay- 
jee-sah  lev-ee-thah-moh-noo-jee,  oo-noo-chee  oh-may-pay  tee-bay-ayl  ohr-sah. 

Bah-g!ay?  Moh-doh-ah  oh-e!  kohr-dah-zoad.  Ay!  kah-pee-mah-oh  ee-zoad-ee  mahx-eepay,  oh- 
dah  kah-koh-kahs-bay  goh-sah-ah.  Bah-glay-noo  pee-ee  tee-ahnoo-tah  ah  bahbah-loh-noo-dah,  oh-dah 
fah-ohr-j  ee-tay  tay-lohk- voh- veem 

Mah-dree-ahx,  tor-zoad-oo!  Oh-ah-dree-ahx  ohr-ochoh  ah-boh-ah-pree!  Tah-bahohree  pree-ah- 
zoad  ah-ray  tah-bah-sah.  Ahd-ray-pahnoo  Kohr-sah  tay-ah  doh-beex.  Eeoh!-kah-mah  pree-ah-zoad-ee-ah- 
ray  koh-ah-zoad-ee-ohr-ray,  oh-dah  kew-ahs-bah  kewtee  -noo-gah. 

Ree-pee-rah  pah-ohx-tay  essah  ay!-ahkohr.  Oo-may-lah  pray-dah-zoad-ah-ray  kahkahr-jee  ah-oh- 
ee-vay-ah-ay  koh-em-pay-toh. 

Tohr-zoad-oo!  Zoad-ah-kah-ray!  Oh-dah  zoad-ah-mer-ah-noo  ahs-pay-tah  see-bay-see  boot-moh- 
nah,  dah-ess  soo-ray-zoad-ahs  tee-ah  bah!-toh-noo. 

Oh-doh  kee-klay  kah-ah.  Oh-dah  Oh-zoad-oh-zoad-mah  plah-plee  Ee-ahd-nah-mah-dah. 


74 


VOLUME  TEN 


AN  ADDENDUM  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  CONCOURSE  OF  THE  FORCES 
POSTSCRIPT  TO  ENOCHIANA 
By 

V.H.  FRATER  A.M.A.G. 

(This  thesis  was  written  in  1935  following  an  intensive  study  of  the  Golden 
Dawn  documents  on  the  Enochian  system.  It  has  been  left  virtually  in  the  same  form 
it  had  at  that  time.) 

That  the  Enochian  scheme  is  a vast  and  extensive  one  is  well  known  to  the 
Zelator  Adeptus  Minor.  But  that  it  is  as  extensive  as  actually  it  is,  is  suspected  I am 
sure  by  few.  For  the  complete  system  of  the  Enochian  Tablets  comprises,  in  reality, 
several  apparently  disconnected  schemes  - most  of  which  are  not  even  known  to 
the  average  Z.A.M.  Though  they  are  unknown  is  not  to  say  that  they  are 
unimportant,  for  it  requires  but  little  perspicacity  to  realize  that  the  Enochian 
system  underlies  a large  part  of  the  important  work  of  the  Order. 

There  are  many  hints  to  indicate  that  the  Z.A.M.  is  not  in  full  possession  of 
all  the  Enochian  knowledge.  As  the  Adeptus  Minor  ritual  so  eloquently  observes  of 
but  one  of  the  parts  of  the  system:  "Before  the  Door  of  the  Tomb,  as  symbolic 
Guardians,  are  the  Elemental  Tablets  and  the  Kerubic  Emblems,  even  as  before 
the  mystical  Gate  of  Eden  stood  the  watchful  Kerubirn  and  the  Sword  of  Flame.  Do 
not  therefore  forget  that  the  Tablets  and  the  Kerubirn  are  the  Guardians  of  the 
Tomb  of  the  Adepti. . . " 

The  whole  system  comprises  the  following  segments: 

1.  Liber  Enoch  - (Liber  Logaeth),  these  are  the  Enochian 
Tablets. 

2.  The  Claves  Angelicae. 

3.  Liber  Scientiae  Auxiliis  et  Victoriae  Terrestris. 

4.  Sigllum  Dei  Aemeth. 

5.  Heptarchia  Mystica. 

6.  The  Round  Tablet  of  Nalvage. 

The  first  two  items  above  have  been  dealt  with  very  adequately  in  the  routine 
instructions  provided  for  the  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor  in  such  documents  as  The 
Book  of  the  Concourse  of  the  Forces,  as  well  as  in  the  various  introductions  and 
digests  made  of  that  book,  and  also  in  the  Ritual  "T"  known  as  The  Book  of  the 
Forty  Eight  Angelical  Keys  or  Calls. 

The  remaining  schemes  are  not  dealt  with  at  all  in  the  study  programme  of 
work  prescribed  for  the  Z.A.  M.  In  various  places  of  those  manuscripts  there  are 
deliberate  gaps,  indicating  that  such  and  such  an  item  of  knowledge  does  not  come 
within  the  sphere  of  knowledge  of  the  Z.A.M. 

Nonetheless  a certain  amount  of  light  can  be  thrown  without  too  much 
difficulty  upon  these  deliberate  gaps,  though  whether  or  not  they  will  be  considered 
important  depends 


75 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


wholly  on  how  much  of  the  ordinary  Enochian  material  already  available  has  been 
assimilated  and  appreciated  by  the  Z.A.M. 

Although  in  this  paper  1 propose  to  concern  myself  almost  exclusively  with  the 
third  of  the  foregoing  schemes,  to  show  its  relation  to  the  previous  two  which  are  summarized 
in  the  material  freely  circulated  within  the  Order,  a few  words  in  description  of  the  others 
may  be  found  useful. 

The  Sigillum  Dei  Aemeth  consists  of  a highly  elaborate  Pentacle,  said  to  be  a 
magical  synthesis  of  ideas  of  a purely  spiritual  nature  with  regard  to  Divine,  Archangelic 
and  Angelic  Names  concerned  with  the  celestial  spheres  wherein  operate  the  planetary 
forces.  The  latter  are  but  the  palaces  or  thrones  of  the  forces  depicted  by  the  Sigillum.  That 
this  is  so  may  be  gathered  from  a statement  uttered  by  the  Angel  MICHAEL  in  his 
communications  to  the  skryers  - Dr.  John  Dee  and  Sir  Edward  Kelley  - who  were 
responsible  for  the  recording  of  this  system: 

"When  thou  wilt  have  anything  to  do  in  the  world,  in  human  affairs,  seek  nothing 
in  Sigillo  Aemeth.  Enoch,  his  book,  is  a wordly  book.  Veritas  in  Coelo,  Imago  veritatis, 
in  herra  hornini.  Imago  imagini  respondet.  Coelestia  autem  petuntur  a Coelo." 

In  Ritual  "T,"  it  is  mentioned  that  Irwin's  manuscript  gave  certain  names  after  the  first 
18  Keys.  Most  of  these  names  appear  on  the  enclosed  Heptagrams  of  the  Sigillum. 

(The  Order  documents  do  not  explain  who  this  mysterious  Irwin  is,  though  his  name 
is  used  several  times.  However,  Waite  in  his  Brotherhood  of  the  Rosy  Cross  refers  to  him  and 
clears  up  the  mystery,  though  in  his  usual  sarcastic  way  it  seems  as  if  he  had  no  use  for 
Major  Irwin.) 

Moreover,  it  must  be  noted  that  the  Sigils  attributed  to  the  four  Enochian  Tablets  - 
a Cross,  a Sun  with  12  Rays,  and  a Cross  in  whose  angles  are  b4,  6b  and  a (T)  with  4 Yods 
above  it,  receive  their  elucidation  from  this  Sigillum,  being  resolved  into  the  names  of  the 
so-called  Four  Great  Overseer-Angels  of  these  Tablets. 

The  Heptarchia  Mystica  is  very  closely  related  to  the  former  system,  for  it  gives 
the  names  and  sigils  and  invocations  of  the  Angels  and  the  lesser  Spirits  of  the  Planets. 
It  touches  a much  lower  plane  than  the  Sigillum,  the  heavens  of  Assiah  as  it  were,  while  the 
Sigillum  soars  to  the  worlds  of  Briah  and  Yetzirah.  The  world  of  Atziluth  is  touched 
through  the  system  of  Liber  Scientiae  Auxiliis  et  Victoriae  Terrestris.  Moreover,  the 
Heptarchical  Mystery  gives  an  additional  seven  Tablets  which  are  rather  different  in 
content  and  structure  from  the  four  Elemental  Tablets  we  know  already. 

The  schemes  numbered  1-5  are  very  intimately  related  to  the  Enochian  system  and 
one  to  another.  Item  6,  the  Round  Table  of  Nalvage,  however,  is  a magical  Tablet  which 
for  the  moment  I have  been  unable  to  relate  to  the  others.  The  communicating  Angel 
NALVAGE  dictated,  in  much  the  same  way  as  did  Ave  and  Michael  in  other  connections, 
a series  of  letters  and  words  which  were  to  be  arranged  in  a certain  manner.  They  begin 
ZIR  MOZ  IAD  - Zodireh  Mozod  lada  -"1  am  the  Joy  of  God. "etc.  What  the  practical 
application  of  this  Tablet  is  remains  yet  to  be  discovered.  It  consists  of  four  very  small 
Tablets,  each  of 


76 


VOLUME  TEN 


nine  letters,  in  all  of  which  the  word  IAD  figures  in  four  distinct 
permutations,  surrounded  by  four  words  of  five  letters  each,  making  32  letters. 
Whether  this  fact  connects  it  with  the  four  Terrestrial  Tablets  and  the  Tablet  of 
Union  I can  hardly  say  at  this  time.  Of  this  Tablet,  NALVAGE  stated:  "The 
substance  is  God  the  Father.  The  circumference  is  God  the  Son.  The  order  and 
knitting  together  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost."  etc.  This  does  suggest  the  three  columns 
or  the  cross  bar  and  double  Pillars  of  the  Central  Cross  of  the  Tablets  - Linea 
Spiritus  Sancti,  Linea  Dei  Patris  Filiique. 

To  refer  back  to  Liber  Scientae  Auxiliis,  as  a preliminary  point,  let  it  be 
noted  that  in  Ritual  "T,"  the  following  passages  occur:  "The  application  of  the  Keys 
of  the  30  Aethrys  does  not  come  into  the  knowledge  of  the  Z.A.M.  Now  although 
these  Keys  are  thus  to  be  employed  to  aid  thee  in  the  Skrying  of  the  Tablets  in  the 
Spirit  Vision,  and  in  magical  working  therewith,  yet  shalt  thou  know  that  they  be 
allotted  unto  a much  higher  plane  than  the  operation  of  the  Tablets  in  the  Assiatic 
World.  And  therefore  are  they  thus  employed  in  bringing  the  Higher  Light  and  the 
All-potent  Forces  into  action  herein.  And  so  also,  they  are  not  to  be  profaned,  or 
used  lightly  with  an  impure  or  frivolous  mind." 

In  other  words,  it  relates  to  the  schema  described  in  the  Order  manuscript 
entitled  The  Microcosm  which  lays  down  the  philosophical  dictum  that  the  Kether 
of  Man,  "his  Yechidah  is  his  Divine  Consciousness  because  it  is  the  only  part  of  man 
which  can  touch  the  All-potent  Forces.  Behind  Yechidah  are  the  Angelic  and 
Archangelic  Forces  of  which  the  Yechidah  is  the  manifestor.  It  is  therefore  the 
lower  Genius  or  Viceroy  of  the  Higher  Genius  which  is  beyond,  and  which  is  an 
Angel  Mighty  and  Terrible.  This  Great  Angel  is  the  Higher  Genius,  beyond  which 
are  the  Archangelic  and  Divine." 

What  is  to  be  observed  from  this  is,  that  of  the  same  nature  as  the  Higher 
Genius  are  the  all-potent  macrocosmic  forces  called  forth  by  the  Keys  of  the 
Aethyrs,  as  shown  by  the  fact  that  though  91  in  number,  which  equals  AMN,  the 
latter  has  a gematria  of  741  which  reduces  to  12.  And  12  is  the  gematria  of  HUA, 
the  great  Avenging  Angel,  the  holy  and  divine  Genius  in  KETHER.  And  the 
invocation  of  these  forces  is  to  be  undertaken  in  fulfillment  of  the  Obligation 
wherein  the  5-6  initiate  swore  on  the  Cross  to  apply  himself  to  the  Great  Work  so 
that,  one  day,  he  might  become  more  than  human,  etc.  Thus  no  frivolous  or 
ignorant  mind  could  invoke  these  divine  forces  without  bringing  serious  spiritual 
and  physical  harm  to  himself,  as  the  Ritual  "T"  duly  and  rightly  warns. 

The  second  point  to  be  noticed  is  that  to  construct  the  Enochian  Tablets 
entirely  with  capital  letters  is  a serious  mistake.  It  may  be  useful  to  do  so  for  the  sake 
of  convenience  or  of  increased  legibility.  But  so  doing  obscures  one  of  the  several 
important  functions  of  the  Tablet.  Certain  letters  thereon  should  appear  in  lower 
case  letters  and  others  in  capitals.  It  is  from  these  latter  capital  letters  that  are 
constructed  the  names  of  mighty  Angelical  Princes  who  rule  in  each  of  the  thirty 
Aethyrs.  To  each  of  the  Aethyrs  there  are  attributed  three  Governors  or  Angelical 
Princes,  with  the  exception  of  the  thirtieth  Aethyr  named  TEX,  in  which  there  are 
four. 


77 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Thus,  the  Tablets  enshrine,  in  addition  to  those  names  already  described  by  The 
Book  of  the  Concourse  of  the  Forces,  the  names  of  Ninety  One  Angelical  Princes  whose  rule 
is  in  the  Thirty  Aethyrs  of  the  Macrocosmic  World. 

91  equals  the  Gematria  of  Aleph  Mem  Nun  which  equals  Amen,  as  mentioned 
previously.  And  Amen  equals  Amoun,  the  concealed  One,  the  Opener  of  the  Day.  Hence 
also  are  the  names  of  these  91  Princes  opened  up  and  yet  concealed  in  all  secrecy  in  the  Four 
Terrestrial  Tablets  and  the  Mystical  Tablet  of  Union.  Note  that  Amoun  is  concealed  within 
the  heart  of  the  God-Man  YSHhVH  (whose  Gematria  is  326.)  91+326  equals  417  equals  12. 
And  twelve  is  the  Gematria  of  the  great  Angel  HUA. 

The  scheme  delineated  at  length  in  the  book  entitled  Liber  Scientiae  Auxiliis  et 
Victoriae  Terrestris,  further  conceives  that  each  of  these  Angelic  Princes  is  under  the 
governancy  of  some  one  of  the  mighty  Archangels  ruling  the  mystical  twelve  Tribes  of  Israel 
together  with  the  twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac.  They  are  given  in  a special  order  which 
corresponds  to  the  order  of  the  Archangels  depicted  in  the  Zelator  diagram  of  the 
Shewbread.  There  is,  nevertheless,  a slight  discrepancy  in  the  order  of  the  Names  of  the 
Tribes  as  related  to  the  Archangels.  Rectified,  the  attribution  may  be  noted  as  below: 

Aries 

The  Tribe  is  Gad,  the  Deity  name  AOZPI,  the  Archangelic  name  is  MALCHIDAEL 
and  the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  OLPAGED. 

Taurus 

The  Tribe  is  Ephraim,  the  Deity  name  MOR,  the  Archangelic  name  is  AS  MODEL 
and  the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  ZIRACAH. 

Gemini 

The  Tribe  is  Manasseh,  the  Deity  name  is  DIAL,  the  Archangelic  name  is 
AMBRIEL  and  the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  HONONOL. 

Cancer 

The  Tribe  is  Issachar,  the  Deity  name  HCTGA,  the  Archangelic  name  is  MURIEL 
and  the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  ZARNAAH. 

Leo 

The  Tribe  is  Judah,  the  Deity  name  is  OIP,  the  Archangelic  name  is  VERCHIEL  and 
the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  GEBABAL. 

Virgo 

The  Tribe  is  Naphthali,  the  Deity  name  is  TEAA,  the  Archangelic  name  is 
HAMALIEL  and  the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  ZURCHOL. 

Libra 

The  Tribe  is  Asshur,  the  Deity  name  PDOCE,  the  Archangelic  name  is  ZURIEL  and 
the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  ALPUDUS. 

Scorpio 

The  Tribe  is  Dan,  the  Deity  name  MPH,  the  Archangelic  name  is  BARACHIELand 
the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  CADAAMP. 


78 


VOLUME  TEN 


Sagittarius 

The  Tribe  is  Benjamin,  the  Deity  name  ARSL,  the  Archangelic  name  is 
ADVACHIEL  and  the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  ZARZILG. 

Capricorn 

The  Tribe  is  Zebulun,  the  Deity  name  GAIOL,  the  Archangelic  name  is  HANAEL 
and  the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  LAVAVOTH. 

Aquarius 

The  Tribe  is  Reuben,  the  Deity  name  ORO,  the  Archangelic  name  is  CAM  BRIEL 
and  the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  ZINGGEN. 

Pisces 

The  Tribe  is  Simeon,  the  Deity  name  IB  AH,  the  Archangelic  name  is  A M NITZIEL 
and  the  Governing  Angelic  name  is  ARFAOLG. 

In  classifying  these  names  I have  arranged  the  appropriate  Great  and  Secret  Holy 
Names  of  God  as  they  appear  on  the  Elemental  Tablets  following  the  suggestion  made  in 
S.A.'s  Ritual  where  this  passage  occurs: 

"Apply  this  scheme  to  the  Earth  treating  the  Three  Deity  Names  as  the  Three  Signs  of 
the  Zodiac  in  one  quarter.  Thus,  take  the  Fire  Tablet  and  place  OIP  in  Leo,  TEAA  in 
Virgo,  PDOCE  in  Libra,  and  so  on  with  the  other  God-names,  treating  the  Kerubic  signs  as 
the  "point-de-depart";  one  quarter  of  a House  in  Astrology  will  also  be  roughly  equal  to 
the  square  of  each  letter." 

The  above  classification  provides  a comprehensive  scheme  to  be  used  by  itself, 
alone,  or  in  collaboration  with  the  Angelic  Names  of  the  Schem-hamphoresch,  of  great 
value  in  the  art  of  invocation.  In  invocation,  the  two  sets  of  names  could  be  used  conjointly 
to  generate  a good  deal  of  power.  The  Pentagram  could  be  used  with  the  Archangelic 
name,  together  with  the  appropriate  permutations  of  Tetragrammaton,  as  indicated  by  the 
Sepher  Yetzirah.  The  Governing  Angelic  Name  could  be  used  with  the  Hexagram,  using 
the  appropriate  figure  of  the  planet  ruling  the  Sign  - Mars  for  Aries,  and  Jupiter  for  Pisces, 
etc.,  using  not  the  Sigil  of  the  planet  but  the  Sigil  of  the  Zodiacal  Sign. 

The  tabulation  of  the  Names  which  now  follow  provides  the  names  of: 

The  Aire  or  Aethyr  itself. 

The  Name  of  the  Angelical  Governor  of  the  Division. 

The  Number  of  the  Tribe  of  Israel  and  its  Presiding 
Archangel.  The  Number  of  ministers  and  attendants. 

Before  proceeding  to  this  classification,  the  Z.A.M.  may  recall  that  in  Ritual  "T" 
the  following  passage  occurs:  "The  Numbers  456  and  6739  etc.,  which  occur  in  some  of 
the  Calls  contain  Mysteries  which  are  not  now  to  be  explained." 

These  unexplained  Mysteries  will  be  found  to  be  self-explanatory  by  referring  to  the 
final  column  of  the  following  Table  which  classifies  in  systematic  order  the  Aethyrs, 
their  Governors  and  their  Angels,  together  with  the  number  of  subservient  attendants. 


79 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


1st  LIL 

OCCODON  Ninth,  7209,  PASCOMB  Eleventh,  2360,  VALGARS  Seventh,  5562.  2nd 
ARN 

DOAGNIS  Fourth,  3636,  PACASNA  Second,  2362,  D1ALIVA  Second,  8962.  3rd  ZOM 
SAMAPHA  Ninth,  4400,  VIROOLI  Seventh,  3660,  ANDISPI  Tenth,  9236. 

4th  PAZ 

THOTANF  Tenth,  2360,  AXZ1ARG  Tenth,  3000,  POTHNIR  Twelfth,  6300. 

5th  LIT 

FAZDIX1  First,  8630,  NOCAMAL  Seventh,  2306,  TIARPAX  Eleventh,  5802.  6th  MAZ 
SAXTOMP  Fifth,  3620,  VAVAAMP  Twelfth,  9200,  ZIRZIRD  Fifth,  7220. 

7th  DEO 

OBMACAS  Fourth,  6363,  GENADOL  Third,  7706,  ASP1AON  Eleventh,  6320.  8th  Z1D 
ZAMFRES  Fifth,  4362,  TODNAON  First,  7236,  PRISTAC  Ninth,  2302. 

9th  ZIP 

ODDIORG  Third,  9996,  CRAFP1R  Tenth,  3620,  DOANZIN  Ninth,  4230. 

10th  ZAX 

LEXARPH  Eleventh,  8880,  COMANAN  Seventh,  1230,  TABITOM  Ninth,  1617.  11th 
ICH 

MOLPAND  Tenth,  3472,  VANARDA  Sixth,  7236,  PONODOF  Third,  5234.  12th  LOE 
TAPAMAL  Sixth,  2658,  GEDOONS  Eighth,  7772,  AMBRIAL  Second,  3391.  13th  ZIM 
GECAOND  Tenth,  8111,  LAPARIN  First,  3360,  DOCEPAX  Seventh,  4213. 

14th  YTA 

TEDOOND  Fifth,  2673,  VIVIPOS  Seventh,  9236,  OOANAMB  Twelfth,  8230.  15th  OXO 
TAHANDO  Ninth,  1367,  NOCIABI  Tenth,  1367,  TASTOXO  Twelfth,  1886. 

16th  LEA 

COCARPT  Second,  9920,  LANACON  Third,  9230,  SOCHIAL  Twelfth,  9240.  17th  TAN 
SIG  MORF  Second,  7623,  AYDROPT  Fifth,  7132,  TOCARZI  Ninth,  2634. 

18th  ZEN 

NABAOMI  Fifth,  2346,  ZAFASAI  Seventh,  7689,  YAFPAMB  Twelfth,  9276.  19th  POP 
TORZOX1  Twelfth,  6236,  ABAIOND  Eighth,  6732,  OMAGRAP  Eleventh,  2388.  20th 
KHR 

ZILDRON  Fifth,  3626,  PARZIBA  Third,  7629,  TOTOCAN  Seventh,  3634. 

21st  ASP 

CHIRSPA  Twelfth,  5536,  TOANTOM  Eighth,  5635,  VIXPALG  Sixth,  5658. 


80 


VOLUME  TEN 


22nd  LIN 

OXIDAIA  Twelfth,  2232,  PARAOAN  First,  2326,  CALZIRG  Twelfth,  2367. 

23rd  TOR 

RONOAMB  Seventh,  7320,  ONIZIMP  Seventh,  7262,  ZAXANIN  Eighth,  7333. 

24th  NIA 

ORCAM1R  Fourth,  8200,  CHIALPS  Tenth,  8360,  SOAGEEL  Twelfth,  8236. 

25th  VTI 

MIRZIND  Fourth,  5632,  OBVAORS  Second,  6333,  RANGLAM  Twelfth,  6236. 

26th  DES 

POPHAND  Twelfth,  9232,  NIGRANA  Eighth,  3620,  BAZCHIM  Twelfth,  5637. 

27th  ZAA 

SAZIAMA  Second,  7220,  MATHULA  Fourth,  7560,  ORPAMB  Fifth,  7263. 

28th  BAG 

LABNIXP  Tenth,  2630,  FOCISNI  Ninth,  7236,  OXLOPAR  Sixth,  8200. 

29th  RII 

VASTR1M  Third,  9632,  ODRAXTI  Fourth,  4236,  GOMZ1AM  Fifth,  7635. 

30th  TEX 

TAOAGFA  Twelfth,  4632,  GEMNIMB  Fourth,  9636,  ADVORPT  Third,  7632, 
DOZINAL  Sixth,  5632. 


From  these  names  magical  Sigils  are  formed.  But  it  is  extremely  difficult  adequately 
to  describe  how  the  names  of  these  91  Princes  are  formed  and  how  their  Sigils  are  drawn, 
In  order  to  avoid  excessive  verbiage,  the  following  four  diagrams  will  demonstrate 
clearly  their  Sigils  drawn  on  the  Enochian  Tablets.  By  comparing  these  diagrams  with  the 


IS 

S3 

d! 

Ei 

BE 

13 

19 

3 

3 

13 

m 

3 

IB 

Ei 

a 

3 

3 

W 

31 

ESi 

ts 

lli 

3 

M 

91 

SB 

EE 

Lid 

9 

3 

H 

a 

B 

m 

BE 

19 

m 

B 

IB 

19 

b 

m 

m 

a 

Bb 

m 

ia 

a 

ml 

m 

n 

B 

a 

bE 

EH 

E 

B 

El 

IB 

a 

3 

IB! 

3 

IBI 

S3 

3 

3 

■ 

mi 

m 

3 

3 

3 

Bi 

S3 

m 

3 

3 

m 

a 

E9 

B 

IB 

§1 

a 

S3 

B 

B 

13 

H 

a 

m 

El 

3 

3 

Hil 

!a 

3 

H 

3 

ni 

s 

3 

B 

9 

a 

as 

IB 

R 

EE 

B 

H 

a 

a 

■; 

B 

Be 

13 

El 

B 

3 

a 

B 

m 

EB 

ri 

13 

H 

S 

3 

a 

Hi 

HQ 

urn 

■HE 

81 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


PI  pin 

wm 

a 

frm 

nil 

m 

SB 

a 

bd 

i£3l 

Esea 

0 

a 

ES 

ai 

m 

la 

a 

BBS 

a 

a 

Is 

ai 

be 

SB 

a 

maa 

a 

a 

a 

m 

pi 

aa 

a 

S3E 

a 

B 

pj 

a 

LSZ 

aa 

a 

QBB 

a 

a 

m 

Ell 

aa 

S9 

BBS! 

a 

m 

BE 

SB 

!EI 

mm 

a 

il 

B 

a 

BE 

aa 

m 

msB 

in 

B 

a 

a 

ai 

m 

a 

am 

im 

a 

a 

as 

IS 

a 

BBMB 

a 

a 

a 

as 

sa 

a 

BBE 

a 

a 

IB 

BE 

as 

a 

luces 

a 

m 

H 

01 

El 

SIGILS 


GOVERNORS 


Enochian  Tablets,  it  should  be  simple  for  the  Z.A.M.  to  trace  out  these  names  and 
work  out  for  himself  the  method  by  which  they  are  formed  from  the  letters  of  the 
Tablets.  The  customary  division  of  Air,  Fire,  Water  and  Earth  sub-elements  or  Lesser 
Angles  does  not  enter  into  this  matter,  the  Names  and  Sigils  of  the  Princes,  in  any  way 
whatsoever. 


I stumbled  on  this  formula  accidentally.  Later,  I discovered  that  Crowley  had 
worked  them  out  years  earlier,  and  published  the  Sigils  in  one  of  the  Equinox  volumes.  I 
had  seen  this  many  years  before  my  own  discovery,  but  at  that  time  his  sigils  and  findings 
meant  little  to  me.  There  are  some  discrepancies  between  Crowley's  versions  of  the  sigils 
and  my  own.  Whose  are  more  accurate,  I cannot  determine  at  this  time.  Nearly  50  years 
have  elapsed  since  I worked  on  this  particular  problem,  and  my  memory  does  not  tell 
me  much  at  present. 


82 


S ii  4 a s ° _%  r b z n h 

f w o n d ai'fd'j  a.  V 1 j 

o r o i bah  a o z p i 

tc  N a b fg  V i X §,  a sz  d 

0 i i i t Tt  1 1 0 a i 


OHL 

n r 


M.O  r d i a.  1 


h !C  t 


h t a. 


m -f. 

a m 


A b a m o 

o 

o 

a C Uv  c a 

N 

a o c [O  T t 

n p r Uq.T 

0 

c la,  n m. 

CL 

3 

o t r o i 

S h i a-  1 

r 

a 

P m z o x 

TABLETS  WITH  SIGILS 


83 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


There  is  very  little  that  actually  can  be  said  about  this  additional  tabulation  which 
will  be  of  any  immediate  practical  value  to  the  Z.A.M.  If  the  whole  scheme  of  the 
Enochian  Tablets  is  studied  in  all  its  innumerable  ramifications  and  an  earnest  endeavour 
made  to  correlate  the  information  given  here  to  those  Tablets,  then  the  student  will 
discover  for  himself  many  facts  of  tremenydous  importance  and  significance.  Unless  one  is 
well-versed  in  this  subject,  any  of  thee-rTfatters  described  at  greater  length  could  appear 
as  trivial. 

But  this  much  may  be  said.  By  studying  the  classical  attributions  of  the  Egyptian  Gods 
to  the  squares,  and  by  taking  the  Gods  which  are  allocated  to  the  several  squares  to  which 
the  Names  of  any  of  the  above  mentioned  Governing  Princes  are  attributed,  it  is  possible  to 
construct  an  invocation  composed  of  the  formulae  of  these  Gods.  It  will  comprise  a species 
of  continuous  invocation  of  the  forces  of  the  Atziluthic  world. 

For  example,  one  of  the  Sigils  of  these  Princes  may  pass  through  several  letters,  to 
which  squares  are  attributed  the  Goddess  Isis,  Nephthys,  Osiris  two  times,  Kabexnuv  and 
Horus  two  times,  and  Hathor.  An  invocation  of  these  mighty  forces,  vibrating  their  names  in 
their  Coptic  attributions  will  serve  as  a most  potent  conjuration  of  the  Angel  whose  Sigil  is 
thus  being  traced. 

Again,  the  transliteration  of  the  letters  of  these  Names  into  Hebrew  makes  it  possible 
to  give  the  correct  colours  from  the  Rose  to  the  depicted  Sigils.  It  will  also  result,  by  the 
application  of  conventional  Order  methods,  in  the  formation  likewise  of  Telesmatic  figures 
of  great  beauty  and  power.  All  of  this  must  be  worked  out  personally  by  the  Z.A.M.  who 
finds  himself  interested  in  this  system.  He  will  be  amply  repaid  by  any  expenditure  of  time 
and  energy  in  this  direction. 

The  Thirty  Aethyrs  themselves  represent  a scheme  considerably  different  from  what 
we  have  been  able  to  conceptualize  through  the  Qabalah  and  its  major  glyph  of  the  Ten 
Sephiroth.  It  is  a more  primitive  scheme  and,  bluntly,  it  requires  a good  deal  of 
manipulation  to  make  attributions  to  the  Tree. 

The  method  of  application  of  these  Keys  of  the  Thirty  Aethyrs,  together  with  the 
names  of  their  Governing  Princes  is  extremely  simple,  and  in  part  has  already  been  shown 
in  Ritual  "T." 

Let  the  Z.A.M.  prepare  the  Temple  as  in  all  his  ceremonies  of  consecration  and 
proper  working.  That  is,  wearing  his  Rose-Cross  lamen,  with  Sword  and  Lotus  Wand  at 
hand,  implements  on  the  altar,  let  him  thoroughly  banish  all  forces  from  his  chamber,  purify 
with  water,  consecrate  with  fire  - or  use  the  method  of  Opening  by  Watchtower. 
Circumambulate,  and  adore  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  Then  let  the  invoking  Lesser  Ritual  of 
the  Hexagram  be  performed,  preceded  by  the  Qabalistic  Cross  and  followed  by  the 
analysis  of  the  Key-word  I.N.R.I.  Then  let  him  to  go  to  the  West  of  the  Altar,  and  facing 
East,  recite  the  words  of  the  Call  of  the  30  Aethyrs  inserting  the  name  of  whichever  Aethyr 
he  proposes  to  deal  with. 

I feel  I should  mention,  while  on  this  topic,  that  Crowley  discovered,  when  using 
these  Calls  to  cross  the  Abyss,  that  this  Call  which  seemed  a curse  turns  out  to  be  - seen 
from  the  "other  side  of  the  Abyss"  - a glorious  paean  of  praise  and  blessing. 


84 


VOLUME  TEN 


In  the  event  that  the  Z.A.M.  proposes  in  his  skrying  in  the  Aethyrs,  to  deal  with 
the  Governing  Princes  and  Archangels,  let  him  follow'  the  general  invocation  with  a 
particular  conjuration  of  the  Names.  A slight  variation  could  be  used  of  the  Exhortation  in 
the  Portal  Grade  which  invokes  Lexarph,  Comananu  and  Tabitom  (who  are  the  Three 
Ruling  Angels  of  the  Tablef  Union  as  well  as  the  10th  Aethyr  ZAX)  inserting  in  their 
place  the  Names  required. 

Following  his  skrying  in  the  Aethyr,  let  the  Z.A.M.  reconsecrate  his  Temple  with 
Fire  and  Water,  reverse  circumambulate,  Adoration,  and  the  Banishing  Ritual  of  the 
Pentagram. 

With  regard  to  the  Sigils  that  occur  let  it  be  noted  that  the  name  LAZDIXI  is  the  only 
one  of  the  91  Names  that  may  be  attributed  to  the  squares  or  letters  of  the  Tablets,  in  the 
formation  of  the  appropriate  Sigils,  in  two  different  ways.  Both  are  correct;  the  original 
manuscripts  are  silent  on  this  matter. 

Fikewise,  it  should  be  noted,  when  the  Z.A.M.  works  out  the  Sigils  for  himself,  that 
the  name  PARAOAN  forms  no  Sigil,  and  actually  does  not  appear  on  any  of  the  Tablets.  1 
can  offer  no  suggestion  or  reason  why  this  should  be  so.  It  seems  that  on  each  of  the  four 
Tablets,  there  are  one  or  two  squares  left  over,  as  it  were,  that  is,  left  blank  after  all  the  Sigils 
of  the  other  Names  have  been  duly  drawn.  The  name  PARAOAN  is  drawn  from  all  the 
Tablets,  and  is  an  Angel  combining  the  qualities  of  all  Four  Terrestrial  Tablets,  or 
synthesizes  them  in  some  way. 

Moreover,  be  it  noted  that  the  three  Angels  or  Princes  who  are  shown  to  be  the 
Ruling  Angels  over  the  three  Divisions  of  the  Tenth  Aethyr  of  ZAX  are  also  the  Angels 
who  are  given  as  the  mighty  Archangels  ruling  over  the  Mystical  Tablet  of  Union. 

It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  in  invoking  the  Aethyr  itself,  the  name  may  be 
transliterated  into  Hebrew,  and  vibrated  while  tracing  its  Sigil  on  the  Rose. 

PART  TWO  OF  THE  ADDENDUM  TO  THE  BOOK 
OF  THE  CONCOURSE  OF  THE  FORCES 

(Being  an  exposition  of  the  third  section  of  the  Enochian  system  - the  Sigillum 
Dei  Aemeth.) 

One  of  the  first  important  results  of  the  ceremonial  skrying  of  Sir  Edward  Kelley  and 
Dr.  John  Dee  was  the  obtaining  and  construction  of  the  SIGILFUM  DEI  AEMETH.  In 
this  connection  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  of  these  words  of  The  Seal  of  the  God  of  Truth, 
the  word  Aemeth  equals  the  Hebrew  word  for  Truth.  And  these  letters  reversed  give  us 
the  word  Thmaa  (Themis),  which  is  the  name  of  Her  who  stands  before  the  Face  of  the  Gods 
in  the  place  of  the  Threshold.  She  is  the  Guardian  of  the  Hall  of  the  Dual  Manifestation  of 
Truth.  Hence,  this  Sigillum  Dei  Aemeth  is  one  especially  under  her  guidance  and 
presidency. 

Aleph,  Mem  and  Tau,  are  the  three  letters  representing  the  three  elements  of  Air, 
Water,  and  Earth.  Shin  representing  Fire  the  holy  spirit,  is  not  represented  directly  in  the 
name  of 


85 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


this  Sigil.  However,  it  is  implicit  for  the  Holy  spirit  is  Truth  and  overshadows  the 
other  elements  of  the  Sigil  like  the  brooding  Spirit  of  God.  And  when  the  truth  of  the  Sigil 
dawns  on  the  mind,  the  Fire  of  the  Spirit  breaks  through  and  illuminates  the  mind. 

The  Seal  itself  is  a highly  complex  pantacle,  which  Dee  and  Kelley  were  instructed 
to  make  of  pure  wax,  about  27  inches  in  circumference.  It  bears  what  is,  at  first  sight,  a 
confused  medley  of  heptagons  and  heptagrams  thrown  in  juxtaposition  with  innumerable 
crosses,  numbers  and  letters,  and  a pentagram.  It  requires  only  a little  attention  to  realize 
that  this  chaos  is  but  a seeming  one,  though  a good  deal  of  careful  attention  is  required  in 
order  to  disentangle  the  secret  of  its  formation.  For  the  whole  ensemble  is  a brilliant  and 
highly  ingenious  piece  of  synthesis,  combining  diverse  ideas  in  which  all  the  rules  of 
acrostics,  permutations,  and  magical  squares  are  alternately  employed. 

In  the  following  description  in  these  pages,  it  would  be  well  to  glance  periodically  at 
the  Sigillum  so  as  to  be  able  to  follow  intelligently.  Each  step  of  deciphering  should  be 
referred  to  the  reproduction  of  the  Sigillum  so  that  each  step  may  be  clearly  understood. 

Moreover,  let  it  be  remembered  that  the  description  which  here  follows  is  but  a 
surface  view  of  the  whole,  and  that  further  meditation  could  disclose  many  other 
interesting  and  significant  facts. 

Around  the  extreme  edge  of  the  Seal’s  circumference  is  a series  of  numbers  and 
letters.  From  these  numbers,  the  hieroglyphs  or  sigils  which  are  attributed  to  the  Enochian 
Tablets  may  be  deciphered,  as  shown  in  Ritual  X.  They  yield  the  names  of  the  Great 
Elemental  Kings  or  Angel  Overseers  who  keep  guard  over  the  Watch-Towers. 

Within  this  circle  of  letters  and  numbers,  occur  seven  symbols  with  other  letters 
and  numbers.  Giving  them  with  their  formal  astrological  significance  and  Enochian  names 
they  are  as  follows: 

1.  Galas  - Saturn 

2.  Gethog  - Jupiter 

3.  Thaoth  - Mars 

4.  Horlwn  - Sun 

5.  Innon  - Venus 

6.  Aaoth  - Mercury 

7.  Galethog  - Luna 

It  was  after  these  seven  planetary  symbols  had  been  dictated  that  one  of  the 
communicating  Angels  remarked  significantly:  "Seven  rest  in  seven;  and  the  seven  live  by 
seven.  The  seven  govern  the  seven,  and  by  seven  all  government  is." 


G* 

A izM. 

30. 

XE„ 

"?9. 

j)§ 


86 


VOLUME  TEN 


In  short,  this  Sigillum  Dei  Aemeth  is  essentially  a synthetical  glyph  of  the  septenary 
forces  of  the  planets,  which  it  analyzes  at  great  length  and  with  much  detail  in  each  of  its 
several  planes.  The  application  of  Order  teaching  - Hebrew  letters,  names,  geomantic 
symbols  and  sigils,  Tarot  cards  and  their  Dominion  in  the  Heavens  in  the  appropriate 
colours  - to  the  skeletal  form  of  the  Dee-Kelley  skrying  expands  it  into  a much  more 
coherent  and  workable  system.  After  all,  precisely  this  was  done  by  the  original  founders  of 
the  Order  to  the  bare  bones  of  the  Four  Elemental  Tablets,  which  in  their  original  form  in  the 
British  Museum  Manuscripts  bear  only  the  faintest  resemblance  to  the  comprehensive  and 
magnificent  system  as  developed  by  the  Order.  In  providing  this  analysis,  I shall  quote  from 
some  of  the  alleged  speeches  of  the  communicating  Angels,  as  some  of  them  are  of  great 
beauty  and  power. 

Continuing  the  description  of  the  letters  of  the  Sigillum,  and  working  inwards  from 
the  circumference  to  the  centre,  we  next  find  a double  Heptagon,  each  facet  of  which  is 
divided  into  seven  compartments,  each  containing  a letter.  The  point  of  this  Heptagon  is 
uppermost.  From  the  diaries  of  Dr.  Dee,  it  would  appear  that  these  were  dictated  line  by 
line,  and  Kelley,  the  seer,  would  report  that  these  letters  were  manifested  to  his  vision  as 
baskets  of  letters  by  the  great  Archangel  Uriel.  They  appeared  in  this  order: 

Z 1 1 R H 1 a 
a Z C a a o b 
P a u p n h r 
hdmhiai 

The  next  line  was  communicated  by  putting  them  in  this  order: 


K 

Kla  1 

a e 

e e 

The  sixth  basket  was  seen  thus: 


9 

1 

e 

e 

« 1 

is  circular  form: 


87 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Now  this  final  line  or  basket  of  letters  was  deemed  to  be  of  such  lofty  significance 
that  Uriel  uttered  this  fine  passage:  "Those  seven  letters  are  the  seven  Seats  of  the  One 
and  Ever-lasting  God.  His  seven  secret  Angels  proceeding  from  every  letter  and  cross  so 
formed;  referred  in  substance  to  the  Father;  in  forme  to  the  Sonne;  and  inwardly  to  the 
Holy  Ghost." 

Incidentally,  note  the  description  of  these  names  having  reference,  in  the  case  of 
the  substance  to  the  Father,  the  form  to  the  Son,  and  the  inward  essence  to  the  Holy  spirit, 
and  compare  it  with  an  almost  identical  description  given  by  NALVAGE  in  the  first  part  of 
this  Addendum,  with  reference  to  the  Round  Table  which  commenced  "Zodire  Mozod 
Iada.'Tt  seems  a characteristic  of  all  Enochiana  as  it  were. 

"Look  upon  it.  It  is  one  of  the  Names  which  thou  hast  before;  every  letter  containing 
an  Angel  of  Brightness;  comprehending  the  seven  inward  powers  of  God,  known  to  none 
but  Himself.  A sufficient  BOND  to  urge  all  creatures  to  Life  or  Death,  or  anything  else 
contained  in  this  world.  It  banishes  the  wicked,  expelleth  evil  spirits,  qualifieth  the  Waters, 
strengtheneth  the  Just,  exalteth  the  righteous,  and  destroyeth  the  wicked.  He  is  One  in 
Seven.  He  is  twice  Three.  He  is  Seven  in  the  whole.  He  is  almighty.  His  name  is  everlasting; 
His  truth  cannot  fail.  His  glory  is  incomprehensible.  Blessed  be  His  name.  Blessed  be  Thou,  O 
God,  for  ever." 

By  putting  the  above  letters  together  in  seven  ordered  lines,  in  the  form  of  a square, 
we  obtain  the  following  figure.  The  Angel  further  remarked  of  this  arrangement  that  "every 
letter  containeth  or  comprehendeth  the  number  of  72  virtues."  It  is  important  to  recall  that 
72  equals  the  number  of  Angels  of  the  Quinaries,  the  Shem-hamphoresh. 


m 

i 

R 

H 

B 

a 

□ 

z 

a 

a 

a 

B 

□ 

□ 

a 

ir 

P 

n 

□ 

B 

a 

□ 

m 

a 

B 

a 

B 

K 

K 

a 

a 

e 

e 

e 

H 

B 

e 

e 

i 

i 

i 

e 

i 

i 

G 

Q 

For  convenience  sake,  we  will  label  this  figure  as  the  Archangelic  Square. 
Beginning  with  the  letter  Z in  the  upper  left  hand  corner  and  reading  all  the  way 
down  the 

file,  and  including  the  first  letter  of  the  second  horizontal  file,  we  find  spelled  the 
name  of 

Zaphkiel  the  Archangel  of  Binah  and  the  Sphere  of  Saturn.  Beginning  with  the  Z 

on  the 


88 


VOLUME  TEN 


second  line  and  following  a similar  procedure,  the  result  turns  out  to  be  Zadkiel,  the 
Archangel  of  Chesed,  and  the  Sphere  of  Tzedek  or  Jupiter.  Then  follow,  commencing  in 
each  instance  with  an  upper  case  letter,  Camael,  the  Archangel  of  Geburah  and  the  Sphere 
of  Madim,  Mars;  Raphael  the  Archangel  of  Shemesh,  Sun;  Haniel  the  Archangel  of 
Netzach  and  the  sphere  of  Nogah,  Venus;  Michael  the  Archangel  of  Hod,  and  the  sphere  of 
Kokab,  Mercury;  and  Gabriel,  the  Archangel  of  Yesod,  and  the  sphere  of  Levanah,  the 
Moon. 

Malkuth  is  symbolized,  without  any  other  attribution  or  description,  by  the 
concluding  Cross,  and  in  Enochian  symbolism,  as  Ritual  X testifies,  the  Cross  is  always  read  as 
"th"  as  Tau  the  letter  of  Earth.  And  the  idea  of  Earth  as  the  epitomization  of  the  foregoing 
names  is  further  suggested  by  the  fact  that  the  whole  figure  is  to  be  constructed  of  wax. 
Moreover,  on  the  reverse  side  of  the  Sigillum  Dei  Aemeth,  Malkuth  is  further  summarized 
by  this  figure: 


AGLA,  a notariqon  of  "Thou  art  mightyforever,  O Lord."  And  AGLA,  be  it  noted,  is  the 
Name  of  Power  vibrated  to  the  North  in  the  Lesser  Ritual  of  the  Pentagram. 

This  completes  one  way  of  reading  the  letters  in  the  Square.  As  the  archangel  Uriel  said, 
however,  in  the  above-mentioned  quotation,  there  are  several  ways  of  viewing  these  letters 
in  the  formation  of  Names.  1 content  myself  for  the  moment  with  the  above,  leaving  to  the 
Z.  A.  M.  the  task  of  further  working  out  these  mysteries  in  the  light  of  what  has  already  been 
stated. 

Before  proceeding  to  the  next  part  of  the  Sigillum,  1 must  record  another  Angelic  speech, 
this  time  made  by  Michael:  "Mark  this  Mystery.  Seven  comprehendeth  the  Secrets  of 
Heaven  and  Earth.  Seven  knitteth  man's  soul  and  body  together  (three  in  Soul  and  four  in 
body.)  In  seven  thou  shalt  find  the  Unity.  In  Seven  thou  shalt  find  the  Trinitie.  In  seven 
thou  shalt  find  the  sum  and  proportion  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  O God,  O God,  O God.  Thy 
Name,  O God,  be  praised  ever,  from  Thy  seven  thrones,  from  Thy  seven  trumpets,  and 
from  Thy  Seven  Angels,  Amen,  Amen,  Amen!" 

Immediately  under  the  Heptagon  described  above,  there  will  be  seen  on  the  Sigillum 
seven  sets  of  upper-case  letters  and  figures. 

These  figures  and  letters  are  organized  in  a square  on  a later  page. 

These  names  comprise,  according  to  the  Angel  "seven  names  of  God,  not  known  to  the 
angels,  neither  can  they  be  spoken  of  or  read  of  man.  These  Names  bring  forth  Seven 
Angels  (1),  the  governors  of  the  heavens  next  unto  us.  Every  letter  of  the  Angels'  names 


89 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


bringeth  forth  seven  daughters  (2).  Every  daughter  bringeth  forth  her  daughter  (3); 
every  daughter  her  daughter  bringeth  forth  a son  (4).  Every  son  hath  his  son  (5)."  This 
would  apparently  indicate  that  there  are  five  sets  of  hierarchical  names.  In  the  Order 
system,  five  relates  to  the  letters  of  the  Pentagrammaton,  Yod  Heh  Shin  Vau  Heh  equals 
the  five  elements.  Each  set  of  names  therefore  is  attributable  to  the  five  elements,  ruling 
the  four  Elemental  Tablets  and  the  Tablet  of  Union. 

In  the  form  above  given,  certainly  it  would  appear  that  as  names  they  cannot  be 
spoken  of  or  read  by  man.  But  by  reference  to  the  letters  on  the  extreme  circumference  of 
the  Sigillum,  we  find  that  21  is  E,  8 is  L;  also  30  is  L.  Thus  by  interpolating  these  letters 
instead  of  keeping  the  numbers,  we  acquire  SAAIELEMEL,  and  BTZKASEL,  etc.  This 
makes  the  names  a little  less  impossible  to  use,  and  by  employing  the  now  familiar  rules  of 
Enochian  pronunciation,  that  is  of  vibrating  each  letter  separately,  a fairly  sonorous 
vibration  is  obtained.  These  are  the  Divine  Names  ruling  the  spheres  of  the  planets. 

By  treating  these  letters  in  much  the  same  way  as  the  former  series,  a similar  square 
is  obtained.  This  we  shall  call  the  Angelic  Square  to  differentiate  it  from  the  Archangelic. 

VSN'T  IN 
CO  ELIS 


DUES  Noster 


Du t Noster. 


Hie  EST 

LUX  IN 
AETERHUM 


Finis  e&t 

Vera  Esr 
HAEC  TABULA 


s 

□ 

□ 

Eg 

m 

M 

E 

B 

z 

K 

S 

E 

H 

E 

a 

D 

£ 

N 

a 

m 

E 

i 

M 

o 

30 

□ 

El 

M 

E 

G 

c 

B 

a 

a 

a 

O 

Is 

□ 

N 

a 

a 

A 

A 

zi 

Z 

The  mode  of  reading  these  letters  is  slightly  different  from  that  previously 
demonstrated.  It  is  easier  to  describe  it  by  tracing  a Sigil  than  to  use  a large  number  of 
words,  and  I again  give  the  square  below  with  a line  drawn  in  ink  to  show  the  procedure  to 
be  adopted. 


E 

□ 

m 

n 

■ 

1 

■ 

E 

& 

m 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

m 

m 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

u 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

u 

■ 

■ 

■ 

m 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

IB 

n 

□ 

m 

■ 

B 

□ 

m 

m 

90 


VOLUME  TEN 


If  the  same  process  is  continuously  followed,  commencing  immediately  after  each 
number,  the  Z.A.M.  will  obtain  the  following: 

Sabathiel  - the  Angel  ruling  the  sphere  of  Saturn. 

Zedekiel  - the  Angel  ruling  the  sphere  of  Jupiter. 

Madimiel  - the  Angel  ruling  the  sphere  of  Mars. 

Semeliel  - the  Angel  ruling  the  sphere  of  Sol. 

There  is  an  undoubted  mistake  occurring  at  this  juncture.  If  these  letters  and  names 
were  dictated,  then  Kelley  must  have  wrongly  heard  and  written  an  L where  S was  intended 
in  last  name.  The  name  involved  is  actually  Semesiel  - since  Semes  or  Shemesh  is  the  Hebrew 
word  for  Sun.  However,  if  one  changes  this  letter  on  the  square,  the  effects  obviously  are  far- 
reaching,  for  it  changes  also  many  other  names  obtained  by  means  of  other  modes  of 
permutation.  This  I have  not  cared  to  do,  beyond  noting  the  existence  of  the  error. 

Nogahiel  - the  Angel  ruling  the  sphere  of  Venus. 

Korabiel  - the  Angel  ruling  the  sphere  of  Mercury. 

Here  again  is  an  error,  one  no  doubt  more  of  vision  than  of  hearing,  in  this  instance.  R 
is  recorded  where  K is  quite  evidently  intended.  The  name  of  Mercury  in  Hebrew  is  Kokab 
nor  Korab  - therefore  the  angelic  name  should  be  Kokabiel. 

Levanael  - the  Angel  of  the  sphere  of  the  Moon. 

Here  clearly  we  have  the  beginning  of  a hierarchical  system.  God  names  have  already 
been  given,  together  with  symbols  of  planets  and  the  Enochian  names  of  these  spheres. 

Now  we  have  Archangels  and  Angels,  with  servient  hierarchies  hereafter  to  be  noted. 

Referring  hack  to  the  Angelic  Square  again,  let  me  demonstrate  a second  method  of 
permutation.  Below  I give  the  square  again,  with  a line  drawn  diagonally  from  top  left  to 
bottom  right  to  indicate  the  procedure  to  be  followed.  This  yields  the  name  STIMCUL. 


A similar  process  is  to  be  employed  for  all  other  squares  that  is  by  drawing  diagonal 
lines  on  the  left  of  our  first  diagonal  Name.  This  then  yields  BEIGIA,  HEEOA,  DMAL,  ILI,  I 
H,  I.  On  the  right  of  the  first  name,  you  will  find  AZDOBN,  AKELE,  IANA,  ESE,  ME,  EL. 

Should  we  refer  to  the  Rose  of  the  Z.A.M.,  we  can  make  formal  Sigils  of  their  power 
in  their  true  magical  colours,  as  follows: 


91 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


By  referring  to  the  Order  document  on  Telesmatic  Images,  it  will  become  evident 
that  these  letters  may  be  used  to  call  up  telesmatic  figures  of  no  little  beauty.  Another  mode 
of  analysis  can  be  pursued  by  taking  the  Gematria  of  the  name  AZDOBN,  which  in  this 
case  equals  720,  (72x  10)  and  by  subjecting  it  to  the  Qabalah  of  Nine  Chambers,  as  shown 
by  a very  similar  technique  with  regard  to  the  Sephiroth  in  Ritual  "M"  we  obtain  Gemini 
and  Mer’cury.  The  name  is  thus  clearly  of  a mercurial  nature,  with  an  octagram  as  its 
lineal  figure,  attributed  to  the  Sphere  of  Hod,  under  the  presidency  of  ELOHIM 
TZABAOTH,  and  in  forming  a telesmatic  image,  this  idea  should  be  carried  into  practice. 
Note  too  that  its  first  two  letters  AZ  are  those  of  AZBOGAH,  one  of  the  Mercury  Names. 

Leaving  these  names  for  a moment,  and  referring  back  once  more  to  the  diagram  of 
the  Sigillum  Dei  Aemeth,  we  see  that  after  the  Unpronounceable  Names  of  God  which  we 
obtained  and  formed  into  a square,  there  appears  next  a double  Heptagram,  point  upwards, 
and  inside  this  a double  Heptagon  with  a facet  upwards  and  point  down.  Within  the  points 
and  borders  of  these  lineal  figures  are  further  names  and  letters  - four  lines  or  separate 
divisions,  in  fact.  If  the  Zelator  Adeptus  Minor  refers  to  these,  he  will  find  around  the  seven- 
pointed  figures,  beginning  with  the  uppermost  names  as  follows:  EL",  ME,  ESE,  IANA, 
AKELE,  AZDOBN,  STIMCUL.  (These  should  be  written  in  both  upper  and  lower  case 
letters,  though  for  legibility  here  I am  using  capitals  only.)  The  second  set  of  names 
beginning  from  the  top  is:  I,  HEEOA,  IL,  BEIGIA,  ILI,  STIMCUL,  DMAL. 

Quite  clearly  these  are  the  names  derived  from  the  square  by  the  second  method  of 
permutation,  and  we  have  now  shown  how  these  names  were  obtained,  and  whence  they 
derive. 

Let  us  apply  a third  method  of  permutation.  This  mode  is  similar  to  the  second, 
except  that  it  works  from  right  top  downwards  to  bottom  left.  The  square  is  as  below,  and 
a diagonal  line  shows  the  name  ESEMELI. 


£ 

Y 

it 

i 

Y 

T 

v 

92 


VOLUME  TEN 


The  names  yielded  by  this  method  are,  on  the  left:  MADIMIEL,  EKIEI,  1ZED, 
ATH,  AB,  S.  This  set  of  seven  names  are  the  third  series  within  the  Heptagon  on  the 
Sigillum,  immediately  beneath  or  within  those  listed  before. 

Going  back  to  our  method  of  presenting  the  diagonal  permutations  of  the  Square, 
but  this  time  working  from  the  bottom  upwards,  we  obtain  on  the  right  side:  1LEMESE, 
HAGONEL,  IOCLE,  LIBE,  AVE,  AN,  EL.  These  also  will  be  found  to  be  the  final  set  of 
names  enclosed  by  the  Heptagon. 

Two  things  should  here  be  noted.  The  first  is,  that  in  Ritual  "T,"  which  is  the  Book  of 
the  48  Calls,  there  is  a reference  to  Irwin's  manuscript  which  was  alleged  to  have  given 
certain  names.  Reference  to  the  page  whereon  this  occurs,  will  disclose  the  fact  that  some 
of  the  above-mentioned  names  are  those  referred  to.  Some  of  the  others,  however,  I cannot 
place,  such  as  GALVAH,  MURFIRI,  NAPSAMA,  NALVAGE.  I am  not  able  to  work  out 
whence  they  derive,  though  all  are  names  which  figure  prominently  in  the  record  of  the 
Dee-Kelley  skrying.  Evidently  they  belong  to  one  of  the  other  systems  - to  the  Round  Table 
of  Nalvage,  or  the  Heptarchia  Mystica. 

Incidentally,  note  that  the  name  Ave  occurs,  and  that  our  tradition  asserts  that  the 
Terrestrial  or  Elemental  Tablets  were  delivered  unto  Enoch  by  the  great  Angel  Ave. 

Secondly,  it  will  now  fully  be  understood  why  I have  not  ventured  to  correct  what 
appeared  to  be  two  mistakes.  If  on  the  big  Angelic  Square  I had  altered  certain  letters  so  as 
to  produce  accuracy  in  the  spelling  of  KORABIEL  and  SEMELIEL,  which  are  obviously 
incorrect,  the  alteration  would  entail  similar  changes  in  the  names  of  at  least  four  other 
angelic  names.  And  the  responsibility  for  doing  this  is  too  great  for  me  to  assume.  It  does 
suggest  however  a profitable  and  worthwhile  field  of  research  for  the  Z.A.  M.  who  has  more 
experience  in  skrying  and  astral  projection. 

To  complete  the  analysis  of  the  Sigillum,  let  it  be  noted  that  the  centre  consists  of 
a double  Pentagram,  enclosing  a cross.  The  letters  there  will  be  seen  to  be  the  hierarchical 
names  obtained  from  the  Angelic  Square  by  the  first  mode  of  permutation.  They  are  names 
of  the  Angels  of  the  Planets  with  the  Angel  of  Saturn,  SABATHIEL,  enclosing  the  others, 
as  though  to  affirm  the  supernal  and  general  nature  of  Saturn,  as  corroborated  by  the 
Ritual  of  the  Hexagram,  where  the  Saturn  Hexagram  is  said  to  call  forth  the  general 
powers  of  the  Macrocosm.  Within  the  enclosing  sphere  of  Sabathiel,  are  the  Angels  of 
Tzedek,  Madim,  Shemesh,  Nogah,  and  Kokab,  arranged  about  the  points  of  the  Pentagram. 
The  initial  capital  letters  of  these  five  planets  are  placed  within  the  point  or  angle  itself,  the 
remaining  letters  being  spaced  out  from  point  to  point.  In  the  centre,  placed  about  the  arms 
of  the  Cross,  receiving  the  influence  of  all,  is  the  name  of  Levanael,  the  Angel  of  the 
Moon.  The  synthesis  of  them  all  is  the  Earth. 

Enough  now  has  been  stated  concerning  this  matter  of  Names,  and  the  Z.A.M.  with 
a 

little  application  can  work  out  other  series  of  names,  in  various  combinations,  for  himself. 
One  more  important  point  should  be  noticed.  Inasmuch  as  the  Book  of  the  Concourse  of 
the  Forces  states  that  the  names  of  the  Six  Seniors  and  the  King  of  each  Tablet,  attributed 


93 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


to  the  points  of  the  Hexagram,  represent  the  operation  of  the  Planets  through  the 
elemental  world,  the  Z.A.M.  should  employ,  when  working  with  the  names  of  the 
Archangels  and  Angels  from  the  Sigillum,  the  names  of  the  King  and  Six  Seniors.  For  this 
reason,  that  the  names  on  the  Sigillum  represent  the  root  and  source  of  the  forces  which  in 
the  Terrestrial  Watch-Towers  are  mixed  and  compounded  with  the  elements.  And  the  true 
attribution  of  the  names  of  the  King  and  Six  Seniors  to  the  planets  is: 

King,  the  central  whorl  on  the  Cross,  to  the  Sun. 

The  names  on  the  left  half  of  the  Linea  Spiritus  Sancti  to  Mars. 

The  names  on  the  right  half  of  the  Linea  Spiritus  Sancti  to  Venus. 

The  name  on  the  upper  half  of  the  Linea  Dei  Patris  to  Jupiter. 

The  name  on  the  lower  half  of  the  Linea  Dei  Patris  to  Mercury. 

The  name  on  the  upper  half  of  the  Linea  Dei  Filiique  to  Moon. 

The  name  on  the  lower  half  of  the  Linea  Dei  Filiique  to  Saturn. 

This  completes  the  description  of  the  form  of,  and  the  names  upon,  the  Sigillum 
Dei  Aemeth.  The  Heptarchia  Mystica  continues  the  same  magical  theme,  as  it  were,  by 
listing  the  49  Angelorum  Bonorum,  and  their  servient  ministers,  who  are  under  the 
governance  of  the  Angels  whose  Names  are  shown  in  the  Heptagon  of  the  Sigillum.  For 
instance,  HAGONEL,  is  described  as  presiding  over,  within  his  particular  sphere  of 
government,  a King  named  CAR  MARA  and  a Prince  named  BAREES,  under  whom  are  42 
ministers,  to  whose  commandment  the  Sons  of  Light  are  subject.  And  the  invocation  of 
these  49  Good  Angels  are  the  contents  of  Liber  Logaeth,  a description  of  which,  together 
with  a summary  of  the  Heptarchical  Mystery,  will  comprise  the  third  section  of  this 
Addendum,  (which  1 have  not  had  the  time  to  finish.) 

There  appears,  on  the  surface,  to  be  no  relationship  existing  between  the  names  given 
in  Part  1 of  this  Addendum  and  those  on  the  Sigillum  and  those  on  the  Tablets  comprising 
the  Round  Table  of  Nalvage.  They  occupy  different  planes,  with  different  characteristics. 


94 


VOLUME  TEN 


THE  PYRAMID  GODS  AND  THEIR  ATTRIBUTION 

By 

G.H.  FRATER  D.D.C.F. 

(Note:  The  God-forms  of  CANCELLARIUS,  HEGEMON,  STOLISTES  and  DAD- 
OUCHOS  are  not  used  in  the  ENOCHIAN  PYRAMIDS.  The  addition  of  the  final  Coptic 
(st)  in  a NAME  indicates  the  more  spiritual  force,  since  it  is  attributed  to  KETHER.  I.R.) 

The  colouring  represents  the  synthesis  of  the  attributions,  and  should  be  studied 
very  carefully.  They  will  be  found  complete  in  the  colour  plate  section  of  this  work. 

The  words  appearing  in  dark  type  in  the  following  table  relate  to  the  Elements  and 
that  which  follows  are  the  God  Names  and  Neophyte  Grade  officers. 

Spirit.  Or  one  triangle  of  each  element. 

Osiris  - Hierophant  on  Throne. 

Water.  Or  three  out  of  four.  Water. 

Isis  - Praemonstrator. 

Earth.  Or  three  out  of  four.  Earth. 

Nephthys  - Imperator. 

Fire.  Or  three  out  of  four.  Fire. 

Horns  - Hiereus. 

Air.  Or  three  out  of  four.  Air. 

Aroueris  - Past  Hierophant.  The  Hierophant  when  off  the  Throne. 

2 Water.  2 Earth. 

Athor  - Invisible  station,  Kerub  of  East. 

2 Fire.  2 Water. 

Sothis  - Invisible  station,  Kerub  of  West. 

2 Air.  2 Water. 

Harpocrates  - Invisible  station  between  Altar  and  Hegemon. 

2 Fire.  2 Earth. 

Apis  - Invisible  station,  Kerub  of  North. 

2 Air.  2 Earth.  Anubis  - Kerux.  2 Fire.  2 Air. 

Pasht  or  Sekhet  - Invisible  station  Kerub  of  South. 

Fire.  Water.  Earth. 

Ameshet  - Invisible  station  N.E.  Child  of  Horus. 

Fire.  Water.  Air. 

Ahephi  - Invisible  station  S.W.  Child  of  Horus. 

Earth.  Water.  Air. 

Tmoumathph  - Invisible  station  S.E.  Child  of  Horus. 


95 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Earth.  Air.  Fire. 

Kabexnuv  - Invisible  station  N.W.  Child  of  Horus. 

THE  PYRAMID  GODS 

First.  OSIRIS.  Aeshoori.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  each  is  a 
different  Element.  So  that  all  four  elements  are  united  in  one  square,  for  he  representeth 
the  Spirit  ruling  in  the  Four  Elements  equally  balanced.  That  is  when  Shin  entereth, 
forming  Yeheshuah.  Shape:  A Mummied  God  with  winged  mitre,  scourge  and  phoenix 
wand. 

Second.  ISIS.  Aeisch.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the  Pyramid, 
each  is  of  the  Element  of  Water,  or  when  three  out  of  the  four  are  water.  For  she 
representeth  that  watery  and  moist  nature  which  is  the  Throne  of  the  Spirit.  This  is  the 
Heh  of  YHVH,  the  Mother  and  Beginning.  Shape:  Goddess  with  Throne  headdress.  Lotus 
wand,  and  crux  Ansata. 

Third.  NEPHTHYS.  Nephthuseh.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the 
Pyramid  each  is  of  the  element  of  Earth,  or  when  three  out  of  the  four  are  of  Earth.  For  she 
representeth  the  final  Heh  of  YHV  H,  that  is  the  Bride  and  end.  Shape:  Goddess  on  an  altar 
with  headdress  surmounted  by  a bowl.  Bears  Lotus  Wand  and  Crux  Ansata. 

Fourth.  HORUS.  Hoor.  Ruleth  above  when  the  Four  Triangles  of  the  Pyramid  or 
three  out  of  the  Four  are  of  the  Element  of  Fire.  For  he  representeth  the  letter  Yod  of 
YHVH,  the  fiery  and  avenging  force  of  the  Spirit,  the  opposer  of  the  infernal  and  devouring 
fire.  Shape:  God  with  Hawk's  head  and  double  mitre.  Phoenix  wand  and  Crux  Ansata. 

Fifth.  AROUERIS.  Araoueri.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the 
Pyramid  each  is  of  the  element  of  Air  or  three  out  of  the  Four.  For  he  representeth  the 
Vau  of  Y H V H,  and  is  as  it  were  the  Prince  and  Regent  for  Osiris.  Shape:  A God  with  double 
mitre,  hearing  Phoenix  wand  and  Crux  Ansata. 

Sixth.  ATHOR.  Ahathoor.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the 
Pyramid  two  be  of  Earth.  She  therefore  representeth  the  first  Heh  and  final  Heh  of 
YHVH,  and  uniteth  the  rule  of  Aeisch  and  Nephthuseh,  Isis  and  Nephthys.  Shape:  A 
Goddess  with  disc  and  plumes  between  horns  surmounting  headdress.  Bears  Lotus  Wand 
and  Crux  Ansata. 

Seventh.  SOTHIS.  Shaeoeu.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the 
Pyramid  two  be  of  Water  and  two  of  Fire.  She  therefore  representeth  Yod  Heh  of 
YHVH,  and  uniteth  the  rule  of  Aesisch  and  Hoor,  Isis  and  Horus.  Shape:  Goddess  with  a 
Cow’s  head,  disc,  and  plumes  between  horns.  Lotus  Wand  and  Crux  Ansata. 

Eighth.  HARPOCRATES.  Hoorpokrati.  (This  is  Harpocrates,  who  is  the  younger 
Horus,  the  Lord  of  Silence.)  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the  Pyramid,  two 
be  of  Water  and  two  of  Air.  He  therefore  representeth  Vau  Heh  of  YHVH,  and  uniteth  the 
rule  of  Aeisch  and  Aroueri,  Isis  and  Aroueris.  Shape:  Youthful  God  with  double  mitre, 
long  curling  tress  of  hair  with  left  forefinger  on  lip. 

Ninth.  APIS.  Ahapshi.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the  Pyramid 
two  be  of  Earth  and  two  of  Fire.  He  therefore  representeth  Yod  Heh  of  YHVH,  and 
uniteth  the 


96 


VOLUME  TEN 


rule  of  Nephthusch  and  Hoor,  Nephthys  and  Horus.  Shape:  God  with  Head  of  Bull 
and  disk  between  the  Crook  and  scourge  in  hand. 

Tenth.  ANUBIS.  Anoubi.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the  Pyramid 
two  be  of  Earth  and  two  of  Air.  He  representeth  Vau  Heh  of  YHVH,  and  uniteth  the  rule 
of  Nephthusch  and  Aroeouri,  Nephthys  and  Aroueris.  Shape:  Goddess  with  Lioness'  head, 
crowned  with  the  disc  and  with  Lotus  Wand  and  Crux  Ansata. 

Eleventh.  THARPESH.  Ruleth  above,  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the  Pyramid 
two  be  of  Fire,  and  two  of  Air.  She  therefore  representeth  Yod  Vau  of  YHVH,  and  uniteth 
the  rule  of  Horus  and  Aroueris.  Shape:  Goddess  with  Lioness  head,  crowned  with  disc  and 
with  Lotus  Wand  and  Crux  Ansata. 

Twelfth.  AMESHET  or  Emsta  Ameshet.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles 
of  the  Pyramid  there  be  of  these  three  elements  partaking  in  any  proportion,  viz:  Fire, 

Water  and  Earth.  He  therefore  representeth  Yod  Heh  Heh  (f)  of  YHVH,  and  uniteth  the  rule 
of  Horus,  Isis,  Nephthys,  Sothis  and  Apis.  Shape:  A mummied  God  with  human  head. 

Thirteenth.  HAPI.  Ahephi.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the 
Pyramid,  there  be  these  three  elements  partaking  in  any  proportions,  viz:  Fire,  Water,  and 
Air.  He  therefore  representeth  Yod  Heh  Vau  of  YHVH,  and  uniteth  the  rule  of  Horus,  Isis, 
Aroueris,  Sothis,  Harpocrates,  Tharpesh.  Shape:  A God,  male,  with  an  Ape  head. 

Fourteenth.  TMOUMATHPH.  Ruleth  above,  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the 
Pyramid,  there  be  these  three  elements,  partaking  in  any  proportion;  Water,  Air,  Earth.  He 
therefore  representeth  the  rule  of  Isis,  Aroueris,  of  Nephthys.  He  represeneth  Heh  Vau  Heh 
(f)  of  YHVH,  and  uniteth  the  rule  of  Hoorpokrati,  Ahathoor,  and  Anoubi.  Shape:  A God 
mummied  with  head  of  dog  or  jackal. 

Fifteenth.  KABEXNU  V.  Ruleth  above  when  of  the  Four  Triangles  of  the  Pyramid, 
there  be  these  three  elements;  Fire,  Air,  Earth,  partaking  in  any  proportion.  He  therefore 
representeth  Yod  Vau  Heh  (f)  of  YHVH,  and  uniteth  the  rule  of  Hoor,  Aroueris,  and 
Nephthys,  of  Tharpesh,  Ahephi  and  Anubis.  Shape:  A God  mummied,  with  hawk's  head. 

These  be  the  Gods  of  Egypt  who  rule  above  the  Pyramids  of  the  Sixteen  servient 
Angels  and  squares  of  each  Lesser  Angle,  and  in  the  middle  of  each  pyramid  is  the  sphynx 
of  its  power. 

Revere  then  the  sacred  symbols  of  the  Gods,  for  they  are  the  Word  manifested  in 
the  Voice  of  Nature. 

These  be  the  Elohim  of  the  Forces,  and  before  their  faces  the  forces  of  Nature  are 
prostrate. 


97 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


GODS  OF'  EGYPT  AND  THE  ENOCHIAN  TABLETS  (CIRCA  1895) 

By 

Y.H.  FRATER  A.P.S. 

To  study  the  rule  of  the  GODS  OF  EGYPT  over  the  subservient  squares  of  the 
ENOCHIAN  TABLETS,  I have  drawn  two  diagrams  showing: 

On  the  first,  the  112  squares  governed  by  the  11  GODS  given  first  in  order  in  The 
Book  of  the  Concourse  of  the  Forces. 

On  the  Second,  the  144  squares  ruled  by  the  last  four  there  mentioned.  (Both 
diagrams  are  now  missing  owing  to  the  passage  of  time,  but  the  enterprising  student  can, 
with  close  attention  to  the  text  reconstruct  these  drawings  by  himself.  I.R.). 

In  the  first  diagram,  the  squares  are  coloured  appropriately  to  the  Element  - ruling 
Powers  of  their  respective  Gods  and  Goddesses.  Thus,  squares  ruled  by  OSIRIS  are  shown 
with  an  equilibriated  cross  of  the  elements  in  gold,  traced  upon  them  on  a white  ground. 

Squares  ruled  by  ISIS  are  blue  - Water 
Squares  ruled  by  NEPHTHYS  are  black  - Earth 
Squares  ruled  by  HORUS  are  red  - Fire 
Squares  ruled  by  AROUERIS  are  yellow  - Air 
Squares  ruled  by  AHATHOR  are  olive  - Water  and 
Earth  Squares  ruled  by  SOTHIS  are  violet  - Water  and  Fire 
Squares  ruled  by  HARPARCRAT  are  green  - Water  and  Air 
Squares  ruled  by  APIS  are  russet  - Earth  and  Fire 

Squares  ruled  by  ANUBIS  are  orange  - Air  and  Fire. 

In  the  second  diagram,  the  rule  of  the  other  four  Gods  is  shown  in  a similar  way;  but 
the  colour  used  is  that  of  the  Element  unequilibriated,  in  the  square  over  which  the  God 
rules,  thus: 

AMESHET  squares  are  BLACK  because  EARTH  is 
unequilibriated,  Water,  Fire,  Earth. 

AHEPHI  squares  are  YELLOW  because  AIR  is  unequilibriated, 

Water,  Fire,  Air. 

TMOUMATHPH  squares  are  BLUE  because  WATER  is 
unequilibriated,  Earth,  Air,  Water. 

KABEXNUY  squares  are  RED  because  FIRE  is  unequilibriated, 

Earth,  Air,  Fire. 

To  have  shown  all  these  squares  thus  coloured  in  the  same  set  of  Tablets  would  have 
created  considerable  confusion,  and  have  rendered  it  impossible  to  grasp  the  detail  in  what 


98 


VOLUME  TEN 


may  be  perhaps  called  a "coup  d'oeuil."  The  same  result  would  follow  had  one 
endeavoured  even  to  colour  the  144  squares  governed  by  the  above  four  Gods,  in  tints 
appropriate  to  the  mixture  of  the  Elements. 

At  a glance,  what  strikes  the  attention  on  looking  at  the  first  diagram,  is  the  general 
harmony  and  balance  of  colour  in  the  four  angles.  Now  turn  the  diagram  through  an  arc  of 
45°  against  the  Sun,  and  you  have  a map  of  the  Elemental  Empire  - for  each  quadrangle 
there  naturally  falls  to  the  point  of  the  compass  which  is  the  habitation  of  its  Element: 

The  Fiery  Quadrangle  is  to  the  right  or 
EAST  The  Airy  Quadrangle  is  to  the  left  or 
WEST 

The  Earthy  Quadrangle  is  to  the  bottom  or 
SOUTH  The  Watery  Quadrangle  is  to  the  top  or 
NORTH. 

Hence  we  may  speak  of  the  following  lesser  angles  as  CARDINAL,  viz:  AIR  OF 
AIR  WATER  OF  WATER  - FIRE  OF  FIRE-  EARTH  OF  EARTH;  and  in  the  Cardinal  lesser 
angles  do  the  FOUR  GREAT  GODS  hold  their  prime  sway. 

In  the  WEST  - 

AROUERIS  In  the  NORTH  - 

ISIS 

In  the  EAST  - HORUS 
In  the  SOUTH  - NEPHTHYS. 

In  every  lesser  angle,  there  is  one  square  that  may  be  termed  the  'PRIME'  Square  of 
the  Lesser  Angle.  This  Prime  Square  is  always  the  same  in  any  of  the  four  sets  of  lesser  angles 
of  the  same  element:  as  AIR  OF  AIR-AIR  OF  WATER  - AIR  OF  EARTH-AIR  OF  FIRE. 

It  is  the  right  hand  upper  square  in  the  watery  and  fiery  lesser  angles  and  the  left  hand 
square  in  the  airy  and  earthy  lesser  angles. 

This  Prime  Square  is  always  ruled  by  the  God  of  the  Element  of  the  Lesser  Angle. 
Hence  A ROU  ERIS  rules  the  Prime  Square  of  the  AIR  lesser  Angle  of  every  quadrangle  - 
ISIS  of  the  Watery  Lesser  Angles  - HORUS  of  the  four  fiery  Lesser  Angles  - and 
NEPHTHYS  governs  the  Prime  Square  of  every  earthy  lesser  Angle. 

Which  is  the  Prime  Square  of  every  lesser  angle  is  determined  by  the  horizontal 
and  vertical  forces  corresponding  to  the  element  of  the  lesser  angle.  It  is  determined  by  the 
vertical  fiery  Kerubic  Force,  and  the  horizontal  rank  of  Cardinal  or  Fiery  Signs.  It  is 
therefore  the  FIRE  of  FIRE  of  the  element  of  the  quadrangle  to  which  it  belongs. 

In  the  Cardinal  Lesser  Angles,  the  Cardinal  Gods  rule  every  square  in  both  the 
column  and  the  rank  corresponding  to  the  element  of  the  Tablet.  Thus,  of  the  16  squares, 
they  rule  no  less  than  seven  and  enclose  two  sides  of  the  Square.  Note,  too,  that  in  each 
Cardinal  Lesser  Angle,  a diagonal  line  of  squares  governed  by  three  Gods  of  the  second 
category  proceeds  from  the  'Prime  Square.'  These  three  Gods  are  those  which  unite  the 
rule  of  the  God  of  the  Prime  Square  with  that  of  the  God  of  the  other  elements. 


99 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


There  is  in  this  a strange  point  worth  noticing.  Take  the  West  and  North  lesser  angles 
and  you  will  observe  that  the  Element  hostile  to  each  is  only  shown  in  the  square  opposed  to 
and  furthest  from  the  prime  square.  Thus,  in  AIR,  the  hostile  element  EARTH  is  only  seen 
in  the  AN  U BIS  square  - Citrine;  and  in  the  Watery  Lesser  Angle,  the  hostile  FIRE  is  only 
seen  in  the  violet  SOTHIS  square.  It  is  as  though  the  AIR  and  the  WATER,  even  when 
preponderating,  made  use  of  their  mobility  and  volatility  to  escape  from  their  respective 
enemies!  AIR  from  EARTH  - WATER  from  FIRE. 

With  the  lower  Elements,  it  is  otherwise.  In  the  South,  we  see  the  NEPHTHYS 
squares  endeavouring  to  envelope  ANUBIS,  while  in  the  East,  the  squares  of  HORUS 
strive  to  overwhelm  the  SOTHIS  squares.  It  is  as  if  these  elements  by  their  respective 
ponderosity  and  violence  strove  to  wipe  out  an  inimical  nature.  Is  not  this  a natural  and 
observable  truth? 

These  four  Cardinal  Angles  alone,  of  the  whole  16,  contain  no  square  ruled  by 
OSIRIS.  That  even  and  equilibriated  force  is  there  nowhere  to  be  found.  Unbalanced  force  is 
at  its  utmost  violence,  and  the  rule  of  the  Four  Great  GODS  is  concentrated  there  where 
greatest  power  is  needed.  It  is  as  if  the  Prime  Squares  of  these  Cardinal  Angles  were  the 
sources  of  their  respective  elemental  forces,  whence  they  issue  to  continue  in  varying 
proportions  one  with  another  until  they  result  in  producing  Osirian  molecules  of  WATER, 
EARTH,  FIRE,  and  AIR. 

Passing  to  the  other  lesser  angles  of  the  Tablets,  we  find  various  pairs  and 
quarternions  resembling  one  another  more  or  less  completely  until  we  find  absolute  identity 
in  EARTH  of  FIRE  and  FIRE  of  EARTH,  which  only  differ  in  having  opposite  squares  for 
their  Prime  Squares  - thus  making  a difference  of  right  and  left  when  viewed  from  that  spot 
as  a point  of  vantage. 

Arranged  as  quaternaries  beginning  with  the  least  equilibriated  we  get: 

1.  WATER  of  AIR  - AIR  of  WATER  - AIR  of  EARTH  - 
WATER  of  FIRE 

2.  EARTH  of  AIR  - FIRE  of  WATER  - FIRE  of  EARTH 
- EARTH  of  FIRE 

3.  FIRE  of  AIR  - EARTH  of  WATER  - WATER  of  EARTH  - 
AIR  of  FIRE 

The  last  of  these  quaternions  is  composed  of  the  four  central  lesser  angles,  placed 
around  the  Tablet  of  Union.  They  join,  as  it  were,  a Macrocosm  of  which  an  Osiris  pyramid 
is  the  symbol  - and  a Microcosm  to  which  the  whole  diagram  acts  as  Macrocosm. 

THE  RULE  OF  OSIRIS 

We  know  that  OSIRIS  governs  those  Pyramids  or  Squares  which  contain  all  the 
Elements.  From  this  it  follows  that  He  cannot  have  rule  in  the  lesser  angle  of  any  Tablet 
which  is  attributed  to  the  Element  of  the  Tablet  itself.  It  also  follows  that  He  cannot  have 
rule  in  any  square  of  ARIES,  for  he  is  the  Fire  of  Fire  - nor  of  GEMINI  which  is  Air  of  Air, 


100 


VOLUME  TEN 


nor  of  SCORPIO  which  is  Water  of  Water,  nor  of  TAU  which  is  Earth  of  Earth. 
But  he  rules  two  squares  in  every  other  lesser  angle,  and  two  squares  of  the  other  nine 
Signs  and  three  Elements. 

OSIRIS  further  rules  six  squares  under  each  Kerub;  but  he  governs  no  square  in  the 
Airy  Tablet  under  the  MAN;  none  in  the  EARTH  Tablet  under  the  BULL;  nor  in  the 
WATER  Tablet  under  the  EAGLE;  nor  in  the  FIRE  Tablet  under  the  LION.  Similarly 
OSIRIS  rules  no  square  in  the  AIR  Tablet  in  the  rank  of  Common  Signs;  in  the  WATER 
Tablet  in  the  Kerubic  rank;  and  in  the  Cardinal  Rank  of  the  FIRE  Tablet. 

Let  us  now  consider  this  OSIRIAN  rule  as  it  affects  the  whole  set  of  Tablets.  We 
have  seen  that  the  Cardinal  Quaternion  of  lesser  angles  contains  no  sign  of  OSIRIS.  Of  the 
other  three  sets,  those  numbered  1 and  2 form  a sort  of  ring  round  the  central  number  3 - 
intermediate  in  position  between  this  last  and  the  Cardinal  Four;  and  as  we  shall  see, 
intermediate,  also,  in  the  state  of  balance.  In  Quaternion  number  1,  we  see  the  OSIRIS 
squares  close  together  as  if  entering  into  the  lesser  angle  at  a point  opposite  to  the  Prime 
Square  - as  if  advancing  against  it  side  by  side.  This  is  the  Dawn  of  Light. 

In  Quaternion  number  2,  the  OSIRIAN  Light  has  advanced  to  the  centre  and 
dispersed  the  inferior  lights  to  the  corners  of  the  lesser  angles.  But  they  are  not  yet  balanced. 
There  is  greater  apparent  equilibrium  - it  is  the  beginning  of  the  end,  the  turning  point. 

In  Quaternion  number  3,  OSIRIS  has  conquered  the  square  and  established  his 
sway  more  completely.  He  has  disseminated  his  Light  throughout  and  has  established  a 
peace  with  the  ruler  of  the  Prime  Squares. 


A 

M 

r 

A 


*1 

n 

V 

■ 

A 

• * 

> 

r 

A* 

Si 

W 

i-l 


*1 

S' 

u. 

M 

« 

V 

• 

*** 

X 

/vw 

*■* 

I" 

2 

101 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


This  presumption  is  still  further  borne  out  by  a further  analysis  of  the  squares 
governed  by  OSIRIS  in  the  lesser  angles.  In  Quaternion  number  1,  which  consists  of  the 
Airy  and  Watery  lesser  angles,  the  squares  seized  by  the  OSIRIS  force  are  chiefly  in  the 
LION's  column  and  in  the  elemental  rank.  That  is  to  say,  that  the  weakest  force  in  the  lesser 
angle  is  the  one  first  subjugated. 

Water  of  Air 

Yod  Heh  (f)  with  Yod  having  Osiris  square  for  the  Element,  and  Osiris  square  under 

Heh  (f)  for  the  Cardinal  sign. 

Air  of  Water 

Yod  Heh  (f)  with  Yod  having  Osiris  square  for  the  Element,  and  Osiris  square  under 

Heh  (f)  for  the  Cardinal  sign. 

Air  of  Earth 

Yod  Heh  (f)  with  Yod  having  Osiris  square  for  the  Kerubic  sign,  and  Osiris  square 
under  Heh  (f)  for  the  Cardinal  sign. 

Water  of  Fire 

Vau  Heh  (f)  with  Vau  having  Osiris  square  for  the  Element,  and  Osiris  square  under 

Heh  (f)  for  the  Common  sign. 

The  above  tablet  shows  that  eight  OSIRIS  squares  are  distributed  thus  among  the 
Kerubic  and  horizontal  influences. 

Under  YOD  three,  and  in  the  Cardinal  Rank, 
three.  Under  HEH  one,  and  in  the  Kerubic  Rank,  one. 

Under  VAU  one,  and  in  the  Common  Rank,  one.  Under 
HEH  (f)  three,  and  in  the  Elemental  Rank,  three. 

That  is,  that  the  fiery  and  earthy  forces  of  these  watery  and  airy  lesser  angles  are  the 
first  to  become  equilibriated.  Quaternion  number  2 works  out  the  exact  converse  of  this. 
There,  the  watery  and  Airy  forces  of  the  fiery  and  earthy  lesser  angles  are  the  first  to  be 
equilibriated.  In  Quaternion  number  3,  however,  all  this  is  rectified. 

Fire  of  Air 

Heh  Heh  (f)  with  Heh  having  Osiris  square  for  the  Element  and  Osiris  square  under 

Heh  (f)  for  the  Kerubic  sign. 

Earth  of  Water 

Yod  Vau  with  Yod  having  Osiris  square  for  the  Common  sign,  and  Osiris  square 
under  Vau  for  the  Cardinal  sign. 

Water  of  Air 

Vau  Yod  with  Vau  having  Osiris  square  for  the  Cardinal  sign,  and  Osiris  square  under 

Yod  for  the  Common  sign. 

Air  of  Fire 

Heh  (f)  Heh  with  Heh  (f)  having  Osiris  square  for  the  Kerubic  sign,  and  Osiris 
square  under  Heh  for  the  Element. 


102 


VOLUME  TEN 


Under  YOD  two,  and  in  the  Cardinal  Rank,  two. 

Under  HEH  two,  and  in  the  Kerubic  Rank,  two. 

Under  VAU  two,  and  in  the  Common  Rank,  two. 

Under  HEH  (f)  two,  and  in  the  Elemental  Rank,  two. 

The  balance  here,  is  nearly  perfect;  active  forces  ruling  in  passive  lesser  angles 
and  passive  forces  in  active. 

The  Zodiacal  and  Elemental  emblems  of  the  OSIRIS  squares  give  the  following 

figure: 


AY$ 

a>5 

7 2 

dv 

<92 

V 

AT* 

THE  RULE  OF  ISIS  - NEPHTHYS  - HORUS  - AROUERIS 

Each  of  these  four  GODS  rule  a total  of  13  squares,  of  which  number  more  than  half 
are  concentrated  in  the  appropriate  Cardinal  lesser  angles.  No  less  than  seven  squares  of 
each  of  these  Cardinal  letter  squares  are  ruled  by  the  appropriate  GOD.  Thus  in  the  Western 
lesser  angle  are  seven  AROUERIS  squares;  in  the  North,  seven  ISIS  squares;  in  the  East 
seven  of  HORUS  and  in  the  South,  seven  of  NEPHTHYS. 

This  leaves  six  of  each  distributed  over  the  whole  of  the  other  lesser  angles.  These  sets 
of  six  contain  each  two  sets  of  three  - and  each  set  is  distributed  in  a similar  manner,  so  that  if 
we  describe  the  two  AROUERIS  sets,  the  other  three  pairs  will  be  easily  grasped. 

The  first  set  of  AROUERIS  is  distributed  to  the  other  three  lesser  angles  of  the 
AIR  tablet,  one  to  each  - and  they  will  be  found  at  the  points  of  intersection  of  the  column 
and  rank  corresponding  to  AIR.  The  second  set  is  distributed  to  the  other  three  Tablets,  one 
to  each.  They  will  be  found  in  the  lesser  angles  of  AIR  and  at  the  points  where  the 
corresponding  rank  and  column  meet.  They  are  the  Prime  Squares  of  these  lesser  angles. 

This  represents  the  organisation  of  the  supreme  authority  of  the  Element  of  AIR 
throughout  the  Universe;  the  Supreme  Power  being  concentrated  in  the  AIRY  Lesser 


103 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Angle  of  the  AIR  Tablet;  with  viceroys  in  each  division  of  its  kingdom,  and 
embassies  established  in  each  of  the  other  kingdoms.  AROUERIS  will  be  found  to  rule  in 
no  square  allotted  to  a Sign  that  does  not  belong  to  the  AIRY  Triplicity,  to  the  category  of 
Common  Signs  and  in  no  square  allotted  to  Water,  Earth,  or  Fire. 

In  the  Western  Lesser  Angle,  he  rules  the  following  squares: 

AIR 

LIBRA 

AQUARIUS 

GEMINI  - PISCES  - SAGITTARIUS  - VIRGO 
GEMINI  being  the  PRIME  SQUARE. 

In  all  the  other  six  lesser  angles  in  which  AROUERIS  is  found,  he  also  rules  the 
GEMINI  Square.  Hence,  too,  GEMINI  is  the  Prime  Square  in  all  Airy  Lesser  Angles. 
AROUERIS  rules  seven  GEMINI  squares  altogether. 

Similarly  SCORPIO  is  the  Prime  ISIS  Square,  of  which  Sign  she  rules  seven 
squares.  Similarly  ARIES  is  the  Prime  HORUS  Square,  of  which  Sign  he  rules  seven 
squares.  Similarly  EARTH  is  the  Prime  NEPHTHYS  Square,  of  which  Sign  she  rules 
seven 

squares. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  there  are  16  squares  under  each  Sign,  and  that  almost  half  of 
those  allotted  to  these  four  signs  are  governed  by  these  Great  GODS.  They  are  further  the 
Signs  of  which  OSIRIS  rules  not  a single  square. 

The  whole  of  the  Signs  of  the  Squares  ruled  by  these  four  Gods  are  shown 

below: 


ISIS  - SCORPIO  - 7 
NEPHTHYS - EARTH  - 7 
HORUS  - ARIES  - 7 
AROUERIS  - GEMINI  - 7 

TAURUS,  CANCER,  LEO,  AQUARIUS,  PISCES,  WATER  - 13 
TAURUS,  VIRGO,  CAPRICORN,  WATER,  AIR,  FIRE  - 13 
CANCER,  LEO,  LIBRA,  SAGITTARIUS,  CAPRICORN,  FIRE  - 13 
VIRGO,  LIBRA,  SAGITTARIUS,  AQUARIUS,  PISCES,  AIR  - 13 
THE  RULE  OF  AHATHOOR  - SHEOI  U - ANOUBI 
HOORPARKRATI  - AHAPSHI  - THARPHESH 


The  GODS  who  rule  only  those  squares  in  which  two  elements  appear,  and  then  in 
equal  degree,  have  but  a small  dominion  in  the  elemental  Tablets.  Each  GOD  rules  only 
six  squares,  and  in  only  two  Tablets;  three  in  each. 

Every  Tablet  has  nine  squares  ruled  by  one  of  these  GODS.  Every  Cardinal  Lesser 

Angle 


104 


VOLUME  TEN 


contains  three  such  squares  arranged  diagonally  from  the  Prime  Square.  Every  other 
lesser  angle  has  two  squares  ruled  by  the  same  GOD,  while  the  squares  of  the  Cardinal 
Lesser  Angles  are  ruled  each  by  a different  GOD. 

Each  of  these  GODS,  says  The  Book  of  the  Concourse  of  the  Forces,  unites  the  rule 
of  a pair  of  those  in  the  preceding  category. 

Suppose  we  draw  a line  joining  the  West  Lesser  Angle  to  the  North,  that  is,  from 
the  AROUER1S  Lesser  Angle  to  the  ISIS  Lesser  Angle;  it  may  be  said  to  unite  those  two 
GODS.  And  the  lesser  angles  through  which  it  passes  will  be  those  which  contain 
Harpocrates'  squares,  the  GOD  which  unites  the  rule  of  ISIS  and  AROUERIS. 

Along  the  bottom,  AHAPSHI  unites  HORUS  and  NEPHTHYS  and  on  the  left, 
ANUBIS  unites  AROUERIS  and  NEPHTHYS.  Then  draw  two  diagonals,  and  the  line 
joining  AROUERIS  and  HORUS  will  cut  the  lesser  angles  containing  THARPESH 
squares;  while  the  other  diagonal  will  show  AMESHET  uniting  ISIS  and  NEPHTHYS. 

The  same  uniting  of  the  forces  is  shewn  in  another  way.  Take  any  lesser  angle 
not  Cardinal,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  two  squares  ruled  by  one  of  these  six  GODS  is 
the  synthesis  of  the  other  two.  Thus  in  WATER  of  AIR,  we  get  the  blue  Prime  Square  of 
ISIS  and  the  yellow  viceroyal  square  of  AROUERIS  and  the  two  green  squares  of 
HARPOCRATES.  Or  take  AIR  of  FIRE  and  we  get  the  red  vice-regal  square  of  HORUS, 
the  yellow  embassy  or  Prime  Square  of  AROUERIS,  and  the  orange  square  of 
THARPHESH. 

Next  we  consider  the  signs  of  the  squares  ruled  by  these  GODS  and  we  get  the 
following  arrangement  shewing  the  same  point  again: 


AHATHOR  will  be  found  to  rule  EARTH  TAURUS  2;  WATER  2; 
SCORPIO. 

SHEOEU  will  be  found  to  rule  ARIES  CANCER  2;  LEO  2;  SCORPIO. 
HOORPARKRATI  will  be  found  to  rule  GEMINI  PISCES  2;  AQUARIUS 
2;  SCORPIO. 

AHAPSHI  will  be  found  to  rule  ARIES  CAPRICORN  2;  FIRE  2;  EARTH. 
ANOUBI  will  be  found  to  rule  GEMINI  AIR  2;  VIRGO  2;  EARTH. 
THARPHESH  will  be  found  to  rule  ARIES  LIBRA  2;  SAGITTARIUS  2; 
GEMINI. 


This  also  shows  that  this  group  has  the  same  rule  as  OSIRIS,  and  in  addition  3 
squares  of  those  signs  over  which  OSIRIS  has  no  rule  at  all,  viz:  ARIES  3;  GEMINI  3; 
SCORPIO  3;  EARTH  3.  This  is  a much  better  state  of  affairs  than  is  shown  in  the  squares 
under  the  ISIS  class.  It  shows  that  the  states  symbolised  by  these  pyramids  are  a step  nearer 
Osirification  than  the  former,  and  the  GODS  of  less  Elemental  Power  are  needed  for  their 
governance. 


105 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


THE  RULE  OF  AMESHET  - AHEPHI  - TMOUMATHPH  - KABEXNUV 

These  four  Gods  who  rule  squares  in  which  three  diverse  elements  occur,  rule  144  out 
of  the  256  subservient  squares,  having  an  individual  rule  over  36  each.  Every  GOD  rules  12 
squares  in  each  of  Three  Tablets,  but  does  not  appear  in  the  Tablet  of  the  Element  hostile  to 
its  own  unequilibrated  one. 

Thus  AHEPHI  rules  squares  of  WATER,  FIRE,  AIR,  and  therefore  is  not  met  with 
in  the  EARTH  Tablet.  If  we  take,  as  1 think  we  are  right  in  taking,  these  GODS'  rule  to 
be  rather  of  the  nature  of  the  unbalanced  Element,  than  of  either  of  the  others,  then  AHEPHI 
is  more  airy  and  corresponds  to  AROUERIS  - AMESHET  to  NEPHTHYS  - 
TMOUMATHAPH  to  ISIS  - and  KABEXNUV  to  HORUS  - and  they  may  be  looked  upon 
as  governing  forces  more  particularly  derived  from  the  appropriate  lesser  angles.  If  so,  we 
find  AHEPHI's  subject-force  derived  from  the  AIR  Tablet  passing  to  the  Watery  and  to 
the  Fiery  - KABEXNUV's  rule  from  the  Fiery  through  the  Earthy  to  the  Airy, 
establishing  a right  hand  whorl  of  the  masculine  forces.  If  the  rule  of  the  other  two  GODS  is 
similarly  examined,  a left  hand  whorl  of  the  female  forces  is  discovered. 

Every  Cardinal  Lesser  Angle  contains  three  pairs  of  squares  ruled  by  these  GODS, 
but  every  other  lesser  angle  contains  two  sets  of  five  ruled  each  by  one  of  them,  by  the 
GOD  corresponding  to  the  Lesser  Angle,  except  in  the  case  of  the  Lesser  Angle  of  the 
opposing  Element,  where  the  GOD  of  the  Tablet  is  absent  and  the  ruling  GODS  are  those 
of  the  opposite  hostile  Elements. 

Thus  take  the  Earthy  Tablet  of  Nephthys  - AHEPHI,  WATER,  FIRE  and  AIR,  is 
absent.  In  FIRE  of  EARTH,  we  find  AMESHET,  WATER,  FIRE,  and  EARTH,  ruling  55 
squares,  and  KABEXNUV,  EARTH,  AIR,  AND  FIRE,  ruling  the  other  five.  In  WATER  of 
EARTH,  we  find  AMESHET,  WATER,  FIRE,  and  EARTH  -and  TMOUMATHAPH, 
EARTH,  AIR  and  WATER,  while  in  the  AIR  of  EARTH  we  get  the  GODS 
TMOUMATHAPH  and  KABEXNUV  of  watery  and  fiery  rule  respectively  - and  so  with 
all  the  others. 

Each  of  these  Gods  is  said  to  unite  the  rule  of  a certain  three  of  the  ISIS  category.  Let 
us  examine  this  by  the  light  of  these  diagrams,  taking  the  GOD  KABEXNUV  for  our 
illustration.  KABEXNUV  unites  the  rule  of  HORUS,  NEPHTHYS,  and  AROUERIS,  and 
here  we  find  him  ruling  12  squares  in  the  Tablet  appropriate  to  each  of  these  three  GODS. 
But  not  only  so,  he  is  also  found  in  the  three  corresponding  lesser  angles  of  each  of  these 
Tablets  - thus  binding  together  the  forces  of  those  GODS  in  the  Lesser  Angles  of  each  Tablet, 
and  also  in  the  Tablets  as  a whole. 

KABEXNUV  further  unites  the  rule  of  AHAPSHI,  ANUBIS  and  THARPHESH. 
This  too  is  shown  on  the  Tablets,  for  the  nine  Lesser  Angles  in  which  alone  KABEXNUV 
squares  are  formed  from  the  three  lines  of  squares  which  respectively  contain  the  squares  of 
those  GODS,  ANUBIS  on  the  left,  AHAPSHI  at  the  bottom  and  THARPHESH  diagonally. 
The  disposition  of  the  squares  in  the  given  lesser  angle,  other  than  the  Cardinal  ones,  is  by 
this  rule.  Every  GOD  rules  three  squares  in  a column  and  three  squares  in  the 
corresponding  rank.  Two  GODS  in  one  lesser  angle,  and  the  ranks  and  columns  ruled  over 


106 


VOLUME  TEN 


those  of  the  elements  not  in  the  title  of  the  lesser  angle.  Thus  in  the  lesser  angle 
FIRE  of  WATER,  the  VAU  and  HEH  (final)  columns  and  ranks  will  be  occupied. 

The  central  quaternion  of  lesser  angles  shews  the  concentration  of  male  and  female 
agencies  in  perfect  equilibriation  round  the  Tablet  of  Union.  Every  other  quaternion  shews 
dispersion  of  force  - not  its  concentration. 

We  now  come  to  the  analysis  of  Signs  ruled  by  these  four  GODS.  They  give  a very 
peculiar  table,  and  show  how  much  nearer  Osirification  they  are  than  any  others.  This 
shews  that  each  of  these  GODS  rules  30  squares  of  those  Signs  in  which  OSIRIS  holds  sway 
against  six  of  those  in  which  he  does  not.  If  we  contrast  the  classes  of  squares  for  the 
purpose  of  considering  this  Osirification,  we  get  below,  in  tabular  form,  a comparison: 

The  ISIS  Class  rules  52  squares  - 28  non  OSIRIS.  Percentage  of  latter  53.8. 

The  ATHOR  Class  rules  36  squares  - 12  non  OSIRIS.  Percentage  of  latter 

33.3. 

The  AMESHET  Class  rules  144  squares  - 24  non  OSIRIS.  Percentage  of 

latter  16.6. 

The  OSIRIS  Class  rules  24  squares  - 0 non  OSIRIS.  Percentage  of  latter  0.0. 

From  these  considerations  of  the  signs  of  the  squares  governed  by  the  respective 
GOD,  we  find  the  signs  grouped  in  pairs,  except  the  non-OSIRIS  squares.  The  same  GOD 
always  governs  both  members  of  these  pairs  in  the  same  lesser  angle,  no  matter  to  which 
class  of  GODS  he  may  belong  -that  is,  if  you  take  any  one  member  of  any  of  these  pair 
squares  and  notice  by  which  GOD  it  is  governed,  you  know  that  the  other  member  of  the 
pair  is  governed  by  the  same  GOD  in  the  same  lesser  Angle. 

I hus  LEO  - if  you  find  a LEO  square  governed  by  ISIS,  the  CANCER  square  in  the 
same  lesser  angle  is  also  governed  by  ISIS  and  it  further  follows  that  the  same  set  of  GODS 
which  rules  one  member  of  one  of  these  pairs  throughout  the  Tablets  also  rules  the  others. 

Thus,  TAURUS  and  WATER  form  a pair.  The  16  TAURUS  squares  are  thus  ruled  - 
OSIRIS  2 - ISIS  1 - NEPHTHYS  1 - ATHOR  2 - AMESHET  5 - TMOUMATHAPH  5: 
therefore  the  16  water  squares  are  ruled  by  the  same  set  of  GODS  and  in  the  same  lesser 
angles. 

The  table  below  shows  the  GODS  ruling  in  every  Sign,  and  the  Signs  ruled  by 
every  God. 

GODS  RULING  SIGNS  AND  SIGNS  RULED  BY  EVERY  GOD 

Osiris 

There  are  2 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Taurus,  Cancer,  Leo, 
Virgo,  Libra,  Sagittarius,  Capricorn,  Aquarius,  Pisces,  Fire,  Water,  Air,  yielding  a total  of 
24. 

Isis 

There  is  1 square  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Taurus,  Cancer,  Leo, 
Aquarius,  Pisces,  Water,  and  7 in  Scorpio,  yielding  a total  of  13. 


107 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Nephthys 

There  is  1 square  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Taurus,  Virgo, 
Capricorn,  Fire,  and  7 in  Earth  yielding  a total  of  13. 

Horus 

There  is  1 square  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Cancer,  Leo, 
Libra,  Sagittarius,  Capricorn,  Fire,  and  7 in  Aries,  yielding  a total  of  13. 

Aroueris 

There  is  1 square  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Virgo,  Libra, 
Sagittarius,  Aquarius,  Pisces,  Air,  and  7 in  Gemini,  yielding  a total  of  13. 

Ahathoor 

There  are  2 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Taurus  and  Fire, 
and  one  each  in  Scorpio  and  Earth,  yielding  a total  of  6. 

Sothis 

There  are  2 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Cancer  and  Leo, 
and  one  each  in  Aries  and  Scorpio,  yielding  a total  of  6. 

Harparcrat 

There  are  2 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Aquarius  and 
Pisces,  and  one  each  in  Gemini  and  Scorpio,  yielding  a total  of  6. 

Ahapshi 

There  are  2 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Capricorn  and 
Fire,  and  one  each  in  Aries  and  Earth,  yielding  a total  of  6. 

Anubis 

There  are  2 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  in  Scorpio  and 
Air,  and  one  each  in  Gemini  and  Earth,  yielding  a total  of  6. 

Tharpesh 

There  are  2 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  in  Libra  and 
Sagittarius,  and  one  each  in  Aries  and  Gemini,  yielding  a total  of  6. 

Ameshet 

There  are  5 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Taurus,  Cancer, 
Leo,  Capricorn,  Fire,  Water,  and  2 in  each  of  Aries,  Scorpio  and  Earth,  yielding  a total 
of  36.  Ahephi 

There  are  5 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Cancer,  Leo, 
Libra,  Sagittarius,  Aquarius,  Pisces  and  2 each  in  Aries,  Gemini  and  Scorpio,  yielding  a 
total  of  36. 

Tmoumathaph 

There  are  5 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Taurus,  Virgo, 
Aquarius,  Pisces,  Water,  Air,  and  2 each  in  Gemini,  Scorpio,  and  Earth,  yielding  a 
total  of  36.  Kabexnuv 

There  are  2 squares  in  each  of  the  following  signs  or  elements,  Aries,  Gemini, 
Earth,  and  5 each  in  Virgo,  Libra.  Sagittarius,  Capricorn,  Fire  and  Air,  yielding  a total 
of  36. 


108 


VOLUME  TEN 


INSTRUCTION  ON  CHESSMEN 
BY 

G.H.  F RATERS D.D.C.F and N.O.M. 

CHATURANGA  AND  SHATRANJ 

The  present  European  game  of  chess  has  been  gradually  developed  from  the  more 
primitive  form  in  which  it  reached  Western  civilisation.  It  came  to  us  from  the  Arabs  or 
Saracenic  races  who  over-ran  Spain  in  the  eighth  century. 

These  Arab  races  had  a knowledge  of  the  game  for  many  centuries,  and  they  are 
believed  to  have  received  it  from  the  Persians  and  from  ancient  Egypt.  The  game  in  its 
essentials  is  found  to  exist  in  descriptions  by  the  oldest  poets  of  India. 

In  its  oldest  form  traceable  in  literature  its  name  is  found  in  Sanskrit  works  as 
Chaturanga,  from  Chatur  which  is  Four,  and  Ranga  is  members.  Among  the  Saracens  and 
Arabs,  the  name  became  Shatrangi.  Introduced  in  Europe  we  find: 

In  France  - Echecs 

In  Italy  - Seacci 

In  England  - Chess  (perhaps  from  Chequered  board  on  which  it  is  played.) 

In  Germany  - Seach. 

In  all  forms  the  Board  used  is  quite  similar,  being  Square  and  divided  into  8 x 8 or  64 
squares. 

The  chess  men  too  have  not  varied  in  number.  16  major  pieces  and  16  minor  pieces  or 

pawns. 

In  the  Chaturanga  these  32  men  were  divided  equally  between  4 players;  two  partners 
against  two,  generally  green  and  black,  against  red  and  yellow.  Each  player  had  four  pieces 
and  four  pawns.  Dice  were  cast  to  determine  which  piece  or  pawn  should  be  played.  The 
earliest  important  change  in  the  Game  was  the  alteration  made  by  combining  the  forces  of  the 
partners. 

From  that  time,  the  Chaturanga  out  of  India  lost  its  chatur  character,  and  was  played 
by  two  persons,  each  with  16  pieces  and  pawns.  This  change  brought  in  other  changes,  for 
whereas  each  partner  used  to  have  a King,  when  the  two  forces  were  combined  one  King  had 
to  be  converted  into  a Minister  or  Vizier,  who,  in  later  times,  became  the  Queen.  In  India,  the 
names  and  titles  of  the  pieces  suggest  a military  ideal. 

In  Egypt  the  tendency  was  rather  to  look  upon  the  pieces  as  Gods  of  various  forces  or 
natural  powers. 

Ancient  Chaturanga.  Four  players,  in  pairs.  Pieces  and  pawns  arranged  thus:  King  on 
the  right,  then  Elephant,  then  a Horse,  then  Ship,  and  the  Pawns  were  infantry.  The  Moves  of 
the  Element,  with  castle  and  Houdah  on  its  back,  and  of  the  Knight,  were  unaltered  for 


109 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


ages.  Castling  was  unknown.  Pawns  moved  one  square  forward  only,  but  took 
diagonally. 

Dice  were  thrown  to  decide  moves.  Dice  had  four  sides,  marked  on  opposite  sides 
with  4 and  3,  or  5 and  2,  making  in  each  case  7. 

The  Brahmins  abolished  the  use  of  dice. 

Chaturanga  is  referred  to  in  Valurika  ‘s  Ramayana,  Book  4,  Chapter  51.  It  is  also 
mentioned  in  one  of  the  Sanskrit  Puranas,  where  it  is  said  that  it  was  invented  in  the  second 
age  by  the  wife  of  Rawan,  King  of  Lanka,  that  is  Ceylon. 

The  Chaturanga  Elephant  has  become  our  Castle, 

The  Chaturanga  Ship  has  become  our  Bishop, 

The  Chaturanga  Horse  has  become  our  Knight, 

The  Chaturanga  King  remains  King. 

But  the  second  King  has  become  our  Queen.  The  Elephant  and  Ship,  Castle  and 
Bishop  have  exchanged  places. 

Perhaps  the  Elephant  became  Castle  from  the  Houdah  on  its  back.  The  ship  was  also 
formerly  a chariot  in  some  places. 

In  the  oldest  Chaturanga,  Dice  throwing: 

If  2 were  thrown,  the  player  had  to  move  the  Ship. 

If  3 were  thrown,  the  player  had  to  move  the  Horse. 

If  4 were  thrown,  the  player  had  to  move  the  Elephant. 

If  5 were  thrown,  the  player  had  to  move  the  King  or  Pawn. 

Shatranji  of  Persia  and  Araby  appears  to  have  become  well  known  in  Persia  about 
1500  A.D.  We  then  find  that  the  game  has  become  a contest  between  two  players  and  2 of  the 
4 Kings  have  become  Ministers  or  Queens.  The  early  title  was  Mantri  or  Farzin  or  Firz,  hence 
it  is  supposed  comes  Vierge  for  Queen.  The  Castle  and  Bishop  changed  places. 

This  game  is  described  by  the  Persian  poet  Firdansi;  a copy  of  his  book  extant  is  dated 

1486. 

The  Persians  introduced  the  change  of  rank  in  a Pawn  by  reaching  its  eighth  square. 

In  the  third  or  European  epoch,  the  modern  game  of  chess  was  developed.  The  players 
being  2 only  became  quite  defined. 

It  was  laid  down  that  the  Queen  should  stand  on  her  own  colour,  and  that  each  player 
should  have  a white  square  at  his  right  hand.  Castling  has  been  introduced,  and  each  Pawn 
has  been  permitted  to  more  either  one  or  two  squares  at  the  first  move. 

The  queening  of  a Pawn  at  the  8th  square  has  been  finally  settled.  The  moves  of  the 
Queen  and  Bishop  were  much  altered.  Formerly  the  Queen  could  only  move  diagonally  on 
her  own  colour,  and  the  Bishop  moving  diagonally  could  only  attack  the  next  square  but  one. 
The  Castles  or  Rooks  were  definitely  placed  at  the  extreme  right  and  left. 

The  present  moves  are: 


110 


VOLUME  TEN 


Pawns:  1 or  2 squares  forward  first  move,  one  square  only  after,  take  diagonally  forward,  and 
never  move  back. 

King  moves  one  square  only  in  any  direction. 

Bishop  diagonally  on  his  own  colour  only  any  number  of  squares  if  empty,  forwards  or 
backwards. 

Castle  or  Rook  moves  always  in  straight  lines,  not  diagonally,  and  so  moves  over  squares  of 
both  colours  forwards  and  backwards  and  any  distance  if  the  squares  are  unoccupied. 

Queen  moves  in  straight  and  diagonal  lines,  any  distance  over  vacant  squares,  forward,  or 
backwards,  or  laterally. 

Knight  moves  in  any  direction  but  always  to  the  square  which  may  be  described  as  two 
forward  and  one  to  side;  or  one  diagonally  and  one  forward  or  sideways  so  long  as  the  designed  place 
be  vacant.  It  is  immaterial  whether  the  adjoining  squares  are  occupied  or  not. 

UPON  THE  ROSICRUCIAN  RITUAL  OF  THE  RELATION 
BETWEEN  CHESS  AND  TAROT 
By 

G.H.  F RATER  S.R.M.D. 

The  modern  game  of  Chess  is  derived  from  the  scheme  which  follows;  whence  its  name 
chess,  from  chequers.  And  like  Tarot,  originally  the  chess  pieces  were  anciently  small  figures  of  the 
Egyptian  Gods  presenting  the  operation  of  the  Divine  Forces  in  Nature. 

The  chess  pieces  correspond  to  the  Tarot  Aces  and  Honours,  thus,  for  the  Chessmen,  Tarot 
card,  and  Element: 

King  - Ace  - Spirit 

Queen  - Queen  - Water 

Knight  - King  - Fire 

Bishop  - Knight  - Air 

Rook  or  Castle  - Knave  - Earth. 

Pawns,  the  potencies  of  the  Ace  combined  with  each  of  the  other  forces,  the  servant  or 
viceroy  of  that  force. 

The  pawns  can  only  move  one  square  at  a time,  and  not  two  at  the  first  move  as  in  modern 
chess.  The  moves  of  the  other  pieces  excepting  the  Queen  are  the  same  as  those  of  modern  chess.  The 
move  of  the  Queen  in  this  scheme  is  unlike  that  of  any  piece  in  modern  chess,  for  she  controls  only 
the  3rd  square,  from  herself,  in  any  direction  - perpendicularly,  horizontally,  or  diagonally,  and  can 
leap  over  any  intervening  piece.  From  which  it  results  that  she  can  check  or  control  only  16  out  of  the 
64  squares,  including  the  one  on  which  she 


111 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


stands,  and  these  squares  to  which  she  can  move  are  all  other  own  colour.  Each  elemental  set  of 
pieces  then  consists  of:  King,  Queen,  Knight,  Bishop,  Rook,  and  four  pawns. 

OFFICIAL  RITUAL 

The  Correct  Application  of  the  Action  of  the  Moveable  Images  Representing  the  Motion  of 
The  Ruling  Angels  Over  the  Servient  Squares  is  Called  The  Plays  or  Raying  of  the  Chequers  of  The 
Tablets. 

Of  the  Chess  King  and  the  Tarot  Ace.  The  move  of  this  piece  is  one  square  every  way,  and 
answereth  to  the  action  of  the  Spirit  wherever  it  goeth,  commencing  and  initiating  a fresh  current. 
Whence  represented  by  the  motion  of  only  one  square  in  any  direction  and  there  staying  for  this 
purpose  before  moving  onward.  So  that  his  action  is  not  hurried,  but  represents  a balanced  movement. 
Yet  in  his  beginning  of  action  is  he  at  first  a mute  force,  and  throned  upon  the  water;  as  in  the  end  of 
his  action  he  is  a life  manifested  and  throned  upon  the  earth.  And  herein  is  a mystery  of  the  Lord 
Aeshoori  when  enthroned  between  Isis  and  Nephthys,  thus  representing  the  beginning  and  end  of  the 
action  of  him  in  whom  end  and  beginning  are  not,  but  rather  concealment  and  then  manifestation. 
Herein  is  a great  mystery  of  life,  for  His  Thrones  are  not  in  the  two  active  elements,  seeing  that  these 
are  his  horse  and  chariot  of  transition  in  the  passage  from  concealment  unto  manifestation.  This  piece, 
then,  is  the  symbolizer  of  the  action  of  the  potencies  of  the  crosses  on  the  Servient  Squares. 

Of  the  Chess  Knight,  the  Tarot  King.  The  move  of  this  piece  is  three  squares  cornerwise 
every  way  and  representeth  the  leaping  motion  of  the  flickering  flame.  Wherefore  also  is  he  not 
stopped  in  his  course  by  a piece  or  an  intervening  square,  even  as  Fire  seizing  on  a matter  speedily 
rendereth  it  transparent.  This  piece  representeth  the  action  of  Fire  as  the  Revealer  of  the  strength  of 
the  Spirit,  even  as  Hoor  is  the  avenger  of  Aeshoori.  It  is  a force  potent  and  terrible,  the  King  in  the 
elemental  operations. 

Thus  is  opened  the  locked  doors  of  matter  and  sheweth  forth  the  treasure  hidden  therein. 
Therefore  hath  all  life  its  beginnings  in  a Fire  Celestial.  And  the  number  of  squares  covered  by  the 
move  of  the  King  in  the  midst  of  the  Board  (reckoning  from  the  Square  on  which  he  standeth,  but  not 
including  it)  is  16  squares  of  which  8 are  checked,  and  8 are  passed  over. 

Of  the  Chess  Queen,  the  Tarot  Queen.  The  move  of  this  piece  is  unto  every  third  square 
from  her  (reckoning  the  square  whereon  she  standeth  as  the  first)  as  well  cornerwise,  as  well 
perpendicular,  as  horizontal.  Thus  again  covering  16  squares  out  of  a square  of  25  squares,  of  which  8 
are  threatened,  and  8 are  passed  over.  But  she  threateneth  not  a piece  upon  the  intervening  square  of 
her  move.  And  her  movement  is  as  that  of  the  waves  of  the  sea,  and  (like  the  Knight)  she  is  not 
hindered  in  her  motion  by  a piece  on  an  intervening  square.  This  piece  representeth  the  undulating 
action  of  water  and  of  the  sea,  and  she  is  ascribed  unto  the  Great  Goddess  Isis,  who  is  the  Cherisher  of 
Life. 

The  Chess  Bishop  or  Fool,  the  Tarot  Knight.  The  move  of  this  piece  is  any  number  of 
squares  cornerwise  in  any  direction  even  unto  the  limits  of  the  Tablet.  He  representeth  the 


112 


VOLUME  TEN 


keen  and  swift  wind,  and  he  is  ascribed  unto  Aroueris  the  God.  He  is  stopped  by  any  piece  in  his  way, 
even  as  the  wind  is  stopped  by  a material  barrier.  He  representeth  the  swift  vehicle  of  the  Spirit. 

The  Chess  Castle  or  Rook,  the  Tarot  Knave.  The  move  of  this  piece  representeth  the 
ponderous  and  formidable  force  of  earth  and  its  motion  is  any  number  of  squares  in  a square  direction, 
perpendicular  or  horizontal  (but  not  cornerwise)  even  unto  the  limits  of  the  boards. 

It  is  ascribed  unto  Nephthys  the  Goddess.  It  representeth  the  completed  action  of  the  Spirit  in 
matter,  therefore  is  its  movement  square,  and  also  stopped  by  intervening  pieces,  yet  powerful  from 
the  length  and  breadth  of  its  range. 

The  Pawns.  The  four  pawns  represent  certain  forces  formed  by  the  conjunction  of  the  Spirit 
with  each  of  the  four  elements  severally,  and  they  are  severally  ascribed  unto  Ameshet,  Ahephi, 
Tmoumathph,  and  Kabexnuv,  who  stand  before  the  face  of  Aeshoori.  And  their  movement  is  but  one 
square  forward,  perpendicular,  and  they  threaten  one  square  forward  diagonal  on  each  side,  thus 
formulatmg  the  symbol  of  the  Triangle,  for  they  each  represent  a mixture  of  three  elements  under  the 
presidency  of  the  Spirit.  Therefore,  each  is  as  it  were  the  servant  of  the  God  or  Goddess,  before  whom 
he  standeth  yet  they  be  all  in  a manner  alike  in  action,  although  their  Lords  be  different  and  each  is 
the  servant  of  the  God  or  Goddess  whose  element  is  expressed  in  his  symbol,  without  its  contrary. 

For  in  each  set  of  3 elements,  taken  together,  two  are  contrary.  Wherefore  Ameshet  (Water, 
Fire,  Earth)  is  the  servant  of  Nephthys,  whose  element  Earth  is  expressed  in  his  attribution  without  the 
contrary  of  Air. 

Ahepi  (Air,  Fire,  Water)  equals  Aroueris. 

Tmoumathph  (Water,  Air,  Earth)  equals  Isis. 

Kabexnuv  (Fire,  Air,  Water)  equals  Hoor. 

Below  is  a further  description  of  the  Chess  pieces.  The  pertinent  element  will  be  described  in 
bold  type,  followed  by  the  chess  name,  title  and  description. 

Air 

King,  Socharis,  Hawk  with  Osiris  head  dress. 

Knight,  Seb,  Human  head;  Goose. 

Bishop,  Shu,  Human  head  with  feather. 

Queen,  Knousou,  Goddess,  human  with  vase. 

Castle,  Tharpesht,  Lioness  head  with  disc. 

Water 

King,  Osiris,  God  with  double  crown  - three  weapons  over  chest. 

Knight,  Sebek,  Crocodile  headed. 

Bishop,  Hapimon,  Fat  God  with  water  plants. 

Queen,  Thouerist,  Hippopotamus’  body  crocodile  head. 

Castle,  Shu,  Cow  head,  disc  horns. 


113 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Fire 

King,  Kneph,  Ram-headed  God,  crowned. 

Knight,  Ra,  Hawk  disc. 

Bishop,  Toum,  Human  head,  double  crown. 

Queen,  Sati-Ashtoreth,  Goddess. 

Castle,  Anouke,  Goddess  with  crown. 

Earth 

King,  Aeshoori,  Mummied  God,  crook,  scourge,  Phoenix  wand,  whinged  mitre. 

Knight,  Hoori,  Hawk’s  head.  Double  mitre. 

Bishop,  Aroueris,  Human,  double  mitre. 

Queen,  Isis,  Throne  head  dress. 

Castle,  Nephthys,  Altar  head  dress. 

What  follows  is  a description  of  the  pawns. 

Knight’s  Pawn 

Kabexnuv,  Mummy,  hawk’s  head. 

Bishop’s  Pawn 

Ahephi,  Mummy,  ape’s  head. 

Queen’s  Pawn 

Tmoumathph,  Mummy,  dog’s  head. 

Castle’s  Pawn 

Ameshet,  Mummy,  human  head. 

What  follows  is  a description  of  the  chessmen  with  their  Tarot,  Element  and  Hebrew  letter 
attribution. 

King 

Ace,  Spirit,  Shin. 

Queen 

Queen,  Water,  Heh. 

Knight 

King,  Fire,  Yod. 

Bishop 

Knight,  Air,  Vau. 

Rook 

Knave,  Earth,  Heh  (f). 

Differences  from  normal  chess  moves: 

The  pawns  move  one  square  only.  No  taking  en  passant. 

No  castling. 

The  Queen  controls  3rd  square  in  any  straight  line,  counting  square  on  which  she  stands  as  1, 
and  may  jump  over  pieces. 


114 


VOLUME  TEN 


AWAKENING  OF  THE  ABODES 

Four  Players,  two  against  two. 

Partners.  Fire,  Air  - Water,  Earth. 

The  First  player  is  the  Querent.  The  first  player  chooses  angle  and  sets  the  pieces  in  order  of 
the  Kerubic  line,  other  players  follow  the  first  player’s  setting. 

The  corner  square  always  has  King  in  addition  to  other  pieces.  Both  Kings  must  be 
checkmated.  A pawn  on  the  8th  square  becomes  the  piece  of  which  it  isthe  vice-regent. 

PTAH 

The  Ptah  used  for  divination  - set  by  first  player  on  any  square  in  his  own  Lesser  Angle  the 
King  to  reach  and  remain  on  the  square  of  Ptah  for  one  round  of  game  undisturbed  and  unchecked. 

The  pieces  should  (if  four  players)  be  coloured  Red,  Black,  Blue  and  Yellow. 

THE  BOARDS 

The  Four  Boards  of  the  Rosicrucian  game,  although  different,  nevertheless  agree  in  certain 
particulars.  In  each  board  it  is  convenient  to  speak  of  the  arrangement  of  the  Lesser  Angles  as  an 
Upper  and  Lower  Rank  - Air  and  Water  forming  the  Upper  Rank,  and  Earth  and  Lire  the  Lower. 

It  is  evident  that  the  columns  of  the  one  rank  are  continuous  with  those  of  the  other;  and  in 
this  continuity  a certain  regular  rule  is  observable.  Every  column  of  eight  squares  in  the  Upper  Rank 
is  continued  below  by  a column  of  the  opposite  Element. 

Thus  the  Liery  columns  invariably  stand  on  the  Watery  columns  below;  the  Watery  on  the 
Fiery;  the  Airy  on  the  Earthy;  and  the  Earthy  on  the  Airy. 

A different  arrangement  of  the  Ranks  of  Squares  is  observable,  and  a difference  is  seen  in  this 
in  the  Upper  and  Lower  Tablets. 

In  the  Upper  Tablets  the  Kerubic  Rank  of  squares  is  continuous  with  the  Elemental  Rank;  and 
the  Cardinal  is  continuous  with  the  common  sign  Rank,  whereas  in  the  Lower  Tablets  the  various 
Ranks  - Kerubic,  Cardinal,  etc.,  are  continuous  right  across  the  boards. 

The  diagonal  lines  or  Bishop’s  move  present  pecularities.  Every  Lesser  Angle  throughout  the 
Tablets  has  a diagonal  line  of  four  squares  starting  from  its  prime  square;  which  are  allotted 
respectively  to  Aries,  Gemini,  Scorpio  and  Earth  (the  non  Osiris  Squares).  From  these  four  squares 
the  Bishops  can  move  one  square  into  a square  of  Libra,  Sagittarius,  Taurus  or  Water,  these 
completing  the  series  of  squares  in  that  Lesser  Angle  in  which  a Bishop  can  move.  Let  us  call  this  the 
Aries  System  of  diagonal  squares. 

This  diagonal  is  crossed  by  another  which  in  the  Airy  and  Watery  boards  is  composed  of 
Cancer,  Leo,  Virgo  and  Air  Squares,  having  as  subsidiaries,  squares  of  Aquarius,  Pisces,  Capricorn 
and  Fire.  In  the  Earthy  and  Fiery  board  the  second  series  of  four  form  the  diagonal,  and  the  first  the 
subsidiaries.  Let  us  call  this  the  Cancer  series. 


115 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


If  we  now  examine  the  Boards  we  shall  see  that  the  Aries  system  of  any  Lesser  Angle  is  joined 
diagonally  to  the  Aries  system  of  the  other  three  Lesser  Angles;  and  that  the  Cancer  also  is  similarly 
joined  to  every  other  Cancer  system.  So  that  we  have  two  systems  of  squares;  the  Aries  and  the 
Cancer;  of  the  whole,  each  containing  four  squares  allotted  to  every  sign  it  contains.  This  resembles 
the  black  and  white  systems  of  squares  of  the  ordinary  board;  and  it  is  as  if  we  allotted  the  White  to 
Aries,  and  the  Black  to  Cancer. 


AiWi  naif 


A 

A 

Vi 

X 

T 

H 

St 

I* 

T 

V 

s- 

X 

A 

V 

PLACING  THE  MEN 

The  yellow  and  red  men  are  so  placed  that  they  advance  to  the  attack  of  the  black  and  the  blue 
respectively  by  the  columns;  while  the  latter  advance  by  the  ranks.  That  is,  the  actives  are  shown  as  a 
vertical  force,  while  the  passives  are  shown  as  operating  horizontally.  Shewing  the  Cross  of  life, 
corresponding  to  the  forces  of  the  Court  Cards  and  the  Zodiacal  Trumps. 

The  central  squares  of  the  board  contain  the  16  signs  that  are  allotted  to  each  Lesser  Angle. 
And  it  is  only  from  these  16  squares  that  the  pieces  - except  the  Rook  and  the  King  develop  their  full 
influence  or  defensive  force. 

The  Watery  and  Airy  Boards  are  counterparts  of  each  other,  so  far  as  the  arrangement  of  the 
signs,  etc.,  of  the  squares  are  concerned.  And  the  same  is  true  as  regards  the  Earth  and  Water  Boards. 
Every  Board  has  its  uppermost  and  lowermost  ranks  of  the  passive  or  female  element;  and  its  two 
central  ranks  are  of  the  active  or  male  element. 

The  most  striking  difference  between  the  Air  and  Water,  and  the  Earth  and  Fire  boards  is  in 
the  fact  that  in  the  former  the  ranks  are  broken;  whereas  in  the  latter  they  are  not  only  continuous 
across  each  board,  but  they  are  continuous  right  across  both  boards  when  in  situ.  To  this  is  due  the 
greater  balance  and  eveness  seen  in  the  play  of  the  pieces  in  the  lower  boards. 


116 


VOLUME  TEN 


The  Aries  and  Cancer  systems  are  composed  respectively  of  naturally  allied  pairs  of  Signs. 
The  Aries  System  consists  of  Aries,  Gemini,  Scorpio  and  Earth,  the  non-Osiris  Squares  and 
Taurus  and  Water,  Libra  and  Sagittarius,  two  natural  pairs. 

The  Cancer  system  consists  of  Cancer,  Leo;  Virgo,  Air;  Capricorn,  Fire;  Pisces  and  Aquarius, 
for  natural  pairs. 


SWWBnLi  C - AVi.Lt  S.  S-VStTIJI 

EARTH  of  FIRE  setting.  EARTH  Prime  Player. 


117 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Showing  the  Queens  of  Prime  Player  and  his  Ally  governing  all  the  Squares  of  the  Aries 

System. 

Blue  - Watery  Queen’s  move. 

Brown  - Earthy  Queen’s  move. 


THE  QUEEN 

The  four  Queens,  the  Watery  portion  of  their  respective  Elements  govern  between  them  every 
Square  of  every  board.  But  a Queen  can  never  check  another  Queen  for  the  following  reasons. 

Each  of  these  pieces  govern  16  Squares  on  the  board,  four  in  each  Lesser  Angle;  and  they  are 
so  placed  as  to  divide  the  64  squares  equally  between  them. 

It  follows,  therefore,  that  there  is  only  one  of  them  that  can  check  the  Ptah  square. 

The  16  squares  governed  by  any  Queen  are  allotted  to  eight  Signs,  two  Squares  of  each  Sign 
to  every  Queen.  And  the  remaining  two  squares  of  the  same  8 Signs  are  governed  by  the  friendly 
Queen. 

And  the  other  pair  of  Queens  govern  the  32  other  Squares  similarly.  The  Queen  of  the  Prime 
Player  always  governs  the  Water,  Earth,  Taurus,  and  Scorpio  squares  of  its  own  lesser  Angle,  and  also 
of  the  Lesser  Angle  of  the  same  rank. 

In  each  of  the  other  two  Lesser  Angles  the  Queen  of  the  Prime  Player  governs  the  Sagittarius, 
Gemini,  Libra,  and  Aries  squares. 

The  allied  Queen  governs  the  same  squares  in  the  opposite  ranks  of  the  Lesser  Angles.  Thus 
the  Prime  Player’s  Queen  and  his  ally  together  govern  the  Aries  system  of  squares. 

And  this  is  equally  true  of  every  Board. 


HI 

a 

hi 

a 

a 

HI 

a 

■ 

Q 

a 

□ 

■ 

□ 

a 

a 

HI 

a 

HI 

a 

a 

HI 

■ 

□ 

a 

□ 

a 

□ 

a 

□i 

M 

■ 

a 

hi 

a 

HI 

a 

a 

a 

Q 

a 

3 

a 

□ 

HI 

a 

HI 

a 

a 

a 

HI 

a 

a 

□ 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

□ 

©■ 


a ffiiwii.  Qthi  m * b9wranttT  Wf 
\ MWt  UWltii1. 

AfUSHl  PAj w.  P»«R. 

t ^ ]FIKE  — F'PTFK.. 


118 


VOLUME  TEN 


Showing  the  variation  against  an  active  Prime  Player. 

Blue  - Watery  Queen’s  move. 
Brown  - Earthy  Queen’s  move. 

iiMMi  rWfcii*.  ft™  fvmr._ 

Uf  l-|  U| 

© © © ~ 

*“'r  “ h ft  n A 


. _-+h 


Green  - Airy  Queen’s  move. 

Red  - Fiery  Queen’s  move. 

Showing  the  opposing  Queens  governing  all  the  Squares  of  the  Cancer  System,  against  a 
passive  prime  player. 

Fire  - Prime  Player. 

The  opposing  Queens  govern  the  squares  of  the  Cancer  System  in  a similar  manner.  But  there 
is  a slight  variation  dependent  on  the  position  of  the  Prime  Player.  They  together  govern  the  Cancer 
system. 

If  Water  or  Earth  be  the  Prime  Player,  the  opposing  Queens  govern  the  Air,  Fire,  Leo  and 
Aquarius  squares  in  their  own  lesser  Angles  and  in  the  others  of  the  same  rank;  while  in  the  other  rank 
they  govern  Virgo,  Pisces,  Cancer  and  Capricorn  squares. 

If  Air  or  Fire  be  the  Prime  Player  these  two  sets  of  squares  are  reversed. 

The  Queen  of  the  Prime  Player,  and,  therefore,  of  the  attacked  Lesser  Angle,  invariably 
governs  therein  the  passive  Kerubic  and  Elemental  squares. 

The  attacking  Queens  govern  and  have  for  their  bases,  when  active  Elements  attack  - the 
active  Kerubic  and  Elemental  squares. 

When  passive  elements  attack,  the  passive  Cardinal  and  Common  Sign  squares. 

The  allied  Queen,  supporting  the  defence,  has  for  base  the  squares  corresponding  to  those  of 
the  Prime  Player,  the  passive  Kerubic  and  Elemental  squares. 


Q 

■ 

□ 

■ 

5 

■ 

□ 

■ 

■ 

in 

■ 

■ 

■ 

m 

B 

■ 

□ 

■ 

0 

■ 

B 

■ 

■ 

■ 

SI 

■ 

■ 

Q 

■ 

□ 

■ 

□ 

■ 

EJ 

■ 

■ 

s 

■ 

■ 

El 

■ 

□ 

■ 

■ 

H 

■ 

D 

■' 

■ 

n 

■ 

■ 

El 

■ 

119 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


It  also  falls  out  that  no  Passive  Queen  can,  under  any  circumstances  of  Board  or  setting,  check 
an  active  Kerubic,  Cardinal;  Common  or  Elemental  square  in  her  own  rank  of  Lesser  Angles,  nor  a 
similar  passive  square  in  the  other  rank. 

It  is  to  be  seen  that  there  are  certain  Signs  whereon  the  Queens  are  strong  and  others  whereon 
they  are  weak. 

In  defence  the  Queens,  or  Watery  Forces  of  each  Element,  are  strong  in  the  Water,  Earth, 
Scorpio  and  Taurus  squares  of  their  respective  domains.  But  in  attacking  the  vulnerable  points  of  the 
hostile  domain  depends  on  which  Elements  are  in  operation. 

If  Water  be  the  Prime  Player,  and  hence  the  point  of  attack,  the  Watery  Queen  can  deliver  a 
strong  counter  attack  on  Water,  Earth,  Scorpio  and  Taurus  of  yellow  (being  in  the  same  rank),  and  on 
Aries,  Gemini,  Sagittarius  and  Libra  of  red.  While  the  friendly  Water  of  Earth  delivers  attack  on 
Aries,  Gemini,  Sagittarius,  and  Libra  of  yellow  and  Water,  Earth,  Scorpio,  and  Taurus  of  Red. 

The  Aries  System  then  offers  the  strong  points  for  the  Airy  portion  of  an  Elemental  Force  in 
defence;  and  the  Cancer  System  in  offence. 

The  Watery  Forces  of  the  Elements  never  oppose  one  another,  nor  clash  in  their  action.  Each 
undulates  onwards  unaffected  by  and  unaffecting  the  undulations  of  the  others.  Each  Queen  will 
swamp  opposing  force  only  when  that  force  encroaches  on  the  domain  of  the  particular  Queen. 

Every  Queen  has  to  fear  the  attack  of  the  opposing  Airy  forces.  But  as  the  latter  develop  force 
as  the  matter  proceeds  towards  ultimation,  the  Queen  when  protected  is  not  likely  to  be  destroyed  by 
an  opposing  and  threatening  Bishop.  The  same  is  true  as  regards  the  hostile  Knight’s  attack. 

This  rule  of  play  is  generally  sound  except  in  the  case  of  a Queen  that  can  check  the  Ptah 
Square;  which  ability  greatly  enhances  her  value. 

THE  BISHOP 

The  Bishops  of  Partners  always  govern  the  same  set  of  squares;  and  the  Bishops  of  the 
opposing  sides  govern  opposite  sets  of  squares.  These  sets  are  the  same  as  those  before  mentioned  as 
the  Aries  and  Cancer  Systems. 

The  Bishops  of  the  Prime  Player  and  his  ally  always  govern  the  Cancer  system;  and  those  of 
the  opponent  always  act  in  the  Aries  System. 

Hence  if  the  Ptah  square  be  of  the  Aries  system,  the  airy  parts  of  the  opposing  forces  have 
great  power;  but  if  it  be  of  the  Cancer  System  the  opposing  aerial  forces  are  impotent  in  direct  attack, 
and  can  only  be  operative  secondarily.  It  follows,  too,  that  the  Bishops  and  Queens  are  great 
opponents,  since  the  Bishops  operate  over  the  same  system  as  their  opposing  Queens.  The  Queens  can 
only  touch  16  squares,  while  the  Bishop  can  touch  32,  giving  the  latter  a great  superiority  in  this 
respect.  But  the  Queen  must  be  considered  the  equal  of  the  Bishop  from  the  power  she  possesses  to 
hop  over  an  intervening  piece,  which  would  arrest  the  approach  of  the  Bishop. 


120 


VOLUME  TEN 


And  further,  the  Watery  piece  is  not  hampered  by  the  pawns  in  opening,  whereas  the  Bishop 
as  a rule  cannot  act  at  all  until  at  least  one  pawn  has  been  moved. 

THE  KNIGHT 

The  Knights  can  all  reach  every  square  on  the  Boards,  and,  therefore,  operate  over  both  the 
Aries  and  Cancer  Systems. 

The  Knight  moves  from  one  of  these  Systems  into  the  other  every  time  he  is  played.  If  he 
starts  on  a square  of  the  Aries,  his  first,  third  and  fifth,  etc.,  moves  will  bring  him  on  to  squares  of  the 
Cancer  System.  And  in  his  first,  third  or  fifth  moves  he  can  get  to  any  Cancer  system  square  on  the 
board. 

His  second,  fourth  and  sixth  moves  will  equally  bring  him  to  any  Aries  System  square.  There 
appears  to  be  only  one  square  on  the  board  that  requires  six  moves  to  reach  That  is,  if  the  Knight  be  in 
one  of  the  comer  squares  he  cannot  cross  the  board  diagonally  into  the  opposite  corner  square  in  less 
than  six  moves. 

This  results  in  some  peculiarities  as  shown  in  the  diagrams  on  the  following  pages: 

S'lMItK  ISSS*  - THIN 


G 

5 

5 

H 

.5 

4 

5 

3 

t 

5 

V 

3 

H 

3 

4 

3 

«i 

3 

H 

3 

*5 

•i 

3 

*i 

3 

3 

z 

4 

3 

4 

3 

z 

— 

3 

z 

3 

5 

4 

3 

2. 

3 

V 

1 

z 

3 

h 

3 

Z 

t 

3 

3 

4 

3 

JL 

3 

zl 

3 

121 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


122 


VOLUME  TEN 


AIRY  AND  WATERY  BOARDS 


The  various  Signs  can  be  moved  as  follows: 

In  the  Aries  System 
Knight  Can  Move 
On  to  Sagittarius  24  times 
On  to  Aries  23  times 
On  to  Libra  23  times 
On  to  Gemini  22  times 
On  to  Water  20  times 
On  to  Scorpio  19  times 
On  to  Earth  19  times 
On  to  Taurus  18  times 


In  the  Cancer  System 
Knight  Can  Move 
On  to  Pisces  23  times 
On  to  Cancer  22  times 
On  to  Capricorn  22  times 
On  to  Leo  21  times 
On  to  Virgo  21  times 
On  to  Air  21  times 
On  to  Water  20  times 
On  to  Aquarius  18  times 


EARTHY  AND  FIERY  BOARDS 

The  various  Signs  can  be  moved  as  follows: 


In  the  Aries  System 
Knight  can  Move 
On  to  Sagittarius  23  times 
On  to  Libra  23  times 
On  to  Aries  22  times 
On  to  Gemini  22  times 
On  to  Scorpio  20  times 
On  to  Earth  20  times 
On  to  Water  19  times 
On  to  Taurus  19  times 


In  the  Cancer  System 
Knight  can  Move 
On  to  Virgo  23  times 
On  to  Cancer  22  times 
On  to  Capricorn  22  times 
On  to  Pisces  22  times 
On  to  Leo  20  times 
On  to  Aquarius  20  times 
On  to  Lire  20  times 
On  to  Air  19  times 


The  Knight  when  placed  in  the  corner  square  can  only  move  to  2 others. 

The  Knight  when  placed  in  two  adjacent  squares  can  only  move  to  3 others. 

The  Knight  when  placed  in  any  other  outside  square  can  only  move  to  4 others. 

The  Knight  when  placed  in  the  corner  square  of  the  second  row  can  only  move  to  4 others. 
The  Knight  when  placed  in  any  other  second  row  square  can  only  move  to  six  others. 

But  in  the  central  16  its  full  power  is  developed  and  it  can  move  to  eight  others.  This  gives  the 
possible  moves  of  a Knight  as  336. 

There  is  a curious  difference  between  the  details  of  these  336  moves  in  the  upper  and  lower 
Ranks  of  Tablets. 


123 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  Air  Board  will  be  identical  with  the  Watery. 

The  Earthy  Board  will  be  identical  with  the  Fiery. 

It  will  be  seen  by  the  annexed  table  that  the  squares  of  certain  signs  are  more  often  attacked 
by  the  Knight  than  others;  for  instance  in  the  first  column  it  is  shown  that  the  four  Sagittarius  squares 
in  the  Air  and  Watery  Boards  are  attackable  from  no  less  that  24  squares:  while  the  four  Taurus 
squares  are  only  attackable  from  18  squares. 

When  playing  from  the  16  central  squares,  each  Knight  governs  8 squares.  These  8 squares, 
however,  are  not  promiscuously  arranged,  but  follow  one  rule  in  the  Air  and  Watery  boards,  and 
another  in  the  Earth  and  Fire. 

In  the  former  the  8 squares  are  allotted  always  to  6 signs,  2 of  which  are  moved  to  twice. 

Thus  from  the  Earth  square  of  the  Water  Tablet,  the  Knight  moves  to  the  following  Squares: 
Virgo,  Leo,  Capricorn  2,  Cancer  2,  Pisces,  Aquarius,  duplicating  Capricorn  and  Cancer,  and  missing 
Fire  and  Air  of  the  Cancer  System. 

Or  again  from  the  Aries  square,  the  Knight  moves  to  Pisces,  Aquarius,  Air  2,  Capricorn  2, 
Virgo  and  Leo,  duplicating  Air  and  Capricorn,  and  missing  Fire  and  Cancer. 

But  in  the  Earth  and  Fire  Boards  it  is  different.  There  the  Knight  only  moves  to  squares  of  5 
signs  of  its  system,  triplicating  1,  duplicating  1,  and  missing  three. 

Thus  from  the  Earth  square  the  Knight  moves  to:  Pisces  2,  Capricorn,  Cancer  3,  Leo,  and 
Aquarius;  triplicating  Cancer,  duplicating  Pisces,  missing  Fire,  Air,  and  Virgo. 

And  from  the  Aries  Square:  Aquarius  2,  Pisces,  Virgo  3,  and  Air,  Fire;  triplicating  Virgo, 
duplicating  Aquarius,  missing  Cancer.Capricorn,  and  Leo. 

WATER  AND  AfR  BOARDS 


:Tji)  MlUl  'i 

rtfclH  OFf*  UMIH  IWIH4I 

#iwp*n  hr  . 


■ 

■ 

m 

■ 

m 

■ 

□ 

m 

□ 

m 

□ 

■ 

cm 

a 

■ 

a 

■ 

■ 

a 

■ 

■ 

M 

□ 

■ 

WATlR  * JV*.  R*#vbjjEi 


124 


VOLUME  TEN 


Green  shows  the  Knight’s  moves  from  the  Earth  square  of  the  central  Sixteen.  Crimson  shows 
move  from  Aries  Square. 

EARTH  AND  WATER  BOARDS 

ImTATiV  Jflift  BaMftj)* 

) ^it*<ei  wMino.^  mmrnrn  i 


■ 

■ 

■ 

m 

■ 

m 

■ 

■ 

■ 

u 

■ 

m 

■ 

□ 

■ 

s 

u 

EO 

■ 

El 

■ 

E3 

m 

M 

■ 

■ 

B 

S3 

■ 

m 

■ 

□ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

Green  as  before. 

Crimson  as  before. 

From  the  central  16  squares  an  attack  is  made  on  the  Cardinal  and  Common  Signs  10  times 
each;  but  on  the  Kerubic  and  Elemental  Squares  6 times  each.  This  is  true  of  every  board,  and  the 
reason  is  to  be  found  in  the  position  of  the  ranks;  which  in  every  case  are  disposed  so  that  the 
uppermost  and  lowermost  ranks  are  Kerubic  and  Elemental,  while  the  two  central  ranks  are  Cardinal 
and  Common.  The  same  reason  will  explain  the  peculiarities  of  the  curious  difference  between  the 
columns  “No.  of  times  the  Sign  is  duplicated,”  “triplicated,”  and  "missed.” 

This  analysis  of  the  moves  from  the  16  central  squares  seems  to  show  a certain  steadiness  in 
the  Earth  and  Fire  Tablets,  and  is  less  seen  in  the  Water  and  Air. 

The  same  increase  of  steadiness  is  shown  in  the  tablet  at  the  foot  of  the  diagrams  on  the 

Boards. 

In  Air  and  Water  the  extreme  numbers  are  24  and  18. 

In  Earth  and  Fire  the  extreme  numbers  are  23  and  19. 

The  moves  of  the  Knight  referred  in  a similar  way  to  the  remaining  48  squares  show  the  same 
point,  a greater  steadiness  in  the  Earth  and  Fire  boards  than  in  the  Water  and  Air.  And  this  difference 
is  seen  in  the  outer  row  and  not  in  the  inner  one. 

The  28  outside  squares  are  attacked  by  96  possible  moves. 


125 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


The  20  next  squares  are  attacked  by  1 12  possible  moves. 

The  16  central  squares  are  attacked  by  128  possible  moves. 

The  Knights  or  Fiery  forces  of  the  Elements  meet  and  clash  violently  in  all  parts,  and  are 
strong  in  attack  against  everything  and  everywhere.  Their  moves,  like  Fire  pass  unarrested  through  the 
other  elements  in  irregular  courses  like  the  lambent  flame,  leaping  both  diagonally  and  square-wise  at 
every  move.  They  contain  the  potential  forces  of  the  other  pieces.  Their  force  is  similar  to  the  Tarot 
King,  and  to  Chokmah.  They  are  the  ABBA  forces,  and  with  the  Queens  represent  the  Briatic  forces 
of  the  scheme. 

The  Queens  or  Watery  forces  of  the  Elements  never  clash  with  one  another,  but  ever  undulate 
onwards  each  in  its  own  course  unaffected  by  opposing  or  crossing  waves.  But  the  Watery  forces  only 
move  in  their  respective  pre-ordained  courses;  they  cannot  leave  their  limits  and  enter  upon  the 
domain  of  others.  Water,  like  Fire,  is  unarrested  and  undulating,  and  like  Air  and  Earth  it  can  act 
diagonally  or  square-wise  containing  the  potential  force  of  Air  and  Earth.  They  are  the  Queen  of  the 
Tarot,  and  Binah.  They  are  the  AIMAH,  and  are  of  Briah. 

The  Bishops  are  subtle  and  sharp,  moving  rapidly,  but  are  easily  arrested  in  their  course.  They 
clash  not  with  opposing  Bishops,  and  friendly  Airs  support  each  other  in  attack  and  defence;  where 
the  active  Airs  whirl  the  passive  cannot  come.  They  are  the  forces  of  the  Knights,  and  of  Yetzirah,  the 
SON. 

The  Rooks  are  the  heavy  resisting  powers  of  the  Knave,  mighty  indeed  in  action  when 
preceded  by  the  action  of  the  other  three.  That  is,  when  in  any  matter  the  forces  of  Fire,  Water,  and 
Air  have  been  absorbed  and  equilibriated,  i.e.,  removed  from  the  board,  the  mighty  powers  of  the 
Castles  come  into  play.  But  woe  to  him  who  too  early  calls  these  ponderous  forces  forth. 

THE  ROOK 

This  piece  moves  through  columns  as  through  ranks.  He  is  able,  therefore,  to  reach  every 
square  on  the  board,  and  is  very  powerful.  But  his  movement  is  very  ponderous,  and  it  is  a piece  that 
is  not  moved  many  times  in  a game  unless  the  forces  of  the  other  Elements  have  been  absorbed  in  its 
working  out.  While  the  Aleph,  Mem,  and  Shin  forces  are  in  full  operation  the  Rook  is  easily  attacked 
and  with  difficulty  defended,  unless  he  remain  quiet,  and  act  as  a firm  basis  of  support  and  defence  to 
the  side.  If  he  however,  make  the  mistake  of  entering  early  into  action  he  is  nearly  sure  to  fall  a prey 
to  the  more  subtle  forces  whose  proper  sphere  is  attack. 

If  the  more  subtle  forces  do  not  bring  about  a solution  of  the  question,  and  the  matter  has  to 
be  fought  out  to  the  bitter  end,  that  is,  if  the  Yetziratic  and  Briatic  forces  are  absorbed  and  balanced  in 
the  matter,  then  do  the  ponderous  forces  of  Assiah,  the  Knave,  engage  in  powerful  combat. 


126 


VOLUME  TEN 


THE  KINGS 

The  Kings  of  Water  and  Earth  stand  in  squares  of  the  Aries  System.  The  Kings  of  Air  and 
Fire  stand  in  squares  of  the  Cancer  System. 

If  Water  or  Earth  be  the  Prime  player  the  opposing  Bishops  attack  the  squares  on  which  they 
stand.  If  Air  or  Fire  be  the  Prime  Player  they  do  not. 

The  King  is  the  Ace,  and  the  King  of  the  Prime  Player  being  the  piece  on  whose  action  that  of 
all  the  forces  depends,  it  is  this  King  that,  at  every  move  he  makes,  causes  a new  whirl  to  be  set  up  in 
the  other  forces. 


NOTES  CONCERNING  THE  PLAY. 

See  to  which  system  the  Ptah  square  belongs.  Because  if  it  be  a square  of  the  Aries  system  the 
attack  of  the  opposing  Queens  is  insignificant,  while  that  of  the  Bishops  is  strong.  In  such  a case  the 
number  of  pieces  is  6;  2 Bishops,  2 Knights  and  2 Rooks.  That  is,  in  these  matters  the  Airy  attack  is 
strong,  and  the  Watery  weak. 

If  the  Ptah  be  on  a square  of  the  Cancer  System,  one  opposing  Queen  directly  attacks  this 
Square,  but  the  Bishops  do  not.  In  this  case  the  number  of  attacking  pieces  is  5;  one  Queen,  2 Knights, 
and  2 Rooks.  That  is,  in  these  matters  the  Airy  attack  is  insignificant,  while  the  Watery  is  strong. 

If  an  opposing  Queen  can  attack  the  Ptah,  the  defence  should  note  well  which  Queen  it  is  and 
should  remember  that  this  fact  greatly  enhances  her  power.  He  should  thereupon  not  hesitate  to 
exchange  what  might  otherwise  be  considered  a more  powerful  piece  for  her.  She  should  certainly  be 
exchanged  for  a Bishop,  and  probably  also  for  a Knight. 

THE  ARIES  SYSTEM  OF  TRUMPS 

The  Chief  Among  the  Mighty. 


Magus  of  the  Eternal  Gods. 


Oracles  of  the  Mighty  Gods. 


Holder  of  the  Balance. 


Aries  - Emperor. 


Taurus  - 
Hierophant. 


Gemini  - Lovers. 


Libra  - Justice. 


Scorpio  - Death. 


Child  of  the  Great  Transformer. 


Sagittarius  - 
Temperance. 


Daughter  of  the  Reconciler. 


Saturn  - Universe.  Great  One  of  the  Night  of  Time. 


Water  - Hanged 

Man. 


Spirit  of  the  Mighty  Waters. 


THE  CANCER  SYSTEM  OF  TRUMPS 


Cancer  - Chariot. 


Child  of  the  Powers  of  the 

Waters. 


127 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Leo  - Strength. 


Daughter  of  the  Flaming 

Sword. 


Virgo  - Prudence.  Prophet  of  the  Gods. 

Capricorn  - Lord  of  the  Gates  of 

Devil.  Matter. 

Aquarius  - Star.  Daughter  of  the 

Firmament. 

Pisces  - Moon.  Ruler  of  the  Flux  and 

Reflux. 

Fire  - Judgment.  Spirit  of  the  Primal  Fire. 

Air  - Fool.  Spirit  of  Ether. 

The  YHVH  order  of  the  pieces  corresponds  with  their  respective  offensive  and  defensive 
powers,  thus: 

Most  offensive  - Knight. 

More  offensive  - Queen,  than  defensive. 

More  defensive  - Bishop,  than  offensive. 

The  Rook,  most  defensive,  i.e.,  in  a general  sense.  Because  every  piece  assumes  both  roles 
according  to  circumstances. 

THE  NUMERICAL  STRUCTURE  OF  ENOCHIAN 
By 

DAVID  ALLEN  HULSE 

1.  THE  ENOCHIAN  NUMBERS  WITHIN  THE  CALLS 

Enochian  is  an  isosephic  language,  that  is  a language  whose  alphabet  serves  both  as 
phonemes  and  numbers.  The  esoteric  structure  of  the  Enochian  alphabet  is  based  on  phonetic 
sounds  resembling  Greek,  modeled  on  the  alphabetical  order  of  Hebrew  and  numbered 
digitally  like  Sanskrit.  The  language  itself  seems  to  be  an  amalgamation  of  Hebrew,  Greek, 
English  and  Latin,  with  a sprinkling  of  esoteric  languages  such  as  Egyptian,  Coptic,  and 
Sanskrit.  Above  all,  it  is  an  artificial  language,  suggesting  a grammatical  structure  but  in 
reality  containing  no  logical  syntax.  The  number  system  of  John  Dee's  Enochian  Language 
can  be  seen  in  the  Golden  Dawn  System  of  48  calls  derived  from  Dee's  writings.  The  code  is 
blinded  in  the  sense  that  most  use  of  the  letters  as  numbers  are  erroneous,  but  there  are  clues 

within  this  code  to  allow  its  decipherment. 

Within  the  48  Calls  the  letters  are  employed  as  numbers  sixty-three  times,  from  which 
thirteen  keys  can  be  found  which  allow  the  decoding  of  Enochian.  Eight  keys  clarify  the  correct 
allocation  of  numbers  to  letters.  The  ninth  key  shows  the  end  or  last  letter  of  the  Enochian 
alphabet.  The  tenth  key  details  the  empty  or  invisible  letter  in  the  Enochian  system, 
corresponding  to  the  19th  unlettered  Enochian  Call,  the  Call  utilized  to  explore  the  30 
Aethyrs.  The  eleventh  key  reinforces  the  tenth  key  concerning  the  missing  Enochian  letter. 
The  twelfth  key  alludes  to  the  basic  division  of  the  Tarot  which  is  the  model  for  the  number 
of  letters  in  the  Enochian 


128 


VOLUME  TEN 


system.  The  thirteenth  key  shows  the  Hebraic  influence  in  blinding  L as  one 
in  value.  The  sixty- three  codes  using  Enochian  letters  as  numbers  within  the  48 
Calls  are  as  follows: 


First  Call 

no  appearance  of  numbers 

Second  Call 

VIU  - second 

L - first 
L - first 

Third  Call 

OS  - twelve 

NORZ  - six 

LI  - first 
OS  - twelve 

CLA  - four,  five  and  six 

Fourth  Call 

PD  - 33 
VIU  - second 
MAPM  - 9639 
L - 1 

LO  - first 

CLA  - four,  five  and  six 

Fifth  Call 

D - third 
AF  - nineteen 
L - first 
VIU  - second 
PEOAL  - 69636 
LA  - first 
ULS  - the  ends 
L - one 

Sixth  Call 

S - fourth 
EM  - nine 
ACAM  - 7,  6,  9,  9 
VIU  - second 
D - third 


Seventh  Call 

NI  - 28 

D - third 
ES  - fourth 

Eighth  Call 

LO  - first 
PI  - third 
OX  - 26 

Ninth  Call 

P - eight 

OLANI - two 
OBZA  - half 
CIAL  - 9996 

Tenth  Call 

OP  - 22 
DAOX  - 5678 
OL  - 24th 
EORS  - hundred 
MATB  - thousand 
L - one 

MATB  - thousand 

Eleventh  Call 

0 - five 
GA  - 31 

Twelfth  Call 

OB  - 28 
MIAN  - 3663 

Thirteenth  Call 

UX  - 42 
AFFA  - empty 

Fourteenth  Call 

OL  - QUAR  - 1636 


129 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Fifteenth  Call 

L - first 
DARG  - 6739 


Seventeenth  Call 
D - third 
TAXS  - 7336 


Sixteenth  Call 

YIU - second 
EMOD  - 8763 


Eighteenth  Call 
ERAN  - 6332 


Nineteenth  Call  (the  unnumbered  Call,  the  Cal 
L - one 

AG  L - no  one 
L - one  SAGA  - one 


of  the  30  Aethyrs) 


In  these  examples  two  major  methods  of  representing  numbers  within  the  calls  can  be  seen. 

(a)  letters  employed  as  numbers  in  which  each  letter  of  the  alphabet  corresponds  to  a 
number,  and 

(b)  words  employed  as  numeral  names. 

The  unique  use  of  letters  as  numbers  in  these  Calls  is  modeled  directly  upon  the  Sanskrit 
alphabet.  The  alphabets  of  Hebrew,  Greek,  Arabic,  Coptic,  and  Latin  are  additional;  the  value  of 
any  given  word  is  the  sum  total  of  the  letters  composing  that  word.  But  with  Sanskrit  the 
alphabet  becomes  positional,  and  every  letter  of  a word  becomes  the  digit  of  a number.  The 
Hindu  mathematician  Aryabhata  in  his  work  Dasagitka,  published  in  499  A.D.,  details  a system  of 
substituting  numbers  for  letters  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet.  In  this  system  each  letter  of  a word  is  a 
separate  digit  of  a number;  thus  a word  composed  of  three  letters  would  represent  a number 
composed  of  three  digits.  This  code  was  Ka-Ta-Pa-Ya,  the  most  poetical  and  complex  allocation  of 
numbers  to  letters  for  the  Sanskrit  alphabet.  (For  a description  of  this  number  system  refer  to  the 
third  section  of  this  essay.)  This  same  method  of  numerical  notation  is  used  in  the  48  Enochian 
Calls. 

Of  the  sixty-three  times  numbers  are  mentioned  in  the  Calls,  this  digital  system  is  used  32 

times: 


L - 1 (Calls  4,  5,  10,  19  twice) 

OS  - 12  (Call  3 twice)  CLA  - 456  (Calls  3 and  4)  PD  - 33 
(Call  4) 

MAPM  - 9639  (Call  5)  AF  - 19  (Call  5) 

PEOAL  - 69636  (Call  5)  ACAM  - 7699  (Call  6) 


130 


VOLUME  TEN 


NI  - 28  (Call  7) 

OX  - 26  (Call  8) 

P - 8 (Call  9) 

CIAL  - 9996  (Call  9)  OP  - 22  (Call  10) 

DAOX  - 5618  (Call  10)  O - 5 (Call  1 1) 

GA  - 31  (Call  11) 

OB  - 28  (Call  12) 

MIAN  - 3663  (Call  12)  UX  - 42  (Call  13) 

OL  - 24  (Calls  10  and  14)  QUAR  - 1636  (Call  14) 

DARG  - 6739  (Call  15)  EMOD  - 8763  (Call  16)  TAXS  - 7336 
(Call  17)  ERAN  - 6332  (Call  18) 

The  majority  of  the  above  attributions  are  blinded,  for  many  values  are  given  to  one  letter.  For 
example,  let  us  look  at  the  use  of  "A"  (the  letter  Un)  as  a number: 

A is  1 in  AF  and  GA, 

A is  3 in  ERAN,  TAXS,  PEOAL,  and  QUAR,  A is  6 in  CLA,  MAPM,  DAOX, 
and  MIAN,  A is  7 in  ACAM  and  DARG,  and 
A is  9 in  CIAL  and  ACAM. 

The  correct  allocation  is  A as  in  1 in  AF  and  GA,  the  other  nine  examples  being  blinded  values. 
There  are  eight  correct  attributions  in  the  32  uses  of  the  letters  as  digital  numbers.  These  eight  keys  will 
enable  us  to  reconstruct  the  proper  number  code  for  Enochian.  Correctly  analyzed  they  disclose  the 
following  information. 

1 ) AF  = 19  (Call  5) 

AF,  which  is  the  number  19,  assigns  the  letter  A correctly  to  1,  bringing  to  mind  the  Hebrew  Aleph 
and  the  Greek  Alpha.  This  clue  discloses  the  beginning  of  the  Enochian  alphabet,  not  Pe  (B)  as  Mathers 
premised,  but  rather  Un  (A).  [Note  that  Un  is  the  Latin  root  for  One  (as  in  UNUS,  UNA,  UNUM.] 
Although  A is  numbered  correctly  as  1,  F is  blinded  as  the  number  9.  Looking  at  every  use  of  letters  as 
numbers  in  the  Calls  it  is  apparent  that  the  " 0 " is  never  used.  Therefore  F blinded  as  9,  next  to  the 
correct  allocation  of  A as  1 indicated  the  limit  of  this  number  code,  not  1 through  (1)0,  but  1 through  9. 
This  will  be  reinforced  by  the  clue  AFFA  which  means  empty. 


131 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


2)  GA  = 31  (Call  11) 

GA  as  the  number  31  is  the  only  correct  pair  of  letters  used  as  digital  numbers  appearing 
in  48  Calls.  This  allocation  indicates  that  the  alphabet  is  numbered  in  the  Hellenistic-Semitic 
order  in  which  G is  the  third  position  (Gamma,  Gimel  = 3)  rather  than  the  seventh  position  of 
the  alphabet  as  in  Latin  and  most  European  languages.  The  allocation  of  A to  1 in  GA  reinforces 

the  use  of  A as  1 which  appears  in  AF. 

3)  OS  = 12  (Call  3) 

OS,  which  appears  twice  in  the  third  call  as  12,  correctly  allocates  S to  the  number  2. 
This  is  highly  informative  for  by  this  clue  it  can  be  seen  that  the  Enochian  letter  " S " is  modeled 
on  the  Greek  Sigma,  which  is  valued  at  2 (00),  rather  than  the  Hebrew  Shin,  valued  at  3(00),  or 

the  Hebrew  Samekh,  valued  at  6(0). 

4)  OX  = 26  (Call  8) 

OX,  which  is  valued  at  26,  correctly  assigns  " X " to  6,  although  " 0 " is  blinded  as  2 
(resembling  " OS  " which  also  blinds  " 0 " as  2).  If  the  Enochian  alphabet  is  numbered  as 
Hebrew  this  number  position  would  be  S as  Samekh,  valued  at  6(0).  However  since  it  is  "X", 
this  clue  indicated  that  the  phonetic  model  for  Enochian  is  Greek,  where  X is  Xi,  valued  at  6(0). 

5)  DAOX  = 5678  (Call  10) 

DAOX  as  the  number  series  5678,  in  conjunction  with  OS  and  OX,  clarifies  the 
numerical  correspondence  of  O.  For  by  DAOX,  0 is  valued  at  7,  which  is  its  correct  value,  and 
not  2 as  in  OS  and  OX.  Therefore  the  model  for  0 is  the  Greek  Omicron,  valued  at  7(0),  as  well 

as  the  Hebrew  Ayin  also  valued  at  7(0). 

6)  UX  = 42  (Call  13) 

UX,  which  is  the  number  42,  establishes  the  end  of  the  Enochian  alphabet.  As  AF 
indicated  the  beginning  point  of  Enochian  as  "A",  UX  indicates  that  U as  4 is  the  true  end  of  the 
Enochian  alphabet.  U as  4 is  modeled  on  the  Greek  Upsilon  valued  at  4(00),  which  is  the  Hebraic 
position  for  the  end  of  the  alphabet  (Tav  as  400).  From  this  clue  the  true  model  for  Enochian  can 
be  seen;  it  is  patterned  on  the  phonetic  sounds  of  Greek  based  on  the  Hebraic  order  of  the  alphabet. 
Therefore  U as  Upsilon,  corresponding  to  the  letter  Tav  of  Hebrew,  is  the  model  for  the  end  of 
the  alphabet  rather  than  the  Greek  Omega.  This  is  further  supported  by  the  letter  X appearing  in 
UX.  Although  X is  blinded  as  2 (its  true  value  being  " 6 " as  shown  in  OX),  its  shape  as  the 
English  X suggests  the  rock  Hebrew  form  for  Tav  as  a cross.  The  association  to  U as  4 hints  that 
U is  in  the  position  of  Tav,  as  the  last  or  21st  Enochian  letter.  Note  also  that  Tav  is  assigned  to 
the  21st  Tarot  Key. 

7)  P = 8 (Call  9) 

P,  which  is  the  number  8,  is  the  only  isolated  letter  correctly  used  as  a number.  In 
conjunction  with  X as  6 (from  OX)  and  0 as  7 (from  DAOX),  the  phonetic  model  of  Greek  is 
again  reinforced,  for  X as  6 is  Xi,  0 as  7 is  Omicron  and  P as  8 is  Pi. 


132 


VOLUME  TEN 


8)  OP  = 22  (Call  10) 

OP,  which  is  the  number  22  is  an  example  of  a blinded  number.  Neither  " 0 " nor  " P " is 
valued  at  2.  However  from  DAOX  as  5678,  0 is  correctly  numbered  as  7 and  from  P as  8,  P is 
correctly  numbered  as  8.  Thus  OP  blinded  is  22,  while  OP  corrected  is  78.  There  are  78  total 
Tarot  cards  of  which  22  are  symbolic-Qabalistic  pictures  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet.  These  two 
correspondences  of  22  and  78  are  the  blinded  and  correct  numbering  of  "OP".  By  suggesting  the 
Tarot,  the  number  series  0 through  21  is  brought  to  mind,  for  the  22  cards  composing  the  Major 
Arcana  of  the  Tarot  are  numbered  in  this  order.  This  is  the  esoteric  basis  of  the  Enochian 
alphabet,  22  letters,  21  represented  and  1 unwritten.  The  Tarot  assignment,  brought  out  by  the 
clues  for  Enochian,  parallels  the  Enochian  letter  Un  (A)  to  Key  0,  The  Fool  and  the  Enochian 
letter  Vau  (U)  to  Key  21,  The  World.  The  missing  or  unwritten  Enochian  letter  is  the  Greek  model 
Theta,  corresponding  to  Teth  in  Hebrew,  and  Key  8,  Strength  in  the  Golden  Dawn  Tarot. 

(See  the  comment  below  on  the  clue  AFFA  for  further  clarification  of  this  missing 
unwritten  letter.) 

In  addition  to  the  use  of  the  alphabet  as  the  digits  of  numbers,  Enochian  also  contains 
descriptive  names  for  numbers.  Within  the  48  Calls  the  appearance  of  words  describing  number 
concepts  occurs  31  times.  They  are: 

VIU  - second  (Calls  2,  4,  5,  6,  16) 

L - first  (Calls  2 twice,  5,  15) 

NORZ  - six  (Call  3) 

LI  - first  (Call  3) 

LO  - first  (Calls  4,  8) 

D - third  (Calls  5,  6,  7,  17)  LA  - first  (Call  5) 

ULS  - the  ends  (Call  5)  S - fourth  (Call  6) 

EM  - nine  (Call  6)  ES  - fourth  (Call  7)  PI  - third 
(Call  8) 

OLANI  - two  (Call  9)  OBZA  - half  (Call  9)  EORS  - hundred  (Call 
10)  MATB  - thousand  (Call  10  twice) 

AFFA  - empty  (Call  19)  AG  L - no  one  (Call  19)  SAGA  - 
one  (Call  19) 

Four  major  keys  and  one  additional  clue  can  be  gleaned  from  these  31  descriptive  terms. 

The  four  major  keys  are  as  follows: 


133 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


1)  ULS  - the  ends  (Call  5) 

ULS,  a word  meaning  the  ends  reinforces  the  establishment  of  the  Enochian  U (Vau)  as 
the  end  of  the  Enochian  alphabet.  For  ULS  begins  with  the  letter  U (Vau)  which  is  the  "Omega” 
of  the  Enochian  language.  From  the  clue  UX,  the  model  for  this  letter  U was  discovered  to  be 
the  Greek  Upsilon.  Although  its  Enochian  name  or  title  of  Vau  suggest  the  Hebrew  Vav,  the  true 
model  for  the  Enochian  Vau  is  the  Greek  Upsilon.  This  Enochian  letter  U is  also  transliterated 
as  V or  W.  However,  in  both  the  clues  UX  and  ULS  Dee  chose  to  transliterate  this  letter  as  a U 
to  further  establish  the  correspondence  of  Upsilon. 

Another  Enochian  number  name  can  help  support  this  theory,  and  this  name  is  VIU, 
meaning  second,  which  appears  in  the  second,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth  and  sixteenth  call.  In  this  name 
Dee  transliterates  the  Enochian  Vau  as  both  V and  U.  Symbolically  the  term  second  can  be  seen 
as  that  which  is  not  first,  i.e.  last.  Therefore  the  double  transliteration  of  Vau  as  V and  U within 
the  word  for  second  suggests  that  the  Enochian  Vau  is  the  last  letter  of  the  alphabet. 

2)  AFFA  - empty  (zero,  nothing)  (Call  13) 

AFFA  appears  in  the  13th  Call  as  a term  for  that  which  is  empty.  It  is  composed  of  the 
clue  AF  (described  above)  written  forward  and  backwards.  AF  is  numbered  as  19  by  Enochian, 
though  F as  9 is  a blinded  attribute.  However  in  the  light  of  AFFA  as  empty,  the  allocation  of  F 
to  9 in  AF  implies  that  the  9th  position  of  the  Enochian  alphabet  is  empty.  And  this  9th  position 
in  our  Hellenistic-Semitic  model  is  Theta,  or  Teth,  valued  at  9 (and  assigned  to  the  19th  path  on 
the  Tree  of  Life). 

Now  in  the  Greek  alphabet  the  number  5 progresses  to  7,  Epsilon  followed  by  Zeta,  with 
the  number  6 missing  or  empty.  This  6th  position  is  assigned  to  the  archaic  letter  Stau  (or 
Digamma)  which  is  valued  at  6.  Christian  tradition  relates  that  this  6th  missing  letter  Stau  is  the 
mark  of  both  Qain  and  the  Beast  of  Revelations.  This  is  supported  by  Revelation  13:18,  the 
only  instance  when  Stau  appears  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  number  6 in  the  number  letters 
666  (Chi  Xi  Stau). 

While  the  Enochian  alphabet  has  a letter  for  6 (F  found  in  AF  and  AFFA),  it  has  no 
corresponding  letter  for  the  9th  position  of  its  alphabet.  This  missing  Enochian  letter  corresponds  to 
the  Greek  letter  Theta,  valued  at  9. 

Why  would  Enochian  have  a missing  letter  valued  at  9 and  corresponding  in  its  Greek 
model  to  the  letter  Theta?  First,  to  allow  22  letters  in  all  for  its  alphabet,  permitting  a 
correspondence  to  the  22  Major  Keys  of  the  Tarot.  And  second,  out  of  respect  and  fear  of  God, 
honor  was  given  to  an  invisible  letter,  corresponding  to  the  unnumbered  19th  Call  which 
represents  the  God-head.  For  the  angels  instructed  Dee  that  the  21  Enochian  letters  represent 
the  servants  of  the  king  and  not  the  king  himself.  This  corresponds  to  the  Jewish  reverence  for 
the  Tetragrammaton,  for  Theta,  as  the  empty  9th  Enochian  alphabet  position,  represents  the  initial 
for  God  in  Greek:  ThEOS.  Therefore  the  initial  for  God,  Theta,  can  be  seen  as  the  unsounded, 
unwritten  and  unthinkable  concept  within  Enochian. 


134 


VOLUME  TEN 


3)  EM  - nine  (Call  6) 

EM  is  the  numeral  name  for  nine.  By  the  Greek  phonetic  order  E is  valued  at 
5 while  M is  valued  at  4(0).  Though  EM  is  54  as  a digital  number,  by  addition  5 +4 
=9.  Nine  is  the  missing  Enochian  letter  corresponding  to  Theta  and  Teth,  and  nine  of 
the  Tree  of  Life  as  the  letter  Teth  is  the  19th  path  which  connects  the  4th  and  5th 
Sephiroth  ( 4 = M , and  5=E) . 

4)  D - third  (Calls  5,  6,  7,  17) 

D represents  the  numeral  name  for  third.  Though  D is  valued  at  4 in 
Enochian  (based  on  Delta  and  Daleth),  it  corresponds  to  the  third  Tarot  Key,  The 
Empress.  Therefore  by  D as  third,  the  Enochian  parallel  to  the  Tarot  is  established. 
This  is  further  evidence  for  the  clue  supplied  by  OP  as  22  and  78. 

In  addition  to  the  above  12  keys  concerning  the  Hellenistic-Semitic  structure 
of  Enochian  one  final  key  concerns  the  blinded  use  of  the  Enochian  Letter  " L " as  the 
number  one.  L appears  16  times  in  the  48  Calls  to  designate  one: 

L - 1 (Calls  4,  5,  10,  19  twice) 

L - first  (Calls  2 twice,  5,  15) 

Id  - first  (Call  3) 

LO  - first 

(Calls  4,  8)  LA  - first 
(Call  5)  EL  - first 
(Call  6) 

AG  L - no  one  (Call  19) 

LIL  the  call  of  the  first  Aire 

Though  L is  valued  at  3 by  the  digital  code  for  Enochian  (based  on  the  Greek 
Lamda  and  the  Hebrew  Lamed,  valued  at  3(0),  its  blinded  value  of  1 in  the  Calls 
points  to  various  Qabalistic  formulae  for  the  number  1 . 

For  in  Hebrew  L refers  to: 

(A)  L - the  one  law,  power,  might 

L(A)  - not,  nothing,  the  void 

(A)L(P)  - Aleph,  the  first  letter 

(A)L(HIM)  - Elohim,  the  first  name  for  God  in  the  Torah 

L(ILITh)  - Lilith,  Adam's  first  mate 

And  in  Greek  L refers  to: 

L(OGOS)  - the  word  which  was  sounded  at  the  beginning  of  Creation. 

Therefore  the  use  of  L as  one  (though  blinded)  points  to  the  Greek  and 
Semitic  model  for  Enochian. 

Now  from  these  13  keys  the  complete  number  structure  of  Enochian  can  be 
detailed: 


135 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


1)  The  21  Enochian  alphabet  letters  must  be  arranged  as  the  Greek  phonetic  order. 

2)  This  arrangement  must  be  qualified  by  the  22  Hebrew  letters  ranging  from  1 
(which  is  Aleph,  Alpha  and  Un)  to  400  (which  is  Tav,  Upsilon.  and  Vau). 

3)  The  one  place  in  this  order  of  22  which  must  be  left  empty  is  the  9th  place,  or 
place  of  the  Greek  letter  Theta. 

4)  The  number  values  of  the  Enochian  alphabet  based  on  the  corresponding  values  of 
the  Greek-Hebrew  model  must  be  reduced  to  the  number  series  1 to  9.  This  is  accomplished  by 
placing  the  Enochian  alphabet  on  the  Qabalah  of  9 chambers  (AIQ  BKR),  which  will  remove  all 
zeros.  The  Enochian  letters  can  then  be  used  as  digits  of  a composite  number.  Thus  the  21 
Enochian  characters  are  numbered  as  follows.: 

1234  5678  9 

ABGD  EF  ZH 
1 C LMNX  OP  Q 
R S T U 

The  letters  which  are  underscored  are  derived  from  the  clues  in  the  48  Calls.  Note  that 
the  word  "AIR"  from  Aethyr  is  the  first  column  of  our  alphabet  code. 

A second  number  code  for  Enochian  can  be  derived  from  the  above  table  of 
correspondence.  The  21  Enochian  letters  can  also  be  given  the  number  value  of  their 
corresponding  Greek-Hebrew  model.  With  this  value  any  Enochian  word  can  be  given  a number 
value  by  totalling  the  number  value  of  the  letters  of  any  word.  The  table  below  will  detail  the 
two  Enochian  number  codes,  their  parallel  Greek,  Hebrew  and  Tarot  models,  as  well  as  their 
astrological  attributes  derived  from  these  models. 

Enochian  TransliterationAdditional  Greek  Tarot  Hebrew  Astrological 


Alphabet 

of 

Enochian 

Digital  Code 
Code 

Model 

Key 

Model 

Attribute 

Un 

A 

1 

1 

Alpha 

0 

Aleph 

Air 

Pe 

B 

2 

2 

Beta 

1 

Beth 

Mercury 

Ged 

G 

3 

3 

Gamma 

2 

Gimmel 

Moon 

Gal 

D 

4 

4 

Delta 

3 

Daleth 

Venus 

Graph 

E 

5 

5 

Epsilon 

4 

Heh 

Aries 

Orth 

F 

6 

6 

Stau 

5 

Vav 

Taurus 

Ceph 

Z 

7 

7 

Zeta 

6 

Zain 

Gemini 

Na-hath 

H 

8 

8 

Eta 

7 

Cheth 

Cancer 

The  missing  or  empty 

Enochian  letter  Theta 

8 

Teth 

Leo 

Gon 

I,J,Y 

1 

10 

Iota 

9 

Yod 

Virgo 

Veh 

C,K 

2 

20 

Kappa 

10 

Kaph 

Jupiter 

Ur 

L 

3 

30 

Lambda 

11 

Lamed 

Libra 

Tal 

M 

4 

40 

Mu 

12 

Mem 

Water 

Drun 

N 

5 

50 

Nu 

13 

Nun 

Scorpio 

136 


VOLUME  TEN 


Pal 

X 

6 

60 

Xi 

14 

Samekh 

Sagittarius 

Med 

0 

7 

70 

Omicron 

15 

Ayin 

Capricorn 

Mats 

p 

8 

80 

Pi 

16 

Peh 

Mars 

Ger 

Q 

9 

90 

Koppa 

17 

Tzaddi 

Aquarius 

Don 

R 

1 

100 

Rho 

18 

Qoph 

Pisces 

Fam 

S 

2 

200 

Sigma 

19 

Resh 

Sun 

Gisa 

T 

3 

300 

Tau 

20 

Shin 

Fire 

Vau 

u,v,w 

4 

400 

Upsilon 

21 

Tav 

Saturn 

(Earth) 


As  well  as  the  numerical  clues  given  in  the  Calls,  Dee,  in  his  own  writings,  supplies 
additional  proof  in  support  of  a Hellenistic-Semitic  model  for  the  Enochian  language: 

I)  The  abbreviation  Dee  uses  in  his  diary  to  designate  himself  is  Delta,  the  fourth  letter 
of  the  Greek  alphabet. 

2 Enochian  reads  from  right  to  left  resembling  Hebrew  (as  well  as  Greek  prior  to  800 
B.C.).  This  does  not  imply  a demonic  influence;  rather  it  is  an  indication  that  John  Dee 
attempted  to  create  an  Angelic  language  patterned  upon  Hebrew.  The  Talmud  relates  that  the 
angels  only  speak  Hebrew,  while  the  Zohar  states  that  when  we  die,  there  is  only  one  angelic 

language  we  all  speak. 

3)  One  of  Dee's  Enochian  Holy  Books  was  titled,  The  Book  of  SOYGA.  The 
communicating  angel  indicated  that  SOYGA  is  not  the  reversal  of  the  Greek  word  (Holy). 
However,  this  is  a blind.  In  reality  this  name  SOYGA  as  a mirror  of  the  Greek  AGIOS  is  a clue 
to  the  true  model  for  Enochian:  Greek. 

4)  The  Enochian  Cosmology  is  composed  of  30  Aethyr  or  Aires.  This  is  undoubtedly 
patterned  on  the  30  Aeons  or  Worlds  of  the  Coptic-Gnostic  cosmology,  which  was  also 
explored  by  the  Renaissance  Magus  Giordano  Bruno. 

5)  The  name  Enochian  is  obviously  derived  from  the  Hebrew  "Enoch,"  which 
literally  means  to  initiate.  The  Zohar  relates  that  Adam  was  given  the  Book  of  Enoch  in  the 
Garden  of  Eden;  but  after  the  fall  of  Adam  and  Eve  it  was  removed  from  mankind  and  only 
redeemed  and  brought  back  to  earth  by  Enoch.  Dee's  own  magical  work  was  an  attempt  to 
redeem  mankind  again  and  bring  this  pristine  Enochian  wisdom  back  to  earth. 

6)  The  Enochian  angel  Madimi  communicating  to  John  Dee  through  the  skrying  of 
Edward  Kelley,  sent  on  June  29,  1583,  a warning  to  Dee  concerning  Kelley  which  was  expressed 
in  Greek  characters  (supposedly  a tongue  Kelley  did  not  understand).  Recorded  beside  this 
warning  in  Dee's  diary  is  a comment  from  Kelley  to  Dee  concerning  this  cryptic  warning:  "It  is 
the  Syrian  Tongue  you  do  not  understand  it."  Now  this  is  the  exact  model  for  the  esoteric 
structure  of  Enochian,  the  combination  of  Hellenistic  and  Semitic  Qabalahs. 

7)  John  Dee  numbered  his  own  name  as  a transliteration  of  Hebrew  using  the 
Enochian  alphabet  of  Pantheus  recorded  in  the  Voarchadumia.  This  earlier  Enochian  alphabet 
may  have  served  as  a model  of  Dee's  own  Enochian  script;  it  is  an  angelic  script  based  totally  on 
Hebrew.  With  this  Hebraic  code,  John  Dee  transformed  his  name  into  the  Hebrew  IAHN  DAA. 
IAHN  for 


137 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


John  is  valued  at  66,  while  DAA  for  Dee  is  valued  at  6.  By  this  code  Dee  was  able  to  transform  his 
own  name  into  the  number  of  the  beast:  666.  This  is  probably  the  reason  for  the  vast  amount  of  magic 
squares  appealing  in  John  Dee's  Holy  Table  which  are  composed  of  groups  of  666.  (Refer  to  Crowley's 
The  Equinox,  Vol.  I,  No.  7,  for  an  illustration  of  this  table.) 

8)  The  grand  name  given  to  the  angelic  tablets  which  contain  the  Enochian  system  of  John  Dee  is 
Liber  LOGAETH,  or  The  Book  of  Speech  from  God.  This  Enochian  name  of  LOGAETH  is  a perfect 
description  of  the  dual  model  of  Greek  and  Hebrew.  For  LOG  (or  LOGA)  is  derived  from  the  Greek 
LOGOS,  meaning  "the  creative  word,"  while  AETH  (or  ETH)  is  the  Hebrew  AVTh,  meaning  "letter  of 
the  alphabet."  Thus  LOGAETH  is  a symbolic  name  for  the  Greek  phonetic  sounds  (LOGA)  modeled  on  a 
Hebraic  alphabetical  order  (AETH). 

II.  THE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  FOR  NUMBERING  ENOCHIAN 

A second  method  can  be  used  for  deciphering  Enochian  as  numbers.  This  is  the  Golden  Dawn 
system  of  allocations  found  in  The  Book  of  Concourse  of  Forces  and  used  by  Aleister  Crowley  in 
exploration  of  the  30  Aethyrs  of  the  Enochian  cosmology  (recorded  in  his  The  Vision  and  The  Voice). 

In  Crowley's  The  Vision  and  The  Voice,  the  Enochian  for  the  30  Calls  of  the  Aethyrs  is  given 
Hebrew  and  astrological  equivalents.  Crowley,  in  commenting  on  his  vision  of  the  29th  aethyr  states  that 
"the  geomantic  correspondences  of  the  Enochian  alphabet  form  a sublime  commentary."  This  is  the 
Golden  Dawn  basis  for  the  allocation  of  Hebrew  to  the  Enochian  alphabet.  In  the  Golden  Dawn  essay  on 
Talismans  and  Sigils  a table  is  given  allocating  16  select  Enochian  letters  to  the  16  geomantic  figures. 
These  correspondences  are  as  follows: 


Enochian 

Letter 

T ransliteration 

Geomantic  Figure 

MALS 

P 

POPULUS 

UR 

L 

VIA 

GED 

G 

FORTUNA  MAJOR 

CEPH 

Z 

FORTUNA  MINOR 

FAM 

S 

CONJUNCTIO 

MED 

0 

PUELLA 

DRUN 

N 

RUBEUS 

GON 

I.J.T 

ACQUISITIO 

VAU 

U,V,W 

CARCER 

TAL 

M 

TRISTITIA 

DON 

R 

LAETITIA 

ORTH 

F 

CAUDA  DRACONIS 

GISA 

T 

CAPUT  DRACONIS 

PE 

B 

PUER 

UN 

A 

AMISSIO 

GRAPH 

E 

ALBUS 

138 


VOLUME  TEN 


Enochian 

Letter 

Geomancy 

Zodiac 

Hebrew 

Letter 

Number 

Value 

P 

POPULUS 

Cancer 

Cheth 

8 

L 

VIA 

Water 

Mem 

40 

G 

FORTUNA 

MAJOR 

Leo 

Teth 

9 

Z 

FORTUNA 

Air 

Aleph 

1 

S 

CONJUNCTIO 

Virgo 

Yod 

10 

0 

PUELLA 

Libra 

Lamed 

30 

N 

RUBEUS 

Scorpio 

Nun 

50 

I,J,Y 

ACQUISITIO 

Sagittarius 

Samekh 

60 

u,v,w 

CARCER 

Capricorn 

Ayin 

70 

M 

TRISTITIA 

Aquarius 

Tzaddi 

90 

R 

LAETITIA 

Pisces 

Qoph 

100 

F 

CAUDA 

DRACONIS 

Fire 

Shin 

300 

T 

CAPUT 

DRACONIS 

Earth 

Tav 

400 

B 

PUER 

Aries 

Heh 

5 

A 

AMISSIO 

Taurus 

Vav 

6 

E 

ALBUS 

Gemini 

Zain 

7 

Unlike  the  digital  code  concealed  in  the  48  Calls,  the  Golden  Dawn  parallel  between 
Enochian  and  Hebrew  is  not  phonetic  in  basis  but  rather  elemental  as  defined  by  the  attributes  of 
geomancy. 

However,  if  the  zeros  in  this  code  are  removed,  and  this  number  code  is  then  applied  to 
the  digital  number  codes  in  the  Enochian  Calls  the  following  harmonies  can  be  found: 

1)  CLA  = (Calls  3,  4);  in  this  number  A=6  is  correct, 

2)  MAPM  = 9639  (Call  5);  in  this  number  A=6  and  M=9  are  correct, 

3)  ACAM  = 7699  (Call  6);  in  this  number  M=9  is  correct, 

4)  P = 8 (Call  9);  this  isolated  number  as  8 is  correct, 

5)  OL  = 24  (Calls  10,  14);  in  this  number  L=4  is  correct, 

6)  MIAN  = 3663  (Call  12);  in  this  number  both  1=6  and  A=6  are  correct, 

7)  DARG  = 6739  (Call  15);  in  this  number  G=9  is  correct. 


139 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


Crowley  in  his  use  of  the  above  Golden  Dawn  Enochian  Table  of  Attributions 
deviated  in  two  main  attributions.  He  often  interchanged  Leo  with  Cancer  (both  ruled  by 
the  luminaries),  and  Virgo  with  Gemini  (both  ruled  by  Mercury). 

The  Golden  Dawn  system  does  not  number  the  complete  Enochian  alphabet.  In 
this  system  5 Enochian  letters  are  excluded.  Crowley  realizing  this  disparity, 
developed  5 additional  allocations  based  on  the  logic  of  The  Notes  of  the  Book  of  the 
Concourse  of  Forces.  Since  the  geomantic  attributes  for  Enochian  are  ultimately 
elemental  in  nature  Crowley  premissed  that  the  live  excluded  Enochian  letters  must 
correspond  to  the  live  points  of  the  elemental  pentagram.  These  additional  five  Enochian 
letters  and  their  Hebrew  parallels  are  as  follows: 

Excluded  Element  Hebrew  Number 

Enochian  Letter  Value 

Letter 


C(K) 

Fire 

Shin 

300 

D 

Spirit 

Daleth  or 

4 or 

Aleph  Lamed 

31 

H 

Air 

Aleph 

1 

9 

Water 

Mem 

40 

X 

Earth 

Tav 

400 

Thus  with  the  addition  of  Crowley's  five  letters  the  complete  Enochian  alphabet 
can  be  numbered  in  line  with  their  Hebrew  model.  This  numerical  rectification  is  as 
follows: 

CROWLEY  S ATTRIBUTION 


Enochian 

Number 

Enochian 

Number 

Letter 

Value 

Letter 

Value 

B 

5 

P 

8 

C(K) 

300* 

9 

40 

G 

9 

N 

50 

D 

4 (or  31)* 

X 

400* 

F 

300 

0 

30 

A 

6 

R 

100 

E 

7 

Z 

1 

M 

90 

U (V,W) 

70 

I(J,Y) 

60 

s 

10 

H 

1* 

T 

400 

L 

40 

*Crowley  variant 

140 


VOLUME  TEN 


III.  THE  SANSKRIT  DIGITAL  NUMBER  CODE 

The  Sanskrit  source  for  the  Enochian  code  appearing  in  the  Calls  is  known  as  the  Vedic 
Number  Code  or  Ka-Ta-Pa-Ya-Dhi,  (Ka,  Ta.  Pa,  and  Ya  all  being  valued  at  one  in  this  code).  It 
is  this  code  which  serves  as  a key  to  unlocking  the  allocation  of  the  50  letters  of  the  Sanskrit 
alphabet  to  the  50  petals  of  the  chakra  system.  The  rules  for  the  Katapayadhi  Number  Code  are 
as  follows: 

1)  The  34  consonants  of  the  Sanskrit  Alphabet  represent  the  numbers  0 through  9 as 
digits  within  a number. 

2)  The  16  vowels  receive  no  number  value  or  place  value. 

3)  Each  consonant  of  a word  is  a place  value  (digit)  of  the  resultant  number. 

4)  When  two  consonants  are  conjoined  in  a word  the  last  consonant  receives  the 
number  value. 

5)  The  number  of  consonants  (or  conjoined  consonants)  in  a word  determines  the 
number  of  digits  which  compose  the  number  value  of  that  word.  Thus  all  one  consonant  words 
will  be  valued  between  0 and  9;  all  two  consonant  words  will  be  valued  between  10  and  99:  all 
three  consonant  words  will  be  valued  between  100  and  999,  etc. 

The  number  values  for  the  34  consonants  and  the  16  vowels  are  as  follows: 


Number  Value 

THE  34  CONSOl 
Sanskrit  Letter 

SANTS 

Petal  of  Chakra 

1 

Ka 

1st  petal  - Anahata 

1 

Ta 

11th  petal  - Anahata 

1 

Pa 

9th  petal  - Manipuraka 

1 

Ya 

4th  petal  - Svadisthana 

2 

Kah 

2nd  petal  - Anahata 

2 

Tha 

12th  petal  - Anahata 

2 

Pha 

10th  petal  - Manipuraka 

2 

Ra 

5th  petal  - Svadisthana 

3 

Ga 

3rd  petal  - Anahata 

3 

Da 

1st  petal  - Manipuraka 

3 

Ba 

1st  petal  - Svadisthana 

3 

La 

6th  petal  - Svadisthana 

4 

Gha 

4th  petal  - Anahata 

4 

Dha 

2nd  petal  - Manipuraka 

4 

Bha 

2nd  petal  - Svadisthana 

4 

Va 

1st  petal  - Muladhara 

5 

N'  a 

5th  petal  - Anahata 

5 

Na 

3rd  petal  - Manipuraka 

5 

Ma 

3rd  petal  - Svadhisthana 

141 


THE  COMPLETE  GOLDEN  DAWN  SYSTEM  OF  MAGIC 


5 

Sa 

2nd  petal  - Muladhara 

6 

Ca 

6th  petal  - Anahata 

6 

Ta 

4th  petal  - Manipuraka 

6 

Sa 

3rd  petal  - Muladhara 

7 

Cha 

7th  petal  - Anahata 

7 

Tha 

5th  petal  - Manipuraka 

7 

Sa 

4th  petal  - Muladhara 

8 

Ja 

8th  petal  - Anahata 

8 

Da 

6th  petal  - Manipuraka 

8 

Ha 

1st  petal  - Ajna 

9 

Jha 

9th  petal  - Anahata 

9 

Dha 

7th  petal  - Manipuraka 

0 (as  a place  value) 

Na 

10th  petal  - Anahata 

0 (as  a place  value) 

Na 

8th  petal  - Manipuraka 

0 (as  a place  value) 

Ksa 

2nd  petal  - Ajna 

THE  16  VOWELS 
(No  place  value  or  number  value) 

Sanskrit  Letter  Petal  of  Chakra 


A 

1st  petal 

- Visuddha 

X 

2nd  petal 

- Visuddha 

I 

3rd  petal 

- Visuddha 

I 

4th  petal 

- Visuddha 

u 

5th  petal 

- Visuddha 

u 

6th  petal 

- Visuddha 

Ri 

7th  petal 

- Visuddha 

Ri 

8th  petal 

- Visuddha 

Li 

9th  petal 

- Visuddha 

Li 

10th  petal 

- Visuddha 

E 

11th  petal 

- Visuddha 

Ai 

12th  petal 

- Visuddha 

O 

13th  petal 

- Visuddha 

Au 

14th  petal 

- Visuddha 

Am 

15th  petal 

- Visuddha 

Ah 

16th  petal 

- Visuddha 

The  above  allocation  of  the  50  Sanskrit  alphabet  letters  to  the  50  petals  of  the  chakra  system 
is  derived  from  Arthur  Avalon's  The  Serpent  Power.  The  number  code  itself  is  derived  from 
Jagadguru  Swami  Sri  Bliarati  Krshna  Tirthaji's  Vedic  Mathematics. 

Sobam  Ag  Cormpo  Crp  L 


142 