INCIDENTS IN MY LIFE.

                  BY

   D[aniel]. D[unglass]. HOME.

             [1833-1886]

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY JUDGE EDMONDS.




                ————
             FIFTH EDITION




            NEW YORK:
                 1864.

            Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1863,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern District of New York.


          The text has not been professionally proofed and
       experience shows that works of this vintage are likely
     to have more than a few errors compared to recent works.

                     Courtesy of SpiritWritings.com

                                     CONTENTS.
                                                                          PAGE


Introduction ................................................................ vii

                                      CHAPTER I.
Early Life: I become a Medium .................................. 17

                                      CHAPTER II.
Before the World ........................................................ 32

                                     CHAPTER III.
Further Manifestations in America ............................. 70

                                     CHAPTER IV.
In England ................................................................... 95

                                      CHAPTER V.
At Florence, Naples, Rome and Paris ....................... 126

vi                                         CONTENTS.
                                                                             PAGE
                                         CHAPTER VI.
     In America. The Pressgang ........................................149

                                         CHAPTER VII.
     1857-8—France, Italy, and Russia—Marriage ......... 164

                                        CHAPTER VIII.
     Russia, Paris and England ......................................... 183

                                         CHAPTER IX.
     The "Cornhill" and other Narratives ......................... 213

                                          CHAPTER X.
     Miraculous Preservation. France and England ..........230

                                         CHAPTER XI.
     A Diary and Letter ................................................... 261

                                         CHAPTER XII.
     In Memoriam ............................................................ 285

                                        CHAPTER XIII.
     Conclusion ................................................................ 305

                          INTRODUCTION

                   T O T H E A M E R I C A N E D I T I O N.

                                     ———

   IT is now about fifteen years since there occurred at Rochester, in the State
of New York, some incidents of so unusual a character as to excite a very
lively attention.

   These incidents were, the locomotion of ponderable objects without any
perceptible mortal agency, and the creation of sounds without any
discoverable human origin; and through their instrumentality, such an
intelligence displayed as enabled conversation to be carried on with the
unseen power that was acting thus strangely in their midst.

  Through the conversation thus opened, it was professed that these things
were done by the spirits of those who had once lived on the earth, and that
the object was to open a communication between the living and the dead.

  Such a claim was received by an almost universal disbelief—by vehement
condemnation of the impiety, or unsparing ridicule of the credulity which
could receive or avow it.

   Still the thing went on, and impelled by curiosity or the love of the
marvelous, people began to investigate—and as investigation progressed, the
belief in the spiritual origin of the phenomena spread, until in a short time,
people of all classes and positions in society, and of all conditions of
intelligence

viii            INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.

and education, inquired—and most of those who inquired, believed.
   Confined originally to one locality, it soon spread to other parts of that
State and to adjoining States. Limited, at first, to three young girls as the
"mediums" through whom these things were done, the power was soon
manifested through others, of different sexes and ages.
   The ordinary newspaper press of the day was alive with the details and
discussion of the incidents and their origin. Periodical papers were
established, devoted to the topic and numerous volumes were published with
the same purpose. The whole matter was subjected, both as to the facts and
their sources, to the severest scrutiny which ingenuity and acuteness could
devise. Solutions of the mystery, professing to be satisfactory, put forth even
under the auspices of such men as Sir David Brewster, and Professors
Faraday and Agassiz, were of frequent occurrence, and the press and the
pulpit seemed to unite in one voice of denunciation of the monstrous fraud
and delusion.
   Still the thing moved steadily on, until before the expiration of the first
decade after its advent, the instruments through whom the things were done
were counted by thousands in this country, and the believers by millions, and
kindred manifestations were breaking out throughout the world, and
appearing on different continents, among people of diverse nationalities and
language simultaneously, without any missionary effort on our part, and
apparently without preconcert with us or between themselves.
   Thus at length—through this instrumentality and by the testimony of these
hosts of witnesses—was established in this country the marvelous fact of
inanimate matter moving without mortal contact, and displaying
intelligence, and that intelligence so great as to "speak in many tongues,"
and to read the inmost unuttered thoughts of man.
   Among the early instruments used to bring about such a result in this
country, was D. D. Home, whose experience is given in the ensuing pages.
He was of a mild and gentle disposition, sincere and simple-minded, yet of a
passive rather than an affirmative character, with a strong devotional
tendency.
   He was never known much in this country as a medium.—

                 INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.                          ix

His powers were not more remarkable than those of many others who were
in daily use at the time, and during a good part of the time that elapsed
between the development of his powers and his departure for Europe, his
mediumship was confined to a very small circle, consisting of gentlemen of
education and of means, who were, through him, thoroughly investigating
the subject.
   Such an investigation, by men of science, of learning, of intelligence, and
of standing, was earnestly sought and repeatedly urged by the educated ones
of those who, on witnessing the phenomena, found in it, a profound mystery.
It was often said to that class of men, whom we were wont to regard as our
teachers and leaders in knowledge, "Here is something that we cannot
fathom. Come you to our aid! Here are incidents for which we can find no
origin in the laws of nature known to us, which we are told are not
supernatural, but in conformity with nature. Come ye and discover this
unknown and extraordinary power which thus tends to lead us into the
domain of the magical and the miraculous! Here is an intelligence displayed
by inanimate matter which professes to be that of the dead. Come ye to our
rescue, and unfold to us, if it is possible, some other theory than the spiritual,
as explanatory of these uncommon events.—For if that cannot be done, and
this thing is what it professes to be—a communion with the spirits of the
departed—the importance of this new phase of human life cannot be
exaggerated"
   To such appeals the response was often favorable, and such investigations
were had in different parts of the country; which resulted not so much in the
discovery of the nature of this new power, as in establishing to all who
would expend a thought on the subject, the reality of its existence, and in
some degree, what it was capable of achieving.
   As soon as this end was attained in this country, demonstrations of that
character almost wholly ceased among us, and spirit communion assumed a
new and most interesting phase.
   Meanwhile Europe lagged behind the celerity of our movement, and as we
were beginning to read in this New

x               INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.

Testament from God to man, we could occasionally hear that her people
were just entering on their A, B, C.
   So that when Home arrived in England, in the possession of a power then
quite common in this country, but almost unknown there, he at once attracted
great attention—and it will be seen in the following pages, how wide-spread
and earnest was that attention among the higher classes, as well on the
Continent as in England. The same lively interest in these, the primary steps
of the Communion, was displayed there that had been seen here, some ten
years before. That interest still continues there. I will mention as an instance
of this, that some time ago I received a letter from Home, requesting leave to
send me the advanced sheets of his forthcoming work, in order to their
publication here; and when I received those sheets, they came to me, not
from him, but from a friend, because he had been sent for by the Emperor of
the French and had departed for Paris.
   The office which his book will perform in Europe will be somewhat
different from what it will perform with us. There, it will be mainly to
establish the fact of spiritual intercourse. With us, we have an abundance of
testimony on that point, not only in the oft recorded experience of the past,
but in the great number of private Circles, now scattered all over our land,
where every one may see and judge for himself.
   To some in this country too that will be the office of his book, but to very
many it will be different, and the book will find its chief interest in the plain
simple detail of fact, and the great accumulation of testimony in support of
that detail, and in the fact that it is a clear delineation of the first step of
many which have been taken within the last fifteen years.
   That first step has been pretty thoroughly investigated in America, until a
great revolution has been wrought in the public mind as to its actuality.
   The next thing—and we are prepared for that now in this country—is to
obtain for the subsequent steps the same thorough and searching scrutiny.
   And it is the object of this introduction to bespeak for those subsequent
steps the closest investigation that science, education and acuteness can give.
It is impossible for any

                INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.                          xi

one mind or any small number of minds to do that wisely and well. It
requires very many minds and numerous observations and a gathering
together of the results of very many inquiries, before a satisfactory
conclusion can be arrived at, and every possible objection be foreclosed. Just
as in astronomy, the discoveries of the last hundred years have exceeded
those of any prior equal period, because of the largely increased number of
observers and improved means of observation. It may be the same in
spiritual intercourse. Many things now obscure may be rendered clear; many
things deemed impossible may be shown to be possible; and many things
which to the uninstructed mind may be terrifying, may be rendered at once
attractive and salutary. All that is wanted is patient, persistent investigation.
   This appeal of mine would however be incomplete, if I should omit to
define more particularly what are the topics for which I supplicate a scrutiny,
and so I proceed to mention them.
   First. If it be true that the spirits of the dead can commune with us, then it
must be, that they call reveal to us what is the state of existence into which
they were ushered on dying, and what is the mode of life they are leading
there. This they profess to do, and this seems to me to be the primary and
main object of this whole movement. I have myself received a great deal of
information on this subject. Some I have already given to the world, but
there is a great deal more that I have not. I am ready to give it as soon as I
find the world ready to receive it—not amid the furor if superabundant
wealth, with all the selfishness, luxury and extravagance which follow in its
train, nor amid the evil passions which civil war engenders—but bye and
bye, when the afflictions which God is bringing upon us shall have
performed their destined office of softening our hearts, and opening them to
the entrance of the gentle voice which is now coming to us in ever-increasing
tones from beyond the grave.
   As the life on earth is never exactly alike in any two persons, so life in the
spirit world is never alike to any two immortals. Behold then! How many
spirits must commune with us, and how many mortals must engage in

xii             INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.

that communion before enough can be obtained for us to be able to say and
to feel that we know what is the life beyond the grave. As in astronomy it
took the observations of many, many persons for several thousand years, to
enable us to arrive at the truth in regard to our planetary system, so this far
more momentous truth must come to us in the same way, as the result of
many observations by many persons. What can one man, or even a score do
in this respect? The question is easily answered. How few have ever read or
believed what I have published in regard to the spirit world! Yet let the
inquirer be convinced of what this book of Home's teaches, namely, that
there is such a thing as direct communication with departed spirits, and he
can himself make his own inquiries, and receive direct answers to himself,
and thus from personal observation may come to believe that which he finds
it so hard to receive through me. Others and others again doing the same
thing, the result would be such an accumulation of testimony that there
would be as little doubt upon this subject as there is now of the actual
existence of spiritual intercourse.
   And when that time shall come, when a rational knowledge of what the
great change—the mortal putting on immortality—actually is, shall be
substituted for the dreadful fear of death which now so often frightens man
from his propriety, and enslaves his mind with a worse than Egyptian
bondage, what imagination can picture the vast increase that will flow to the
happiness, the wisdom, and the purity of man!
   Second. Another topic, on which much evidence has al already been
received, but much more is necessary to a full understanding, is involved in
the question in what manner, and to what extent are we, in the mortal life,
surrounded and affected by the spirits of the departed?
   There is abundant evidence to show that we are ever surrounded by them,
and much to induce us to believe that every mood of mind has its kindred
spirit; whence it would seem to follow that we are ever liable to be
influenced for good or evil by our unseen companions. But many important
questions arising out of these facts are yet unsolved. For instance: To what
extent and under what circumstances can the attendant spirits influence us?
And

                INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.                    xiii

what is our protection against the evil of this influence?—Can we ourselves
control it by controling our mood of mind? And if we need help, can we
obtain it, and how? Here perhaps will be found the solution of the oft
disputed proposition of the efficacy of prayer. Here, perchance, we may learn
that as God always works through his instruments, so the mood of mind
which prompts us to pray, may drive evil far from us, and draw closely
around us the ministering spirits who may be charged with the function of
answering our petitions, and who might not otherwise be able to approach
and do for us that which they see, as well as we do, is needful for us.
   And here too, perchance, may be found the solution of many mental
conditions which ignorant doctors are apt to treat as incurable insanity. I
have seen a good many cases, and myself cured several, where the
physicians had been appealed to in vain.
   It is not long since that I was invited by one of our Medical Societies to
attend the reading of a paper on Insanity by a German Doctor. In some
remarks I made on that paper, I took occasion to call the attention of the
faculty to this subject, and detailed to them several of the cases in which I
had cured, and I did so in the hope that they would investigate for
themselves, and see whether there was not something in that. Unhappily, in
their publication of my remarks, they omitted this part, and with it an
inquiry, which I cannot but think highly pertinent—"Whether the medical
profession might not find in these and cognate cases something worthy of
their most careful investigation?"
   And now in this connexion I may repeat the question already asked—If
the inquirer believe in the communion announced in these pages of Home,
and he can, by availing himself of that communion, learn the cause and the
cure of any number of cases of Insanity, be they many or few, why not
investigate? Does mere investigation hurt? It never hurts anything but error,
and sometimes perchance the first propounder of the truth—but the truth
itself it never hurts.
   Third. Another deeply interesting topic, on which some revelation has
been had and more may be, is: What is the soul? And how is it connected
with the body? What form

xiv             INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.

or covering does it assume, when corruption puts on incorruption? And what
are its relative powers before or after death?
   In this topic are embraced the phenomena of sleep and dreams—of
clairvoyance (long a subject of dispute, but now received as a fact, though
involved in profound mystery)—of the spirit photographs—of a spiritual
telegraph, and the philosophy and explanation of spirit communion.
   On all these subjects many facts and principles have already been learned,
and many more may be. Enough has been learned to show us that we need
not remain in ignorance any longer.
   For instance: One winter, four or five years ago, I tried some very
interesting experiments. Two seances were held at the same time, (allowing
ten minutes for the difference of longitude) in New York and Boston.
Careful records of what occurred at both places were preserved—and upon
comparing them it was found that the two parties, though two hundred and
fifty miles asunder, conversed with each other as if present face to face. The
modus operandi was shown to me, and many explanations given. The
experiments were continued for several weeks, but it was found that they
were attended with danger, and they were abandoned. The cause of that
danger was discovered, and it was found that in due time it could be
obviated.
   Since these experiments, I have made no continued efforts in that
direction, but I have experienced many incidents calculated to show the
practicability of such a communion among us even in this earth life.
   Another instance will be found to be in the spirit photographs, which
profess to be likenesses of the departed as they now live in the spirit life.
Several years ago I received from the far West—Illinois I think—some crude
specimens of this phenomenon, and was informed of what was intended and
what it was hoped would be attained. Now a more matured form of it has
appeared in Boston, and many pictures have been taken, which there is every
reason to believe are likenesses of the departed as they exist now. Time and
repeated observations will show how this is. And if it should become a well
established fact, surely every one

                INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.                        xv

will see at a glance how powerful is the evidence thus given of an existence
beyond the grave.
   Connected with this subject is the power of seeing and delineating scenes
and objects in the spirit land. I have received much evidence in this regard,
and have in my collection some interesting specimens, all of which tend to
show feasibility and the need of further investigation to develope the power.
   Fourth. I will refer to one other topic and close, and that is the power of
foretelling future events. I have in my library a book published in London in
1707 in which is detailed a prophecy, given through just such a spiritual
intercourse as we are now experiencing, that the Bourbon family would be
expelled from the throne of France, and the reason was given, viz. its general
profligacy and its persecution of the freedom of religious opinion.
   The last time I lectured to the Spiritualists in New York, which was in
May, 1861, I read two papers, one given about eleven years and the other
about five years ago, in which our present civil war was foretold—in one of
the papers somewhat blindly, until the events made it clear,—but in the other
most explicit and distinct.
   These all related to public events, where the prophecies were published to
the world before the events happened, but I have had a great many instances
within my own observation where private events were truly foretold.
   Five years ago, I published a tract on this subject, with a view to calling
attention to it. I have seen nothing since to change my views, but much, very
much to confirm them, and to show me that here is a power capable of being
understood and improved by us, and of being made available to us.
   These four topics are all that I deem it advisable to refer to now. But they
are by no means all that are, connected with Spiritual Intercourse that are of
deep and abiding interest, on which some knowledge has already been
obtained and more may be by proper inquiries.
   It is, as I understand it, only through the instrumentality of Spiritual
Intercourse that that knowledge can be obtained. No man certainly will use
that instrumentality who does not believe in its reality, or who regards it as a
fraud

xvi             INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.

or a delusion. And in this, it seems to me, lies the chief value of Home's
book, and the lesson which it teaches.
   If the Book does no more than merely work conviction in some minds, of
the reality of communion with the Departed, it will be of some value, for it
will carry consolation to many a heart now suffering under a load of doubt or
affliction. But if it goes farther, and leads intelligent and instructed minds
into an investigation of the higher truths connected with the subject, it will
be a great good indeed. For my part, I do not believe that we have yet
"attained the end of knowledge of either the works or the word of God."

                                                     J. W. EDMONDS.
                                              New York, March 29, 1863.

                INCIDENTS IN MY LIFE.

                             ———

                           CHAPTER I.
                EARLY LIFE: I BECOME A MEDIUM.

   I WAS born near Edinburgh, in March, 1833. When I was about
a year old, I was adopted by an aunt, and I accompanied her and
her husband to America when I was about nine years old. I was
very delicate as a child, and of a highly nervous temperament; so
much so that it was not thought that I could be reared. I cannot
remember when I first became subject to the curious phenomena
which have now for so long attended me, but my aunt and others
have told me that when I was a baby my cradle was frequently
rocked, as if some kind guardian spirit was tending me in my
slumbers. My aunt has also told me that when I was about four
years old, I had a vision of the circumstances attending the passing
from earth of a little cousin, I being at Portobello, near Edinburgh,
and she at Linlithgow, all which proved to be entirely correct,
though I had mentioned persons as being present about her, who it
is thought could not have been there, and had noticed the absence
of her father on the water, at a

18                        EARLY LIFE.

time when it was thought that he must be with her at home.

   When about thirteen years of age, the first vision which I
distinctly remember occurred. I was from my delicate health,
unable to join the sports of other boys of my own age. I had, a few
months before the vision which I am about to relate, made the
acquaintance of a boy two or three years my senior, and somewhat
similar to myself both in character and organization. We were in
the habit of reading the Bible together, and upon one occasion, in
the month of April, as we had been reading it in the woods, and we
were both of us silently contemplating the beauties of the
springing vegetation, he turned to me and said, "Oh, I have been
reading such a strange story!" and he told me a ghost story
connected with the family of Lord ——, and which I have since
found to be well authenticated. A portrait of the lady to whom it
occurred still exists in the family, and is known as the lady with
the black ribbon. The present Lord who is of the same family, has
told me that he was born in the chamber where the spirit appeared.
My friend Edwin asked me if I thought the story could be true, and
I said I did not know, but that I had heard strange things of that
kind. We then agreed that whichever one of us should first be
called from earth, would, if God permitted it, appear to the other
the third day afterwards. We read another chapter of the Bible
together, and we prayed that so it might be to us. About a month
from this time, I went with my family to reside at Troy in the State
of New York, a distance from Norwich, where Edwin lived, of
nearly three

                           EARLY LIFE.                            19

hundred miles. I had been to spend the evening at the latter end of
June with some friends, and nothing had occurred during the
evening to excite my imagination, or to agitate my mind; on the
contrary, I was in a calm state. The family had retired to rest, and I
at once went to my room, which was so completely filled with the
moonlight as to render a candle unnecessary. After saying my
prayers, I was seated on the bed, and about to draw the sheet over
me, when a sudden darkness seemed to pervade the room. This
surprised me, inasmuch as I had not seen a cloud in the sky; and
on looking up I saw the moon still shining, but it was on the other
side of the darkness, Which still grew more dense, until through
the darkness there seemed to be a gleam of light, which I cannot
describe, but it was similar to those which I and many others have
since seen when the room has been illuminated by spiritual
presence. This light increased, and my attention was drawn to the
foot of my bed, where stood my friend Edwin. He appeared as in a
cloud of brightness, illuminating his face with a distinctness more
than mortal. His features were unchanged except in brightness, and
the only difference I saw was that his hair was long, and that it fell
in wavy ringlets upon his shoulders. He looked on me with a smile
of ineffable sweetness, then slowly raising the right arm, he
pointed upward, and making with it three circles in the air, the
hand began slowly to disappear, and then the arm, and finally the
whole body melted away. The natural light of the room was then
again apparent. I was speechless and could not move, though I
retained all my reasoning faculties. As soon

20                        EARLY LIFE.

as the power of movement was restored) I rang the bell, and the
family, thinking I was in, came to my room, when my first words
were, "I have seen Edwin ——, he died three days ago at this very
hour." This was found to be perfectly correct by a letter which
came a few days afterwards, announcing that after only a few
hours' illness, he had died of malignant dysentery.

   My mother was a seer throughout her life. She passed from
earth in the year 1850, at the age of forty-two. She had what is
known in Scotland as the second sight, and in many instances she
saw things which were afterwards found to have occurred at a
distance, just as she had described them. She also foresaw many
events which occurred in the family, and foretold the passing away
of relatives, and lastly, she foretold her own four months
previously.

    I was then seventeen, and was residing at Norwich,
Connecticut, and my mother was living at Waterford, near New
London, twelve miles distant. One day I suddenly felt a strong
impulse that she wished to see me, and I walked all the way in
consequence of this impression. When I got home, I felt an
impression that she had something particular to communicate to
me that evening. When we were alone I turned to her and said,
“What have you to say to me, mother?" She looked at me with
intense surprise, and then a smile came over her face, and she said,
“Well, dear, it was only to tell you that four months from this time
I shall leave you." I asked incredulously how she knew, and she
said, "Your little sister, Mary, came to me in a vision, holding four
lilies in her hand, and

                          EARLY LIFE.                           21

allowing them to slip through her fingers one after the other, till
the last one had fallen, she said, 'And then you will come to me.' I
asked her whether the four lilies signified years, months, weeks, or
days, and she told me I months."' I had been quite impressed by
this narration, when my mother added—and I shall be quite alone
when I die, and there will not be a relative near to close my eyes."
This appeared to me to be so improbable, not to say impossible,
inasmuch as the family was a large one, and we had many
relatives, that I said to her, "Oh, mother, I am so delighted you
have told me this, because it shows that it must be a false vision."
She shook her head. Mary was a little sister who had been taken
from earth under most trying circumstances about four years
previously. My mother was out for a walk, leaving the child at
home, and on returning, having to cross a running stream, and
whilst she was on the bridge over it, she saw what appeared to be
some loose clothes floating on the water, and hastening to the side
to see what it was, she drew out the body of her child.

   The apparently impossible prophecy was literally fulfilled, for
by a strange complication of circumstances, my mother was taken
ill amongst strangers, and a telegram which they sent on the last
day of the fourth month, announcing her serious illness, only
reached us about half-past eleven in the morning. Being myself
confined to bed by illness at the house of my aunt, and she being
unable to leave me, the telegram was sent on to my father. That
same evening, about twilight, being alone in my room, I heard a
voice at the head

22                        EARLY LIFE.

of my bed which I did not recognize, saying to me solemnly,
"Dan, twelve o'clock." I turned my head, and between the window
and my bed I saw what appeared to be the bust of my mother. I
saw her lips move, and again I heard the same words, "Dan, twelve
o'clock." A third time she repeated this, and disappeared from my
sight. I was extremely agitated, and rang the bell hastily to
summon my aunt; and when she came I said, "Aunty, mother died
today at twelve o'clock—, because I have seen her, and she told
me." She said, "Nonsense, child, you are ill, and this is the effect
of a fevered brain." It was, however, too true, as my father found
on going to see her, that she had died at twelve o'clock, and
without the presence of a relative to close her eyes.

  My mother has also told me that her great uncle, Colin Urquhart,
and her uncle, Mr. Mackenzie, were also seers, and gifted with the
second sight.

    A few months after my mother had passed from earth, one night
on going to bed, I heard three loud blows on the head of my bed,
as if struck by a hammer. My first impression was that some one
must be concealed in my room to frighten me. They were again
repeated, and as they were sounding in my ears, the impression
first came on me that they were something not of earth. After a
few moments' silence they were again heard, and although I spent
a sleepless night, I no longer felt or heard any repetition of them.
My aunt was a member of the Kirk of Scotland, and I had some
two years previously, to her great disapprobation, become a
member of the Wesleyan body, but her opposition was so violent
that I left them to

                          EARLY LIFE.                            23

join the Congregationalists. On going down to breakfast in the
morning, she noticed my wan appearance, and taunted me with
having been agitated by some of my prayer meetings. I was about
to seat myself at the breakfast-table, when our cars were assailed
by a perfect shower of raps all over the table. I stopped almost
terror-stricken to hear again such sounds coming with no visible
cause; but I was soon brought back to the realities of life by my
aunt's exclamation of horror, "So you've brought the devil to my
house, have you." I ought here to state that there had then been
some talk of the so-called Rochester knockings through the Fox
family, but apart from casually hearing of them, I had paid no
attention to them; I did not know even what they meant. My aunt,
on the contrary, had heard of them from some of the neighbours,
and considered them as some of the works of the Evil One. In her
uncontrollable anger, she seized a chair and threw it at me.
Knowing how entirely innocent I was of the cause of her
unfortunate anger, my feelings were deeply injured by her
violence, and at the same time I was strengthened in a
determination to find out what might be the cause of these
disturbances of our morning meal. There were in the village three
ministers, one a Congregationalist, one a Baptist, and the other a
Wesleyan. In the afternoon, my aunt, her anger at me having for
the moment caused her to lose sight of her prejudices against these
rival persuasions, sent for them to consult with her, and to pray for
me, that I might be freed from such visitations. The Baptist
minister, Mr. Mussey, came first, and after having questioned me
as to how I had

24                         EARLY LIFE.

brought these things about me, and finding that I could give him
no explanation, he desired that we might pray together for a
cessation of them. Whilst we were thus engaged in prayer, at every
mention of the Holy-names of God and Jesus, there came gentle
taps on his chair, and in different parts of the room; whilst at every
expression of a wish for God's loving mercy to be shewn to us and
our fellow-creatures, there were loud rappings, as if joining in our
heartfelt prayers. I was so struck, and so impressed by this, that
there and then, upon my knees, I resolved to place myself entirely
at God's disposal, and to follow the leadings of that which I then
felt must be only good and true, else why should it have signified
its joy at those special portions of the prayer? This was, in fact, the
turning point of my life, and I have never had cause to regret for
one instant my determination, though I have been called on for
many years to suffer deeply in carrying it out. My honor has been
called in question, my pride wounded, my worldly prospects
blighted, and I was turned out of house and home at the age of
eighteen, though still a child in body from the delicacy of my
health, without a friend, and with three younger children
dependent on me for support. Of the other two clergymen, the
Congregationalist would not enter into the subject, saying that he
saw no reason why a pure-minded boy should be persecuted for
what he was not responsible to prevent or cause, and the Methodist
was so unkind, attributing it to the devil, and treating me as a lost
sheep, that I derived no comfort from him.

  Notwithstanding the visits of these ministers, and the continued
horror of my aunt, which only increased

                          EARLY LIFE.                          25

as each manifestation was developed, the rappings continued, and
the furniture now began to be moved about without any visible
agency. The first time this occurred I was in my room, and was
brushing my hair before the looking-glass. In the glass I saw a
chair that stood between me and the door, moving slowly towards
me. My first feeling was one of intense fear, and I looked round to
see if there were no escape; but there was the chair between me
and the door, and still it moved towards me as I continued looking
at it, When within about a foot of me it stopped, whereupon I
jumped past it, rushed down stairs, seized my hat in the ball, and
went out to ponder on this wonderful phenomenon.

   After this, when sitting quietly in the room with my aunt and
uncle, the table, and sometimes the chairs, and other furniture,
were moved about by themselves in a singular way, to the great
disgust and surprise of my relations. Upon one occasion, as the
table was being thus moved about of itself, my aunt brought the
family Bible, and placing it on the table, said, "There, that will
soon drive the devils away;" but to her astonishment the table only
moved in a more lively manner, as if pleased to bear such a
burden. Seeing this, she was greatly incensed, and determining to
stop it, she angrily placed her whole weight on the table, and was
actually lifted up with it bodily from the floor. My only
consolation at this time was from another aunt, a widow, who
lived near, whose heart-felt sympathy did much
to cheer and console me. At her house, when I visited her, the
same phenomena occurred; and we there first began to ask

26                         EARLY LIFE.

questions, to which we received intelligent replies. The spirit of
my mother at her house in this way communicated the following:"
Daniel, fear not, my child, God is with you, and who shall be
against you? Seek to do good: be truthful and truth-loving, and
you will prosper, my child. Yours is a glorious mission—you will
convince the infidel, cure the sick, and console the weeping." This
was the first communication I ever received, and it came within
the first week of these visitations. I remember it well. I have never
forgotten it, and can never forget it while reason and life shall last.
I have reason to remember it too, because this was the last week I
passed in the house of the aunt who had adopted me, for she was
unable to bear the continuance of the phenomena, which so
distressed her religious convictions, and she felt it a duty that I
should leave her house, and which I did.

   One of the singular manifestations which occurred during this
first week, was in connexion with Mrs. Force, a neighbour. I
should mention that by this time the neighbours had heard of what
was occurring in my presence, and were besieging the house in a
way that did not tend to sooth the religious susceptibilities of my
aunt. Being one evening at the house of Mrs. Force, the raps were
heard, and the alphabet was used in the way that has now become
familiar to many. The name of her mother was in this way given,
announcing her presence, and words were spelt out, reproaching
her with having so long forgotten her half-sister, who had been
married some thirty years previously to a farmer, who removed to
the far west, and had not since been heard of. Her mother went on
by

                         EARLY LIFE.                          27

means of the alphabet and the raps, to state the name of the town
where this daughter by a former husband lived, the number of their
children, and each of their names, Mrs. Force wrote to the address
thus given, and received a letter in reply confirming every
particular; and the family was in this way again brought together,
and mutual sympathies were interchanged. On visiting Mrs. Force
the following year, I found that she had had one of her newly
found nephews to visit her the previous autumn.
   I go into these particulars not to revive or to cause painful
recollections to any one, but merely to shew the history of my
mediumship, and the mysterious working of Providence in thus
throwing me before the public. Had it not been for this chain of
circumstances, these truths might have remained unknown so
widely as they now are.
  Although the manifestations had only lasted a week, they had
become known not only to the town, but through the newspapers
they were becoming public all over the New England States; and
when I left my aunt's house, I went to a neighbouring town,
Willimantic, and was received at the house of a friend there.
Whilst I was with him, these phenomena were repeated, and those
present investigated them in the most determined manner. I find
the following account of what occurred stated in a newspaper of
March, 1851.
  "At request, the table was moved repeatedly, and in any
direction that we asked to have it. All the circle, the Medium
included, had their hands flat upon the table, and we looked
several times Under the table while it was in the most rapid
motion, and saw that

28                        EARLY LIFE.

no legs or feet had any agency in the movement. The table was a
large and heavy one, without castors, and could not be moved by
Mr. Hayden in the same manner by all his exertion with his hands
laid open upon the table. At one time, too, the table was moved
without the Medium's hands or feet touching it at all. At our
request, the table was turned over into our lap. The table was
moved, too, while Mr. Hayden was trying to hold it still! Mr.
Hayden took hold of the top at first, and failing that way, he
grasped the leg, and held with all hit; strength. The table did not
move so freely as before. It would move a little way from Mr.
Hayden, and then the invisible power would suddenly relax its
effort, when it would spring back with the exertion of Mr.
Hayden."

  I was then eighteen years old, and on seeing this article which
made me so public, I shrank from so prominent a position with all
the earnestness of a sensitive mind; but I now found myself finally,
embarked without any volition of my own, and indeed, greatly
against my, will, upon the tempestuous sea of a public life. From
this time I never had a moment to call my, own. In sickness or in
health, by day or night, my privacy was intruded on by all comers,
some from curiosity, and some from higher motives. Men and
women of all classes, and all countries; physicians and men of
science, ministers of all persuasions, and men of literature and of
art, all have eagerly sought for the proofs of this great and
absorbing question of the possibility of spiritual causes acting on
this world of nature. For myself, I have no apology to offer for the
occurrence of these unwonted manifestations in

                          EARLY LIFE.                           29

my own case. As will have been seen, they came to me quite
unsought, and with all the unpleasant and painful accompaniments
which I have described. I have not, and never had the slightest
power over them, either to bring them on, or to send them away, or
to increase, or to lessen them. What may be the peculiar laws
under which they have become developed in my person, I know no
more than others. Whilst they occur I am not conscious of the
mode by which they are produced, nor of the sort of manifestation
that is about to occur. Any peculiar sensations that I may
experience during certain of the manifestations, I will describe as
far as I can, while mentioning the visions or external phenomena.
Beyond being of a highly nervous organization, there is nothing
peculiar about me that I am aware of; but I continue to have
delicate health, and I firmly believe that had it not been for these
phenomena, I could not have lived till now. In this belief many
physicians of high standing have given their testimony to bear me
out. Frequently during the most severe visitations of illness, my
pains have been suddenly soothed in a mysterious way, and many
times when it would have been impossible to have moved me in
bed, for fear of increased haemorrhage from the lungs, my head
has been slowly lifted, and my pillow has been turned by unseen
hands. This has been repeatedly witnessed by many persons.
Especially, I would say, that I do not on this account or on any
other, consider myself morally superior to others, nor should any,
one believe that these phenomena come to me, or to others, on
account of moral or immoral qualities. On the contrary, with

30                        EARLY LIFE.

the great blessings which have been showered on me, and the
ineffable proofs which I have received of God's providence and
goodness to me, I feel myself only worse than others that I should
have made so little progress in the path of good. I have to thank
God for many kind friends, not less than for many bitter enemies,
since they keep my mind in an equilibrium, and do not suffer me
to feel any pride, at what is no doubt but an accident, so to speak,
of my organization.

  These extraordinary occurrences have, with some exceptions,
continued with me ever since the time I have stated as their
commencement, and they have extended their range, to my
astonishment not less than to that of others, in the most striking
manner. They have proved to me and to thousands of careful and
able investigators, the existence of spiritual forces which are
calculated to revolutionize the current ignorance both of
philosophy and of theology, as men have made them. The
exceptions to which I refer have been of periods during which the
power has left me entirely; for instance, from the 10th of February,
1856, to the 10th of February, 1857, during which time I had no
external token of spirit power, though I on several occasions had
visions, one of which was my seeing the manner in which a
brother passed from earth. He was frozen in the Polar Seas whilst
out bear-shooting with the captain and officers of his ship. Falling
into a fissure of the ice, he was not found till the following
morning. I saw all this in a vision at the very time of its
occurrence, and informed my family of it five months before the
confirmation of the intelligence arrived. On several other
occasions, the power has

                         EARLY LIFE.                          31

ceased for shorter periods, and generally I have been told
beforehand, both of the times of its cessation and return. I could
never detect any physical cause for such cessation, nor any
difference in my general feelings or health, although the reason
given for the withdrawal has commonly been on the ground of
health. Upon several occasions, however, the reason given was
that it was withdrawn from me as a reproof for having done that
which I knew to be wrong.

                          CHAPTER II.

                      BEFORE THE WORLD.

   I REMAINED in Willimantic but a short time, and then I went to
Lebanon, a few miles off. There I was received in the family of an
old resident. After I had been with them a few days, I saw a spirit
who called himself Uncle Tilden. I asked a lady, a member of the
family, if she, recognized the name, but before she had time to
make answer, the spirit made signs to me that he did not wish the
lady to tell the name, and that he would come on another occasion
to me, when he could have more perfect control. In the course of a
few days he came whilst I was entranced, and signified that certain
papers which his family had been seeking for years, and for which
they had given up the search as hopeless, would be found in a
house which he described as situate near Cleveland, Ohio. They
were the title-deeds of some land which had become valuable for
building purposes, and out of which a lady was entitled to her
thirds, but which by reason of the loss of the deeds, were withheld
from her, and she was in consequence living in very straitened
circumstances. He described to them minutely through me the part

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                           33

of the garret, and the form of the box in which they would be
found. Her son was written to with these particulars; the search
was made, and the deeds were found as described.

  The second week of my stay at Lebanon, I had been to pass a
day or two with an English family residing about three miles off.
One afternoon. I suddenly became unconscious or, entranced, and
on awaking, the lady of the house told me that I had been speaking
with some spirit, who directed me to proceed at once to the house
of a Mr. B——. I had seen two brothers of this name one evening
a week previously, and no interchange of visits had been made or
proposed, and I felt that it would be most awkward for me to call
on them, saying only that I had been sent by my unseen friends.
The distance was also six miles from where I then was, and three
miles of the journey I would have to walk. I knew that when I
returned to my friends at Lebanon, I could have their conveyance;
but still I had not any inclination to pay the visit. As soon as this
was fully decided in my mind, I was again made unconscious, and
on recovering, I was told that I had received strict injunctions to
leave at once, though no reason was assigned why I should go. I
then felt, however, that the order ought to be obeyed, and I went to
my room for the purpose of dressing for the journey. While there,
my reasoning faculties again assumed the ascendancy, and I
thought that if I were thus sent, I ought at least to know for what
purpose. However, I soon again felt myself impelled by a force far
superior to mine, and which to have even attempted to resist would
have been folly. On leaving the house,

34                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

all this left me, and I walked the three miles to Lebanon,
wondering what could be the cause of this singular errand. On
arriving, I stated to my friends there all that had occurred, and they
also thought it would have been quite as well to have ascertained
why I had been sent. Finding that they agreed with me in this, I
now again fully determined to proceed no farther, but I was
quickly made insensible, and on awaking I found that orders had
been given by the family to have a horse saddled, and that I was
admonished in a gentle but firm manner, for my want of Faith and
overweening curiosity, whereas I ought, I was told, to have
followed as a child would its teacher, or an indulgent parent.

   Before I left the house to complete the journey, the sun had set,
and now rain laden clouds were fast overshadowing the sky. The
road was lonely, and for the month of April the weather was
uncommonly chill. I had agreed in my mind that my guardians had
been teaching me a useful lesson, and I resolved that
thenceforward I would not seek to know their purposes. In this
frame of mind I reached what I knew from description must be the
house of Mr. B——, and as I was about to dismount, the first rain
drop fell on my ungloved hand, and with the contact came the
most vivid impression that Mr. B——'s mother was dangerously
ill. I rang the bell, and Mr. B—— having seen me, came himself to
open the door. As he did so, I said, " Your mother is ill, and I have
been sent to say what will relieve her." His look of intense surprise
baffles description, as he said, "How on earth could you have
known of her illness, as it is only an hour since she fell

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                          35

ill, and we have sent in another direction for a medical man, but I
fear he will not arrive in time to save my poor mother, as she
seems sinking so rapidly." On entering the house, I stood waiting
to see what impression I might receive. Whilst I was standing, I
was thrown suddenly into a trance, and I was told by Mr. B——
that in that state I led the way to big mother's bed-room, and that
after making a few passes over her with my hands, the acute pains
left her, and that in a few minutes time she was in a quiet sleep.
Whilst in the trance, I also mentioned simple remedies of herbs for
immediate use, and others for continued use. I was then led by the
unseen power into the sitting room, and there returned to my
normal state, greatly surprised when these things were related to
me. The doctor arrived in about an hour, to find big patient quite
out of danger, and on examining her, he said that from the nature
and violence of the attack, it would in all probability have been
fatal, had steps not been taken at once to alleviate the symptoms. A
letter written a few weeks after to a friend by Mr. B——, says that
his" mother has not had such health for eighteen years past, as she
now enjoys; she follows implicitly all the instructions given
through Daniel, and the effect is magical."

  I remained in Lebanon till the month of June, having seances
nearly every day, my mediumship principally consisting of
visions, movements of the table and of furniture without my
touching them, and of the rapping sounds through which
intelligent messages were received. Whilst there, in the beginning
of June, all these external manifestations ceased entirely, and I

36                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

left Lebanon about the middle of June on a visit to Mr. G—— at
Boonton, New Jersey. I had still visions frequently of the spirit
friends of persons who were perfect strangers to me, describing
their appearance; and the spirits gave me their names, and the
dates of their departure from earth, with answers to other questions
of a test nature which their relatives asked. These came to me
whilst I was in an abnormal or trance state, and in which I was
unconscious of natural surroundings, but with a facility of speech
far superior, as I was told, to that of my ordinary condition, and
through which I transmitted with readiness the replies of the spirits
to the questions asked of them. I was so exceedingly sensitive at
this time, that the playing of sacred music would frequently throw
me into the trance state, in which I am always in companionship
with spirit friends, and that in as perfect and palpable a manner, as
in my ordinary external state I am with my friends of this world.
Through these means hundreds of persons became convinced of
the truth of spiritual communion, and found their sceptical tenets
no longer available. I then found, as I still find, that all honest,
deep-rooted scepticism rather calls out than prevents the proofs of
which it stands so much in need; and atheists, deists, infidels were
thus often brought to a belief in Providence and direct spirit
guidance.

  About the middle of July 1851, I went to Brooklyn, New York,
on a visit to Mr. C——. Whilst here I had the pleasure of first
meeting the learned and good George Bush, an eminent theologian
and Professor of Hebrew and Oriental languages at New York.
Professor

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                          37

Bush was quite prepared to acknowledge the possibility of such
phenomena from his acquaintance with the writings of
Swedenborg, and with the subject of Mesmerism, and the spiritual
experiences of Jung Stilling and others. He was also a profoundly
learned man, with a more open and child-like mind than often falls
to the lot of those with so much worldly knowledge. He had made,
moreover, the greatest sacrifices, by giving up his worldly
prospects in the Church, in consequence of avowing his belief in
Swedenborg's works. Professor Bush took a deep interest in
observing the mental phenomena which occurred through me,
though there were no external manifestations.

  The communications he received were of such a nature as to
leave no manner of doubt on his mind, as to the real presence with
us of those who had gone before. Amongst other names, he told
me that I had given him that of an old schoolfellow, whom he had
forgotten for many years, and that this school-fellow referred to a
dream which the Professor had had on the very night on which the
boy had passed from earth, although he was not then aware even
of the boy's illness. The spirit of the boy, now told through me the
whole of the Professor's dream, which was that whilst they, were
playing together, he suddenly saw his school-fellow taken from
him, and heard his voice saying," I leave you, George, but not for
ever." A dream of forty years previously, was thus brought to his
remembrance. The Professor was so strongly impressed with this,
that he called on me the next day, and wished to have me reside
with him for the purpose of studying for the Swedenborgian
ministry. I went to his house, with the intention of so doing,

38                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

but within forty-eight hours I saw in my waking state the spirit of
my mother, who said to me," My son, you must not accept this
kind offer, as your mission is a more extended one than pulpit
preaching." On seeing the good Professor, I told him of this spirit
message. He expressed regret, but no surprise, and so I returned to
my friend, Mr. C——, and remained with him till the end of
August. I frequently afterwards saw Professor Bush, with whom
the most kindly intercourse was interchanged. Here again in New
York many were convinced.

   I returned to Lebanon, but I was not able to see any, strangers on
account of my very delicate health, and in the month of September
My Young friend, the son of Mrs. E——, fell ill, and I saw the
spirit of his father, whom I had not known on earth, though I had
frequently seen him, and received communications from him both
in the trance and waking state, on my former visit to Lebanon. He
came to me whilst I was alone in my room, and standing near me,
said, "Ezra will be with me within three weeks—go to him." I was
then staying with a Mr. F——, about three miles from the boy. I
obeyed the spirit message, and went at once, and found Ezra ill.
He wished me to stay with him, but the family thought it was a
passing illness, and that I might prolong my visit for a few days to
Mr. F. I did not tell them what I had seen, and in about four days
afterwards they sent for me to come to them, as Ezra was worse. I
went, and with his sister I took care of him, till his departure,
which occurred on the nineteenth day of his illness. He was about
eighteen, and had become conversant with the

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                          39

facts of spirit intercourse through me a few months before, and had
himself become a partial medium, receiving occasional
communications, principally from his father, by means of the
rapping and the alphabet. Soon after my first visiting him in his
illness, on his sister leaving the room for a moment, he took the
opportunity of telling me with perfect composure, that he knew he
should not recover, as he had been told by raps on his pillow, by
his father, that this was his last illness. This extraordinary
composure remained with him throughout, and I had told the
family ten days before of my vision, which prepared them for the
coming change. About two days before his leaving us, the doctor
asked me to break it to him, when I informed him that Ezra had
been long aware of it. He doubted this, from seeing him so
composed, and I desired him to stand at the door and hear what I
would say to Ezra. I then went to his bed, and told him that the
doctor had left some news for him. He laughingly said, "I suppose
it is to tell me that I am going. Little does he imagine that I have
already decided who my bearers are to be." The doctor now came
into the room, and taking his hand, said, "My dear boy, if I had not
heard this, I could not have believed it. You have everything to
make life happy, and yet you are so willing to leave it." A few
hours after this, a deacon of the church visited him, who was much
opposed to these things, to the extent even of telling untruths and
misrepresentations. He argued with the dying boy, trying to take
away his happy belief, but fortunately without the slightest
success. The boy told him that he willingly placed all his hope

40                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

in the hands of an allwise God, and that he felt that the change
would be most happy for him. The last evening of his stay on
earth, several persons came to the house, and I was told by one of
them that it was for the purpose of watching to see if he did not
recant or turn coward at the last. I told this to Ezra, and he
requested that they should be brought into his room, where I left
them for a few hours' rest. At half-past one in the morning, Ezra
sent for me, and I found them still there, he having been speaking
with them great part of the time. In speaking to his mother, he said,
"Only think:, dear mother, I shan't be lame there." He had been
lame since he was six months old. He asked me to look out of the
window, and to tell him what kind of morning it was. I told him it
was bright moonlight, and he recalled to me a conversation we had
had some months previously, in which he said he should like to
pass away in the moonlight, whilst I had said I should wish to go
at sunset. He expressed a wish that no one should wear mourning
for him. He asked me to take his hand, and whilst I held it, his face
suddenly assumed a beatified expression, and he pronounced my
name, as if calling me to witness some happy vision passing before
his eyes, and the breathing ceased.

   This is one of the many happy death-beds which I have
witnessed, and such consolation given at a time like this is
sufficient proof of the loving wisdom of our Heavenly Father in
allowing such things to take place. Some may be surprised to find
all apparent prophecy in this case given both to the boy and to me,
but perhaps a larger view of spiritual insight may

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                           41

teach us that such is only apparent to us in this natural sphere, and
that to those who have spiritual insight and perceptions, there
probably was some bodily change in his organism which made
clear to those in the spiritual state the mortal character of his
disease. Since his departure, he has been frequently present with
me, impressing me to write messages to his mother and sister.
Sometimes my hand has been taken possession of apparently by
him, and used in writing his own autograph. In a letter received
from his sister dated the 9th of February, 1852, she says," Ezra
was with you to a certainty when you were writing, for that is his
autograph and chirography; the kindness of the advice almost
overwhelms me, when I think how spirits watch over and comfort
us."
 The following is an account taken from a newspaper of other
manifestations at this time.
   "After several communications had been spelled out, a request
was made that the table might be moved, in order to convince
some present who were sceptical. Accordingly very soon slight
movements were perceptible, which soon became very rapid. A
light was placed upon the floor under the table, and one remained
on the table. Our hands were raised so that the ends of our fingers
only touched. One end was then moved up so that it was poised on
the two opposite legs upon an elevation in the floor, and in this
position it remained for awhile, keeping time with music, by
rocking; and in the same way questions were answered, three
movements being considered an affirmative, and one a negative;
and after numerous questions were given and as many satisfactory
answers received,

42                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

three gentle raps were heard at the door by a part of the company,
and the question was asked if any one was rapping at the door?
and immediately three decided movements of the table were made,
and accompanying them were three more decided raps at the door.
  "An emphatic call for the alphabet followed, and spelled out,
'Spirits-Door;' the question was asked if there were spirits at the
door who wished to come in? Three raps.
   "It was suggested that they were to help in moving the table, and
an affirmative reply immediately followed. Then commenced
larger and more decided movements—the table being slid freely
about the floor, and raised alternately one side and then the other
several inches; and at one time it was raised nearly to an angle of
forty-five degrees, poised on two side legs, and then by oscillating
movements the time was correctly kept to several tunes sung by
the company.
   "Several unsuccessful attempts were made to bring the table to
the floor, which were relinquished for the fear of breaking the
leaves. By request it was carefully let down on to one side, and in
a moment raised again to its proper position. One of the company
then seated himself upon the table, and it was moved about and
raised up so as to render it necessary for him to hold on, and this,
too, with as much ease apparently as before. Again, by request, it
was slid while one was pushing against it in an opposite direction
to the utmost of his strength."
  I remained in Lebanon up to the end of January, 1852; the
physical manifestations having spontaneously

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                             43

returned in October previously, and with increased power, and
with the new phase of unseen hands touching me and others with
whom I was sitting. We frequently were touched by them, and on
some occasions a spirit hand was placed within our hands as
palpably as if it were a real living hand, though invisible to us. It
would remain quietly in our hands until we tried to close them
upon it, and even then it was not withdrawn, but as it were melted
away in our grasp.

  I went to Springfield, Massachusetts, an entire stranger, but
having heard of Mr. Henry Gordon, a medium there, I asked for
and was directed to his house. He received me most kindly, and
said that he was about to have a seance that evening, requesting
me to join them. I did so, but the contending influences prevented
the occurrence of manifestations. Those who were there assembled
had to leave at an early hour, and Mr. Gordon accompanied them,
leaving me with five or six of his friends who had come in in the
meantime. Among these were Mr. and Mrs. Elmer, the former
being a believer, but Mrs. Elmer having violently opposed it. I was
thrown into a trance, made to sit near her, telling her the names of
her mother, father, brothers, and sisters; then of her children, all of
whom were in the spirit world; and I repeated to her the last words
of two of her children. Turning to an older lady in the room, I did
the same and so on through all those who were present. Mr. and
Mrs. Elmer have since been my friends, and at their house some
most remarkable manifestations occurred. I stayed with them for
some time, and great interest was excited by the accounts given by
the very numerous

44                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

witnesses who came to see the manifestations. Whilst here the
power was very strong, and frequently I had seances six or seven
times a day, at each of which as many were present as could be
accommodated. Their house was besieged by visitors, and often
outside in the street there was a concourse of anxious inquirers.
People came from a distance, even from the extreme west and
south of America, having seen the accounts given of me in the
newspapers of the previous year. It was here that one of the
Professors of the University of Harvard came and joined some
friends in a rigid investigation of the phenomena, and after several
sittings they published the following statement of the result of
their investigations.

             THE MODERN WONDER—A MANIFESTO.

   The undersigned, from a sense of justice to the parties referred
to, very cordially bear testimony to the occurrence of the following
facts, which we severally Witnessed at the house of Rufus Elmer,
in Springfield, on the evening of the 5th inst:
  1. The table was moved in every possible direction, and with
great force, when we could not perceive any cause of motion.
  2. It (the table) was forced against each one of us so powerfully
as to move us from our positions—together with the chairs we
occupied—in all, several feet.
  3. Mr. Wells and Mr. Edwards took hold of the table in such a
manner as to exert their strength to the best advantage, but found
the invisible power, exercised

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                             45

in an opposite direction, to be quite equal to their utmost efforts.
  4. In two instances, at least, while the hands of all the members
of the circle were placed on the top of the table and while no
visible power was employed to raise the table, or otherwise to
move it from its position—it was seen to rise clear of the floor,
and to float in the atmosphere for several seconds, as if sustained
by some denser medium than air.
  5. Mr. Wells seated himself on the table, which was rocked for
some time with great violence, and at length, it poised itself on the
two legs, and remained in this position for some thirty seconds,
when no other person was in contact with it.
  6. Three persons, Messrs. Wells, Bliss and Edwards assumed
positions on the table at the same time, and while thus seated, the
table was moved in various directions.
  7. Occasionally we were made conscious of the occurrence of a
powerful shock, which produced a vibratory motion of the floor of
the apartment in which we were seated—it seemed like the motion
occasioned by distant thunder or the firing of ordnance far away—
causing the table, chairs, and other inanimate objects, and all of us
to tremble in such a manner that the effects were both seen and
felt.
  8. In the whole exhibition, which was far more diversified than
the foregoing specification would indicate, we were constrained to
admit that there was an almost constant manifestation of some
intelligence which seemed, at least, to be independent of the circle.

46                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

   9. In conclusion we may observe, that Mr. D. D. Home,
frequently urged us to hold his hands and feet. During these
occurrences the room was well lighted, the lamp was frequently
placed on and under the table, and every possible opportunity was
afforded us for the closest inspection, and we admit this one
emphatic declaration: We know that we were not imposed upon nor
deceived.
                         WM. BRYANT,
                          B. K. BLISS,
                        WM. EDWARDS,
                       DAVID A. WELLS.
  The following account also is given in the "Shekinah" of 1852,
of manifestations occurring at this time, which will shew the
power which they had then acquired.
   "On the 28th day of February, 1852, while the undersigned were
assembled at the residence of Mr. Rufus Elmer, Springfield, Mass.,
for the purpose of making critical experiments in the so-called
spiritual manifestations, the following, among other remarkable
demonstrations of power, occurred in a room thoroughly
illuminated. The table, around which we were seated, was moved
by an invisible and unknown agency, with such irresistible force
that no one in the circle could hold it. Two men—standing on
opposite sides and grasping it at the same time, and in such a
manner as to have the greatest possible advantage—could not, by
the utmost exercise of their powers, restrain its motion. In spite of
their exertions the table was moved from one to three feet. Mr.
Elmer inquired if the

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                            47

Spirits could disengage or relax the hold of Mr. Henry Foulds;
when suddenly, and in a manner wholly unaccountable by us, Mr.
Foulds was seated on the floor at a distance of several feet from
the table, having been moved so gently, and yet so
instantaneously, as scarcely to be conscious of the fact. It was
proposed to further test this invisible power, and accordingly five
men, whose united weight was eight hundred and fifty-five pounds
stood on a table (without castors) and the table, while the men
were so situated, was repeatedly moved a distance of from four to
eight inches. The undersigned further say that they were not
conscious of exerting any power of will at the time, or during any
part of the exhibition; on the contrary they are quite sure that the
exercise of the will is a serious impediment to such manifestations.

   "St the close of these experiments it was perceived, on lifting
one end of the table, that its weight would increase or diminish, in
accordance with our request. Apprehending that the supposed
difference might be justly attributable to fancy, or to some
unconscious variation in the manner of applying the motive power,
it was proposed to settle the question by weighing the end of the
table. At the first experiment it required a force equal to nineteen
pounds to raise the end of the table. This was fairly tested to the
entire satisfaction of all present. The spirits were then requested to
apply the invisible power. The balance was now applied in
precisely the same manner as before, when the weight was found
to have been suddenly increased from six to twelve pounds,
varying as the mysterious force was increased and diminished, so
that it now required

48                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

a force of from twenty-five to thirty-one pounds to separate the
legs of the table from the floor. Mr. Daniel D. Home was the
medium on this occasion, and it is worthy of remark that during
the performance of the last experiment, he was out of the room,
and in the second story of the house, while the experiment was
conducted in the back parlor below.
  "The undersigned are ready and willing, if required, to make
oath to the entire correctness of the foregoing statement."
  The original paper was signed by John D. Lord, Rufus Elmer,
and nine others, living at Springfield, Mass.
   The account proceeds: "Lights are produced in dark rooms.
Sometimes there appears a gradual illumination, sufficient to
disclose very minute objects, and at others, a tremulous
phosphorescent light gleams over the walls, and odic emanations
proceed from human bodies, or shoot meteor-like through the
apartment. These phenomena are of frequent occurrence, and are
not accounted for by any material hypothesis, unless, indeed, they
could be comprehended under the popular generalization which
ascribes the whole to human fraud and delusion. I have seen these
lights in all their variety. On one occasion, when a number of
friends were assembled at my own house, there occurred a gradual
illumination of the apartment. It appeared like the twilight half an
hour after the dawn. The light continued to increase for about
fifteen minutes, and then it gradually diminished.
  "On the 30th of March I chanced to be one of a company
convened at the house of Mr. Elmer, in

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                            49

Springfield, Mass. Mr. Home being present—when the room was
darkened to see if the mysterious illumination would occur.
Immediately the gross darkness began to be dissipated, and in a
few minutes, the forms of all the persons in the room were
distinctly visible. Without disclosing her purpose to any one, Mrs.
Elmer mentally requested that the spirits would restore the
darkness, and, almost instantly, the change was perceived by the
whole company, and soon every form was lost in the deepening
gloom."

  This was the first appearance of these spirit lights that I had seen
when others were present, though I had several times seen them
when by myself, since their appearance on my first vision of
Edwin as before described. Although the physical manifestations
had increased, and were so continuous, yet the internal power of
vision had not left me, as will be seen from the following, which
was published and signed by Mr. S. B. Brittan of New York, to
whom occurred the fact which he describes.

  "Last winter while spending a few days at the house of Mr.
Rufus Elmer, Springfield, I became acquainted with Mr. Home.
One evening, Mr. Home, Mr. and Mrs. Elmer, and I were engaged
in general conversation, when suddenly, and most unexpectedly to
us all, Mr. Home was deeply entranced. A momentary silence
ensued, when the medium said" Hannah Brittan is here!" I was
surprised at the announcement, for I had not even thought of the
person indicated for many days, or perhaps months, and we parted
for alltime when I was but a little child. I remained silent, but
mentally inquired how I might

50                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

be assured of her actual presence. Immediately Mr. Home began to
exhibit signs of the deepest anguish. Rising from his seat he
walked to and fro in the apartment, wringing his hands, and
exhibiting a wild and frantic manner and expression. He groaned
in spirit, and audibly, and often smote his forehead and uttered
incoherent words of prayer. He addressed me in terms of
tenderness, and sighed and uttered bitter lamentations. Ever and
anon, he gave utterance to expressions like the following:

  "Oh, bow dark! What dismal clouds! What a frightful chasm!
Deep—down—far down!—I see the fiery flood! Hold! Stay!—
Save them from the pit! I'm in a terrible labyrinth! I see no way
out! There's no light! How wild!—gloomy! The clouds roll in
upon me! The darkness deepens! My head is whirling! 'Where am
I!—'

  "During this exciting scene, which lasted perhaps half an hour, I
remained a silent spectator, the medium was unconscious, and the
whole was inexplicable to Mr. and Mrs. Elmer. The circumstances
occurred some twelve years before the birth of Mr. Home. No
person in all that region knew aught of the history of Hannah
Brittan, or that such a person ever existed. But to me the scene was
one of peculiar and painful significance. She was highly gifted by
nature, and endowed with the tenderest sensibilities. She became
insane from believing in the doctrine of endless punishment, and
when I last saw her, the terrible reality, so graphically depicted in
the scene I have attempted to describe, was present, in all its
mournful details, before me!

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                            51

   "Thirty years have scarcely dimmed the recollection of the scene
which was thus re-enacted to assure me of the actual presence of
the spirit. That spirit has since informed me that her present life is
calm, peaceful and beautiful, and that the burning gulf, with all its
horrible imagery, existed, only in the traditions of men, and in the
fitful wanderings of her distracted brain."

   At Springfield, also, there were many instances of the sick being
healed. I was so sensitive to any one who came near me in a
diseased state, that I not only myself felt but accurately described
their symptoms, and the seat and causes of the disease. One case
which I remember was that of a person who had been ill for many
years with no apparent cause. I brought to his mind an accident
which had occurred to him some years previously, and which I
was impressed to tell him was the cause of his suffering. When he
applied to a surgeon and related the circumstance, the surgeon told
him that I had been no doubt correct in attributing his illness to
that accident. My own suffering in sympathy with other people's
illness was often so great, and was indeed so frequent, that I was
often warned by my spirit friends against coming in contact with
sick persons.

  In May, 1852, I went to New York, and was at once received by
investigators of the phenomena, mediums having increased largely
in number, both in public and private circles. My clays and nights
were fully occupied by investigators of all classes and conditions.
The following account of what he witnessed is given in the words
of Dr. Hallock, a physician of New York.

52                  BEFORE THE WORLD.
  "Two communications, spoken through Mr. Home as a medium,
were read by the Secretary. They were given on the 10th inst., at
the house of Mr. Partridge. The first was preceded by physical
manifestations, intended to identify the spirit about to
communicate. The second embraces several topics.
  "Mr. Home said, a male and female were present, who wished to
commune with Mr. P.
  "Directly, sounds and motions were made as of a violent
storm—the roaring and whistling of the wind, the rushing of water,
and the breaking of waves—sounds as if a vessel was straining at
her anchor and laboring in a heavy sea, amid which she was held
by her chain cables—her joints creaking, and she rolling from side
to side. The picture of a shipwreck was so true, that it made the
cold chills run over me. The medium spoke of a boat with
machinery in it, and went through the motions of dying 'mid the
raging waters and a dark storm. The spirit making these
demonstrations to identify her presence, is one whose life was lost
by the wreck of the steamer Atlantic, in November, 1849. She
gave the following communication:
  "'But, oh! it was not death! Bright spirits were hovering around,
and bore me to their happy home; but it would be no home to us, if
we were not permitted to return and watch over our dear friends
we have left behind.
  "'To me, the storm has passed and gone, and with it went all the
storms of life. From that breaking barque, I passed to one the
winds could not beat. It was anchored home in the heavens, and
my spirit was

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                           53
nearer God—more easily developed, and was amid influences
more pure and holy, just what they ought to be for man's
advancement.
    "'Kindness never goes unrewarded; and for yours, she wishes
to express her deep obligation, not thanks merely, but a deep and
abiding sense of it.
  "'Be upright and kind, and it will prepare you for brighter
spheres.
  "'Be patient, as God is. Think of His forbearance, for ages past,
with the blindness, the hardness, the perversity of man. If man had
possessed His power, he would, in his impatience, long since have
annihilated earth and all which inhabit it.
   "'Think not of the grave. To us, it is past and forgotten. To you,
it is but an entrance into a new and more glorious existence.
  "'Oft in the silent night, when the busy toils of life are hushed
and the mind is at rest from its cares, we hover around and watch
over you, happy, indeed, at being able then to impress our
presence upon you.'
  "The question is often asked, Why have not these manifestations
occurred before? Why has not God illumined ages past with these
wonderful manifestations of His providence? The reason is
obvious. When a little light has been from time to time thrown
down, like the feeble rays of a far-off star across the gloom of
night, men have shut it up in darkness! They have been enveloped
in self and shrouded in scepticism! They think the age of miracles
has ceased! Another cause why these things have not occurred in
past ages was, the persecution of mediums—it was perceived that
men would torture them. It alarmed the

54                    BEFORE THE WORLD.
superstitious fears of the community. The mediums were charged
with being witches, and in league with the Devil! I see them on
trial, then taken to the scaffold and the stake, and I hear spirit foot-
sounds accompanying them. The younger, more vigorous and
more positive state of their accusers, under zeal for God and the
good of his church, has made them admit themselves to be what
they were not. Their defenceless, negative condition, makes them
an easy prey to the will-power of their judges and accusers. Now, I
perceive the sorrow of those spirits who were not sufficiently
developed to foresee the catastrophe as the higher spirits did. They
are comforting them in their last earthly agony; and, seeing the sad
results of their attempt to communicate through physical
manifestations, they have suspended the effort till a more
favourable epoch.
  "When men are told that spirits watch over them, it is not
uncommon for them to say, 'Spirits should be in better business.'
The truth is, that many men are so bad that they do not want their
minds inspected; they do not wish to have it known how gross they
are.
   "A spirit wishes to express his idea of a hell. I see a mother with
her children. She is training them in the path she herself has
trodden. As she was ignorant and foolish, so are they. As her path
had been beset with the briars and thorns which ignorance and
folly engender, so is theirs. Now, I see her leave them and pass
into the spirit-world; but, impelled by the eternal and universal law
of affinity, she still watches over them. Oh, the pangs of her spirit,
for the wrong she has done, for the misery she has caused! Yet she
follows

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                           55

them through all their devious windings through darkness and
through crime, and is it not hell enough? Oh, is it not hell enough?

  "Again the scene changes, and I see what caused the sin of the
mother: A drunken man presents himself—his children,
comparatively pure and unsullied, seek associates; for all must
have such; they would gladly choose the pure and the good, but
they are the drunkard's children, and are spurned from the doors of
the intelligent and cultivated. So they are driven back to darkness
and ignorance, to glean from the great law of association the
happiness for which every human being pants. They could not
seek it where they would, they must get it where, they can. Thus,
with minds soured by the repulse they have met with, and their
darker passions stimulated by the desire of revenge for injuries
received, they plod along their devious and uncertain way—the
prison their asylum—the halter their inheritance—the constable
and sheriff their ministering angels. They asked society for meat; it
gave them a scorpion—for bread; they, got a stone. Oh, that men
could see the cause of crime!—they would love and pity.

   "If one tree is blighted so that it cannot bear wholesome fruit,
should the other trees call it evil? That which is evil cannot
become good, but the undeveloped may progress to development.
The tree whose root is rotten cannot grow; but if it has been
merely scathed, A may. So with the spirit—though a long time
may elapse. The bud, placed in the sunlight, does not blossom in a
day—if placed in darkness, not for weeks.—A spirit, after it has
left the body, will

56                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

have to throw off all the perversion that remains. After that is
done, progression goes on without hindrance.
   "Be not wise in your own conceit. Let him that standeth in the
light of truth, take heed lest he fall, through the darkness of his
own wisdom."
   "Dr. Hallock related some remarkable personal descriptions of
spirits through Mr. Home, occurring on the same evening. One
spirit was described as having been known here by the name of
'Elizabeth.' Her person was described, and her prominent traits of
character as well as the disease of which she died, with such
accuracy, that a gentleman present knew her at once from the
description. The only inaccuracy that he could point out, being the
color of her hair, which had been described as brown, when in fact
it was rather a light auburn. In explanation of which, Mr. Home
said, 'When I look at the forehead, which is very white, [which
was the fact,] the hair looks brown to me.'
  "The gentleman (a clergyman) declared that he was not thinking
of her at all, and she was brought to his recollection solely by the
accuracy of the description given.
  "Mr. Home then said, 'I see an old woman, and her name is
Abigail; they called her "Aunt Abby."' To the question how did
she look? he commenced by compressing the lips and checks in
such a way as to indicate a person who had lost her teeth. This at
once brought to his mind an old lady of that name, called by the
whole family, 'Aunt Abby,' who died in the spring of 1817, when
he was some eleven years

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                          57

of age. The appearance assumed by the medium was that of the
last impression left upon his mind. She was an old woman; had
prominent features, had lost her teeth for many years, was much
emaciated by her last illness, and as her body lay in its grave-
clothes, the thought of his young mind, as he stood gazing upon it,
was that cry peculiarity first indicated by the medium. Her nose
and chin nearly met, so acute was the angle formed by her
attenuated gums and shrunken lips.

  "Many other facts were given, going to show the identity of the
two individuals in question. But one great object seemed to be to
teach us, by taking persons not thought of at the time, (in the last
case not thought of for many years,) that it was no psychological
impression from our own minds, as some have supposed; for there
was no known impression of the kind existing at the time, and the
memory was only awakened by the accuracy of the pictures which
the medium had presented.

  "Another equally interesting and accurate description of a spirit,
who said his name was William, was given. Previous to the
announcement of his presence and name by Mr. Home, and while
he was engaged in the other delineation, a lady of high clairvoyant
powers, through whose mediumship some of the most sublime
lessons of truth and wisdom have been from time to time
communicated, had written and shown to a gentleman sitting by
her, the following sentence: 'I am impressed that my father is here
and standing by my side; I feel his presence distinctly!' When Mr.
Home had said, 'there is a spirit present and his name

58                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

is William,' he asked, as if to gratify his own curiosity, 'Who is
William?' and then immediately said, 'O, he says, Eliza knows me.'
The lady's name was Eliza, and the spirit was her father. His
appearance and prominent traits of character were delineated with
great accuracy."

   Here at New York I made the acquaintance of Dr. Gray, one of
the most eminent physicians there, and for whom I have ever had
the deepest affection and esteem. He and his kind wife have given
me counsel, and befriended me at all times, and under all
circumstances. From his character and attainments, he was
eminently suitable as an investigator of phenomena, requiring a
calm dispassionate judgment, and the testimony of such a man is,
in itself, a sufficient answer to all the doubts of unthinking
persons. I had also the pleasure of meeting Judge Edmonds, so
well known as one of the judges of the Supreme Court. He
investigated this subject in the most painstaking manner for three
years, and was fully convinced, not only through the mediumship
of others, but through his own and that of his daughter, a lady well
known for her purity of mind and truthful nature. He was a
frequent visitor to me, and saw all the phenomena which occurred
ha my presence. I was also acquainted with the late Professor
Hare, the eminent chemist and electrician, and with Professor
Mapes, so well known in agricultural chemistry, and for his
acquaintance with this subject. A conference was formed at New
York, which has met weekly for many years for the investigation
of spiritual phenomena, and from its recorded transactions, I make
the following extract:

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                           59

                                   "Friday Evening, Julie 18, 1852.

  "Dr. Hallock related a case of physical manifestations which
took place on the Friday evening previous, at the house of Mr.
Partridge, after the conference had adjourned. Mr. D. D. Home
was the medium, and the circle consisted of Mr. Partridge, and his
wife and daughter, Mr. W. Taylor and wife, Mr. S. B. Brittan, and
himself. On the table around which we were seated, were loose
papers, a lead pencil, two candles and a glass of water. The table
was used by the spirits in responding to our questions, and the first
peculiarity we observed, was, that however violently the table was
moved, everything on it retained its position. When we had duly
observed this, the table, which was mahogany and perfectly
smooth, was elevated to an angle of thirty degrees, and held there,
with every thing remaining On it as before. It was interesting to
see a lead pencil retaining a position of perfect rest, on a polished
surface inclined at such an angle. It remained as if glued to the
table, and so of every thing else on it. The table was repeatedly
made to resume its ordinary position and then again its inclination
as before, as if to fasten upon us the conviction that what we saw
was no deception of the senses, but a veritable manifestation of
spirit-presence and of spirit-power. They were then requested to
elevate the table to the same angle as before, and to detach the
pencil, retaining everything else in their stationary positions. This
was complied with. The table was elevated, the pencil rolled off,
and everything else remained. They were then asked to repeat the
experiment, retaining the pencil and everything

60                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

else upon the table stationary, except the glass tumbler, and to let
that slide off. This also was assented to, with the like result. All
the articles retained their positions but the tumbler, which slid off
and was caught in the hands of one of the party, as it fell from the
lower edge of the table. Then the table, after being restored to the
natural position was moved strongly to and from Mr. Home, and to
and from different individuals in the circle, as they requested.

   "After this had been repeated several times, and while a corner
of the table was inclined into his lap, Mr. Taylor asked if the
spirits would lift it clear of the floor, while it was in that inclined
position. Assent was signified, and the table after much apparent
effort, was lifted clear of the floor as requested. Dr. Hallock: said
he was led to the conclusion that the effort was only apparent,
because, while we were watching it closely, with a light upon the
floor so as to see the slightest motion, the table in the meantime
resting upon one castor oil the floor and one corner of the leaf in
Mr. Taylor's lap, was raised perhaps about one inch, after having
been literally tumbled about the circle, sometimes upon one castor
and sometimes upon two, the leaf resting first in one person's lap
and then in another. But when the foot of the table was finally
raised, as described, he, to make sure that they were not mistaken
in the fact, got down upon the floor to observe more closely. While
looking, the foot of the table, instead of being raised a doubtful
inch or so, was thrown up, clear of the floor, six or eight inches, as
if all former attempts had been mere playful efforts. We then asked
if they could move the table

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                          61
with a man on it. They replied, 'Yes, with two men on it.' Mr.
Partridge and I then seated ourselves back to back upon the table.
Our combined weight is a little over 350 pounds; but
notwithstanding, the table was moved as easily as when nothing
but the candlesticks and the other things were upon it. We were
rocked backward and forward, to and from Mr. Home; the table
was tipped from the medium and held stationary in that position,
with us upon it; and finally we said playfully, 'when you get tired
of rocking us, throw us off.' It was done—the table was tipped
strongly and rapidly from Mr. Home, and we were thrown on the
floor."
  At the end of June I received the following letter from Dr Hull:
                                         "NEWBURGH, Orange Co.
                                               "On the Hudson.
"My dear Sir,
  "I am desirous that you should make me a visit, for myself and
some intimate friends, at your first leisure, or freedom from
present engagements.
   "I will meet all your expenses from your place, during your stay
here, and for your return; and five dollars a-day for ten days, i.e.
fifty dollars.
   "I do sincerely trust you will answer me promptly as to the time
you can make me the desired visit; and if my proposition as to
terms be not satisfactory, state what your terms are. All shall be
made satisfactory to yourself.
  "By addressing a letter to my direction—Newburgh, N. Y., it
will soon reach me.

62                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

  "I regretted I did not see more of you in New York, but I hope to
have the pleasure fully made up here.
 "Mr. Edward Fowler has promised to come up when you visit
me.
                                      "Very truly yours, &c,
                                       "A. GERALD HULL."
"D. D. HOME, Esq."
   In reply to this, I informed him that I was not a paid medium, but
that I should be happy to visit him, as he requested? I did so, and
whilst with him manifestations of a very interesting character
occurred to a family who had been deeply afflicted in the loss of
their children. They and Dr. Hull took a great interest in my
welfare; and feeling the importance of my completing my
education, which from ill health had been much neglected, and of
preserving me from the wearing excitement of the life I was then
leading, they kindly proposed a home for me in their midst. I could
not then avail myself of their offer, having promised to visit many
friends during the autumn, but in the following year as will be
seen, I placed myself under their guidance.
   In August, I went on a, visit to Mr. Cheney, at South
Manchester, Connecticut, and it was at his house that I was first
lifted in the air, a manifestation which has since frequently
occurred to me both in England and France.
  The following is the description of the evening, in the words of a
gentleman who was present.
  "On the 8th instant, in company with three gentlemen

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                           63

from this city, the writer paid a visit to Ward Cheney, Esq.,
residing in Manchester, at whose house Mr. Daniel D. Home was
temporarily stopping. A circle was formed, and the well-known
vibrations on the table were soon loud and distinct. One of my
friends had never seen anything of the kind, and he accordingly
looked under the table to make sure that no one touched it.
Answers of a personal character, such as tests of identity, were
given very freely. Mr. Home was then thrown into a spiritually
magnetic state, discovering great rigidity of muscle, and the
ordinary phenomena of the psycho-magnetic condition, including a
magnetic locking of the jaws, in which an iron-like hardness of the
muscles was apparent. He then spelt out (with his eyes closely
bandaged) some remarkable and interesting messages to one or
two of the company, the personal nature of which precludes their
publication, but which were declared by those interested to be
perfect tests. He did this by pointing, with almost incredible
rapidity, to the different letters of an alphabet arranged on a seven
by nine card, and thus spelling out the necessary words. A rapid
writer had difficulty in keeping up with him, and when a word or a
sentence was partially finished, a suggestion from any of the
company as to what was intended to be spelt, would, if correct, be
answered by eager and vehement rappings in various parts of the
table. Among others, (all remarkable), came a message from two
sailors lost at sea, relatives of one of the company-a stranger to
most of those present. These spirits announced themselves,
somewhat unexpectedly, by canting over the solid and ponderous
table, and rolling

64                   BEFORE THE WORLD.
it in the manner of a vessel in a violent tempest. Accompanying
this demonstration came a violent creaking as of the cables of a
ship when strained in a gale; then came the loud sound of a
prolonged wailing, shrieking blast of wind, precisely such a noise
as the wind makes in the rigging of a ship in a storm at sea—and
the creaking of the timbers and masts as the vessel surged to one
side or the other was distinctly heard by all. Next came the regular,
sullen shocks of the waves as they struck the bows of the doomed
vessel. All this time the table kept up the rocking motion. And now
the large table was capsized on the floor! All this was done with
no one touching the table, as a close and constant scrutiny was
kept up by two, at least, of our party. These two sailors (whose
names and ages were given) it seems lost their lives by the
capsizing of a vessel as represented, although this fact, I have the
best of reasons for knowing, could not previously be known to Mr.
Home or to any of the company excepting myself.
   "Demonstrations now increased in force and number. Several
tunes were rocked out by the table when no one touched it, the
circle being seated a couple of feet, at least, from it. The swing or
motion of the table was a full three feet from the floor at each
elevation, and the tune was kept with singular accuracy. A
simultaneous expression from all the members of the circle
attested their recognition of the several tunes as they were thus
performed for our satisfaction.
  "The table was actually lifted up from the floor, without the
application of a human hand or foot! A table weighing, I should
judge, one hundred pounds, was lifted up a foot from the floor, the
legs touching nothing. I jumped upon it, and it came up

                    BEFORE THE WORLD.                          65

again! It then commenced rocking, without, however, allowing me
to slide off, although it canted at least to an angle of forty-five
degrees! Finally, an almost perpendicular inclination slid me off,
and another of the company tried it with the same results. These
things all happened in a room which was light enough to allow of
our seeing, under and over, and all around the table, which was
touched by no one except the two persons who respectively got
upon it to keep it down!

   "We went into a darkened room to see the spiritual flashes of
light said to have been vouchsafed to some investigators. Instead
of this we were greeted with tremendous rappings all about us.
Some of the blows on the walls, floor, and tables, within three
inches of myself, were astounding. I could hardly produce such
violent demonstrations with my fist, though I were to strike with
all my might. The very walls shook. Answers to questions were
given by concussions of varying force and intonation, according to
the character of the spirits communicating. A favourite little
daughter of one of the gentlemen present, a stranger from a remote
state, who had left the earth almost in infancy, announced her
presence by a thick-pattering rain of eager and joyful little raps;
and in answer to an inward request of her father, she laid her baby
hand upon his forehead! This was a man who was not a believer in
these things—he had never before seen them, but he could not
mistake the thrilling of that spirit touch. I also had a similar
manifestation, in the character of which I am not deceived.

  "Suddenly, and without any expectation on the

66                   BEFORE THE WORLD.

part of the company, Mr. Home, was taken up in the air! I had hold
of his hand at the time, and I and others felt his feet—they were
lifted a foot from the floor! He palpitated from head to foot
apparently with the contending emotions of joy and fear which
choked his utterance and again he was taken from the floor, and
the third time he was carried to the lofty ceiling of the apartment
with which his hand and head came in gentle contact.

  "I omitted to state that these latter demonstrations were made in
response to a request of mine that the spirits would give us
something that would satisfy everyone in the room of their
presence. The medium was much astonished, and more alarmed
than any of the rest, who, I may add, took the matter calmly,
though they were intensely interested."

  During these elevations, or levitations, I usually experience in
my body no particular sensations than what I can only describe as
an electrical fullness about the feet. I feel no hands supporting me,
and since the first time, above described, I have never felt fear,
though should I have fallen from the ceiling of some rooms in
which I have been raised, I could not have escaped serious injury.
I am generally lifted up perpendicularly; my arms frequently
become rigid and drawn above my head, as if I were grasping the
unseen power which slowly raises we from the floor. At times
when I reach the ceiling, my feet are brought on a level with my
face, and I am as it were in a reclining position. I have frequently
been kept so suspended four or five minutes, an instance of which
will be

                     BEFORE THE WORLD.                           67

seen in an account which is given of occurrences in the year 1857,
at a chateau near Bordeaux. I have been lifted in the light of day
upon only one occasion, and that was in America. I have been
lifted in a room in Sloane Street, London, with four gas-lights
brightly burning with five gentlemen present, who are willing to
testify to what they saw, if need be, beyond the many testimonies
which I shall hereafter adduce. On some occasions the rigidity of
my arms relaxes, and I have with a pencil made letters and signs
on the ceiling, some of which now exist in London.

  During this autumn and winter, I visited private families with
whom I had become acquainted, and never a day passed without
some manifestations occurring. These are for the greater part of a
private nature, appealing to the sympathies of relatives and friends,
and could not properly be given to the world. They are to me,
however, as to them a dear reminiscence of the loving guidance of
departed friends, who find their highest happiness in ministering to
and consoling those who remain to fulfil their pilgrimage here.
They ever say that God in His loving-kindness allows this, and
that as He is an everywhere present God, and can bear with our
shortcomings, they having been mortals like ourselves, can the
more readily understand the weaknesses of our human nature.
During the time I have already spoken of as my public life, I have
met with thousands, many of whom disbelieved even the existence
of the soul after death, and some who denied the existence of a
God. Amongst these were even clergymen, who told me that
though they had preached the Gospel, they themselves had

68                  BEFORE THE WORLD.

never been fully convinced of existence in an after life. From the
letters of a friend, an Episcopal bishop, I make the following
extract." You have the pleasant assurance of having been the
instrument of conveying incalculable joy and comfort to the hearts
of many people; in the case of sorrow you have changed the whole
aspect of their existence, and you have made dwelling places light,
that were dark before."

  I went from Hartford to Springfield, to spend a few days with
Mr. Elmer, and although at this time I did not hold seances, still
the power was constantly with me in some form or other, as will
be seen from the following.

  "While Mr. Alderson was at my house, Mr. Home called to see
us, having been absent a long time. Soon after he arrived, he was
taken with severe sickness, from which A. attempted relief by
bathing his head. During the process, Mr. Home was thrown into
the spiritual condition and described Mr. A.'s father and sister;
spoke their names and that of his mother; and the spirit of the
father, while addressing his son, called him correctly by his
christian name, which Mr. Home had no means of knowing,
neither did he know the names of Mr. A.'s parents, which, he
assured us, were known only to himself, as he had not mentioned
them this side of Baltimore!"

  On going to Boston my power returned, and with it the more
impressive manifestations of music, without any earthly
instrument. At night, when I was

                   BEFORE THE WORLD.                       69

asleep, my room would be filled, as it were, with sounds of
harmony, and these gradually grew louder, till persons in other
parts of the house could hear them distinctly. If by chance I
awakened, the music would instantaneously cease.

                          CHAPTER III.

             FURTHER MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

  THE year 1853 was spent under the guidance of three friends,
and during the summer months I resided at Newburgh on the
Hudson river, where my time was passed in the completion of my
studies. I was at the Theological Institute, but only as a boarder,
and in no way included in the theological classes. While here, I
had an extraordinary vision, which is still so vivid, that I
remember it in all its details.

  The institute was built on an eminence, commanding a view of
peculiar beauty; below lay the city; on the right, the river was lost
in its windings among the rocky hills surrounding West Point; on
the left, it lay in expanse, and could be traced for a distance of
many miles; behind, spread out the country, with its pretty little
farm-houses dotted here and there. I have sat for hours of an
evening, watching the feeble flickering lights, and endeavouring to
picture in my imagination the life-emotions which must from time
to time have crossed those thresholds. Now, fancy pictured to me a
young girl, on whose form time and care had passed but as an
evening breeze; and a little further off it was, perchance, a mother
whose little one was

               MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                        71

suffering, and every beat of whose feeble pulse she had counted,
with that hope which only a mother may know, as she prays God
to spare the pure, gentle, and loving little one, whom he has given
her. Anon, it was one bowed down with age and sorrow; all that he
had loved had gone to their rest, and he was alone in the world.
Bright pictures of his youth flitted before him, but these only
augmented his loneliness, for the light of the past had brought out
in deeper contrast the shadows of the present.

  These and similar trains of thought often occupied my idle
hours; and, at times, these fancied scenes became as it were real,
and furnished ample resource to a mind, naturally inclined to dwell
on subjects beyond the little narrow circle of every-day life.

   One evening I had been pondering deeply on that change which
the world calls death, and on the eternity that lies beyond, until
wearied I found relief in prayer, and then in sleep. My last waking
consciousness had been that of perfect trust in God, and a sense of
gratitude to Him for the enjoyment I received from contemplating
the beauties of the material creation. It might have been that my
mind was led to this by the fact of my having watched a beautiful
star as it shone and twinkled in the profound stillness of the night.
Be this as it may, it appeared to me that, as I closed my eyes to
earthly things, an inner perception was quickened within me, till at
last reason was as active as when I was awake. I, with vivid
distinctness, remember asking myself the question, whether I was
asleep or no? when, to my amazement, I heard a voice which
seemed so natural, that my heart bounded with

72             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

joy as I recognised it as the voice of one, who while on earth was
far too pure for such a world as ours, and who, in passing to that
brighter home had promised to watch over and protect me. And,
although I well knew she would do so, it was the first time I had
heard her voice, with that nearness and natural tone. She said,
"Fear not, Daniel, I am near you; the vision you are about to have
is that of death, yet you will not die. Your spirit must again return
to the body in a few hours. Trust in God and his good angels: all
will be well." Here the voice became lost, and I felt as one who at
noonday is struck blind; as he would cling even to the last
memories of the sunlight, so I would fain have clung to material
existence—not that I felt any dread of passing away, nor that I
doubted for an instant the words of my guardian angel; but I feared
I had been over presumptuous in desiring knowledge, the very
memory of which might disturb my future life. This was but
momentary, for almost instantaneously came rushing with a fearful
rapidity memories of the past; my thoughts bore the semblance of
realities, and every action appeared as an eternity of existence.
During the whole time I was aware of a benumbing and chilling
sensation which stole over my body, but the more inactive my
nervous system became, the more active was my mind, till at
length I felt as if I had fallen from the brink of some fearful
precipice, and as I fell, all became obscure, and my, whole body
became one dizzy mass, only kept alive by a feeling of terror, until
sensation and thought simultaneously ceased, and I knew no more.
How long I had lain thus I know not, but soon I felt that I

              MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                        73

was about to awaken in a most dense obscurity; terror had now
given place to a pleasurable feeling, accompanied by a certitude of
some one dearly loved being near me, yet invisible: it then
occurred to me that the light of the spheres must necessarily be
more effulgent than our own, and I pondered whether or not the
sudden change from darkness to light might not prove painful, for
instinctively I realized that beyond the surrounding obscurity lay
an ocean of silver-toned light. I was at this instant brought to a
consciousness of light, by seeing the whole of my nervous system,
as it were, composed of thousands of electrical scintillations,
which here and there, as in the created nerve, took the form of
currents, darting their rayons over the whole body in a manner
most marvellous; still this was but a cold electrical light and
besides, it was external. Gradually, however, I saw that the
extremities were less luminous, and the finer membranes
surrounding the brain became as it were glowing, and I felt that
thought and action were no longer connected with the earthly
tenement, but that they were in a spirit-body in every respect
similar to the body which I knew to have been mine, and which I
now saw lying motionless before me on the bed. The only link
which held the two forms together seemed to be a silvery-like
light, which proceeded from the brain; and, as if it were a response
to my earlier waking thoughts, the same voice, only that it was
now more musical than before, said, "Death is but a second birth,
corresponding in every respect to the natural birth, and should the
uniting link now be severed, you could never again enter the body.
As I told you, however,

74             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

this will not be. You did wrong to doubt, even for an instant, for
this was the cause of your having suffered, and this very want of
faith is the source of every evil on your earth. God is love; and still
His children ever doubt Him. Has He not said, 'Knock, and it shall
be opened unto you: seek, and ye shall find?' His words must be
taken as they were spoken. It is not for men to give any
interpretation they may believe or desire to believe, to what God
has said. Be very calm, for in a few moments you will see us all,
but do not touch us, be guided by the one who is appointed to go
with you, for I must remain near your body."

   It now appeared to me that I was waking from a dream of
darkness to a sense of light; but such a glorious light. Never did
earthly sun shed such rays, strong in beauty, soft in love, warm in
life-giving glow, and as my last idea of earthly light had been the
reflex of my own body, so now this heavenly light came from
those I saw standing about me. Yet the light was not of their
creating, but was shed on them from a higher and purer source,
which only seemed the more adorably beautiful in the invisibility
of its holy love and mercy,—thus to shower every blessing on the
creatures of its creation; and now I was bathed in light, and about
me were those for whom I had sorrowed, for although I well knew
that they existed, and loved and cared for me, nevertheless, their
earthly presence was not visible. One that I had never known on
earth then drew near and said, 'You will come with me, Daniel! I
could only reply, that it was impossible to move, inasmuch as I
could not feel that my nature had a power

              MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                        75

over my new spirit-body. To this he replied, 'Desire and you will
accomplish your desires which are not sinful, desires being as
prayers to the Divinity, and He answereth the every prayer of His
children.'

  For the first time I now looked to see what sustained my body,
and I found that it was but a purple tinted cloud, and that as I
desired to go onward with my guide, the cloud appeared as if
disturbed by a gentle breeze, and in its movements I found I was
wafted upward until I saw the earth, as a vision, far, far below us.
Soon, I found that we had drawn nearer, and were just hovering
over a cottage that I had never seen; and I also saw the inmates,
but had never met them in life. The walls of the cottage were not
the least obstruction to my sight, they were only as if constructed
of a dense body of air, yet perfectly transparent, and the same
might be said of every article of furniture. I perceived that the
inmates were asleep, and I saw the various spirits who were
watching over the sleepers. One of these was endeavouring to
impress his son where to find a lost relic of him which the son
much prized, and the loss of which had greatly grieved him. And I
saw that the son awoke and thought it but an idle dream, and three
times this impression was repeated by the spirit; and I knew that
when morning came, the young man would go, out of curiosity
where he had been impressed to go, and that he would there find
what he sought for. In an adjoining room I saw one who was
tormented by dreams, but they were but the production of a
diseased body.

  I was most deeply interested in all this, when my guide said,
"We must now return." When I found

76             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

myself near my body, I turned to the one who had remained near
my bed, and said, "Why must I return so soon, for it can be but a
few moments I have been with you, and I would fain see more, and
remain near you longer?" She replied, "It is now many hours since
you came to us; but here we take no cognizance of time, and as
you are here in spirit, you too have lost this knowledge; we would
have you with us, but this must not be at present. Return to earth,
love your fellow-creatures, love truth, and in so doing, you will
serve the God of infinite love, who careth for and loveth all. May
the Father of mercies bless you, Daniel!"

   I heard no more, but seemed to sink as in a swoon, until
consciousness was merged into a feeling that earth with its trials
lay before me—and that I, as well as every human being, must
bear my cross. And when I opened my eyes to material things, I
found that the little star had given way to the sun, which had been
above the horizon about four hours; making in all about eleven
hours that this vision had lasted. My limbs were so dead, that at
least half an hour elapsed before I could reach the bell rope, to
bring any one to my assistance, and it was only by continued
friction that, at the end of an hour, I had sufficient force to enable
me to stand upright.

  I merely give these facts as they occurred; let others comment
on them as they may. I have only to add, that nothing could ever
convince me that this was an illusion or a delusion; and the
remembrance of those hours is as fresh in my mind now, as at the
moment they took place.

  In the autumn I returned to New York, with the intention

              MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                       77

of beginning a course of medical studies, but a chain of untoward
circumstances seemed strangely to link themselves together, and to
prevent my carrying out my intention. At that time I could not well
comprehend why this should be; but since then I have often had
occasion to thank God that it was so ordered. The kind friends who
were doing what they thought to be best, in preventing others from
seeing the manifestations, did not take into consideration that the
phenomena which had been a source of information and
consolation to them, were God-given, and that we had no right to
conceal the light from any. As what was intended for me could
only be brought about by my own decision, I acted as I felt would
be for the best, and so it afterwards proved to be.

  Previous, however, to my taking the step, I had another vision of
great distinctness. I had been with some friends to dine at the
house of a mutual acquaintance, and on returning, it was necessary
to cross from Brooklyn to New York in the ferry-boat. The gate-
keeper allowed our carriage to enter, and we were going down the
inclined plane which led to the boat, when one of the men caught
the horses by the bit and stopped them, telling the coachman as he
did so, that there was no room for us on the ferry-boat. Not only
was this so, but the chains were already down, and the boat was in
the act of leaving. There we were on a steep inclined plane, with
restive horses, and the deep waters within a foot of them, the only
barrier being a chain not over strong. Mrs. C—— begged to alight,
and I jumped from the carriage and gave her my hand to assist her.
As her hand touched mine, with the instantaneous sensation

78             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

of contact, I saw with most perfect distinctness, that a little sister
of mine had passed from earth. I was not aware that the child had
been ill, and her illness being apparently but slight, my relatives
had not thought it necessary to write to me about her. It was a
strange transition; there I stood in the cold night air, and I heard
the impatient pawing of the horses on the worn deal boards; I
heard the waters as they broke against the side piles of the ferry; I
felt a life-warm hand in mine, yet there, shielding her from the
cold, beyond all fear, and where harm could not come, I saw my
mother, with one of the three children she had left with me to care
for on earth. The child was close pressed to her heart, and her long
silky hair lay scattered in profusion over my mother's shoulder. I
saw also my spirit-sister Mary, who seemed anxious to soothe the
child-like wonderment of her newly arrived sister. It was but for a
moment, yet I saw it all, and I knew that God had given me
another guardian angel. The next day letters came to announce
what I thus already knew.

  January of 1854 was the beginning of severer trials, for I had
been so left to myself in solitude and study the whole whiter, that
mind and body were alike disturbed, and I wrote to my friends
saying that I could not think of continuing the life I then led; and
after many letters had passed between us, I was again left to
myself to decide as to my future course. I had friends in Boston,
who as soon as they knew what my intentions were, generously
offered to do all that my other friends had been doing, and to allow
me perfect liberty to see whom I might please. My health had

               MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                        79

suffered from the nervous anxiety of my solitary life and studies,
and now the medical men whom I consulted, pronounced my left
lung to be diseased. My spirit friends said that they were correct in
their diagnosis, but that I would not yet pass from earth, as my
mission was incomplete, and there was much yet for me to do.

  I went from New York to Hartford, but I saw no strangers for a
few weeks. From here I went again to Springfield, and Dr. Gardner
of Boston, in a letter, dated March 1st, 1854, describes what he
saw at this time, and which, though in some respects similar to
what has been already described, will help to shew the character of
the manifestations at different periods of my life.

   Dr. Gardner says," I am induced to offer you the following facts,
which I in company with several other persons witnessed at the
house of Mr. Rufus Elmer in this city, on the evening of the 28th
of February, 1854. Nine persons besides Mr. Home, were seated
round a common cherry table, when the following phenomena
occurred: The table commenced a trembling, vibratory motion,
sounds were heard on the floor and table, some of which were very
loud, then the table was rocked with great force, then raised nearly
if not quite two feet from the floor, and it was held supported in
mid air with a waving motion, as if floating on the agitated waters
of the sea, for considerable time. This was repeated several times.
Then we were directed to place the dinner-bell (weighing one lb.
one oz.) under the table on the floor, where it was rung with great
violence many times; questions were answered by the raps upon it,
and with it each individual in the circle

80             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

was touched in such a manner that there could be no mistake about
it. We then requested the spirits to pass the bell from the floor, and
to place it into our hands, which was done to each individual
separately; and, again at our request, it was taken from our hands,
and carefully deposited on the floor. Again, while we sung the
hymn, 'Whilst shepherds watch,' the bell was raised from the floor,
and rung in perfect time with the measure of the tune sung, after
which another tune was drummed out by the bell against the
under-side of the table, the sound resembling the roll of drum-
sticks in the hands of a skilful performer upon a tenor drum. This
was continued for several minutes.

   "All the above I know was performed without human agency;
the hands of each person present during the whole performance
above described being on the top of the table, with the room well
lighted, and in the full view of every, person present; and this was
also the case during the whole sitting. During the whole time of
the various performances with the bell, as well as before and after
it, our clothes were pulled almost constantly, two handkerchiefs
were firmly knotted together while lying in the laps of the owners,
we were many times touched more or less forcibly, producing a
peculiar and indescribable sensation, some of us had our limbs
grasped with considerable force, and distinctly felt the form of the
spirit hand, a soft, delicate, elastic, yet powerful touch, which
cannot be described, but must be felt to be appreciated. The reader
will bear in mind that the hands of every person present were in
plain view on the top of the table.

  "During the evening, responses to questions asked,

               MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                        81

were made by the invisible intelligence with the bell-handle, so
heavy as to leave indentations on the table which may be seen by
any person who doubts. Many other manifestations were made, but
the above are sufficient to convey some idea of the wonderful
invisible power there manifested; and the many beautiful and
sublime moral teachings there given by our heavenly visitants,
through the medium while entranced, I trust will long be
remembered and made a rule of life by those who heard them."

   I next went to Boston, and while here the power seemed to
increase in a manner, which surprised me not less than other
witnesses of it. On several occasions spirits were seen distinctly by
all present in the room, and more than once they kissed persons
present so as to be both felt and heard. During the summer months
my health gradually improved, and I once more thought that I
would now be enabled to pursue a course of studies which would
enable me to take my diploma as a medical man. But no! again a
series of unforeseen circumstances combined to prevent me. In
September, I returned to Springfield, and the letter I here insert is
taken from" The Republican" and describes some phenomena
witnessed by Mr. F. C. Andrue.

  "On Monday last, September 25, 1854, I called after tea at the
house of my friend, Mr. Elmer, for the purpose of returning a book
which I had borrowed. Unexpectedly, I met there Mr. D. D. Home,
who had just arrived from Boston. After conversing an hour or
two, Mr. Elmer having to leave on the morrow on business,
proposed a 'circle' that evening. We accordingly

82            MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

sat down—Mr. Elmer's family, Mr. Home and I being the only
persons present. The occurrences, though very extraordinary, were
similar to those already published. We were all touched by unseen
hands, the room being well lighted with gas, a large bell was
passed into our hands, &c. These things were not new to me, and
are not to the public. I will therefore pass them by.

   "Knowing that still more extraordinary 'manifestations' at times
occurred to Mr. Home during the night, I mentioned that I would
like to witness some of them. They urged me to stay and spend the
night, and I did so.

  "After leisurely undressing, putting out the light and retiring to
bed, we soon began to hear faint raps, which rapidly increased in
power and number, till the walls, floor, and bedstead fairly shook
with the strokes. They came like a shower. Soon came other
noises, and then the bed began to move across the floor. This
seemed rather dangerous locomotion. It was the only thing that
gave me any uneasiness. Having before witnessed so many
wonders, I was not frightened, though Mr. Home seemed to be so,
holding on to me with both hands, and begging with all his might
that the bedstead should be stopped. They complied with his
request, but only to come in a more tangible form.

  Soon I began to feel some one stepping on my feet and ancles,
over the bed-clothes, but with a pressure different from that
produced by any hard substance. Directly after there came a hand
on my head and forehead, as much like flesh-and-blood as any I
ever felt, only somewhat cold. I began to ask questions, the

              MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                       83

fingers patting me on my forehead in answer. Several hands,
touching me at the same time, claimed to be those of relatives of
mine.
  "A strong hand came, stated to be that of my, grandfather. I
asked, how am I to know that this is my grandfather? The hand
moved from my forehead to my temple, over my eyebrow and eye,
and then passed down over my face—the fingers patting me in the
most gentle manner possible. At another time, at my request,
hands patted my forehead with such force that the sound could be
heard, I am confident, in any part of the room.
   "I wish, before I close, to add a few words. To religious minds,
(which are strangely the most sceptical in this matter) I have this
to say: By what process of reasoning can you bring yourselves to
disbelieve my testimony of what I know and have seen, and to
believe the testimony of what John, Peter or Paul saw? I speak
with all reverence—I doubt not their testimony; on the contrary I
believe it now more than ever. But I know of no reason, (my
veracity being unimpeached) why my testimony of what I know
and see is not as good as that of any other man, living or dead.
And there are thousands who know these things to be so, as well as
I.
  "To our wise men, whose bobby is scientific investigation, I
would say: Of what use is it to those who have gone through what
I have, to read Dr. Dodd's book, Dr. Rogers' theory, or to marvel
over Professor Faraday's discoveries? who only proved that when
he pushed, he pushed."
  Early in November, I returned to New York, and resumed

84             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

my medical studies. I held seances two or three times a week, at
my own rooms, and was in the habit of going amongst the poorer
classes for the purpose of speaking to them of this most cheering
truth. I have always found them to be the most candid and
thorough in their investigations; and when they were in reality
convinced, they were the most thankful to God in allowing such
proofs of spiritual beings and forces to exist. I have seen many a
poor heartbroken mother consoled with the thought that the fair
young child, given her by God as a hope-star to cheer her as she
toiled for her daily bread, but who had pined, and gone for ever
from her sight, was still living and loving her and her God-sent
ministering angel. I well remember a poor man being present one
evening, and the spirit of a little girl coming with the following
message. Father, dear, your little Mary was present last
Wednesday, and God gave her power to prevent you from doing
what you wished. If you were ever to do that, you could not come
where your own Mary and her mother are. Promise me you will
never think of such an awful thing again." We all looked
astonished, but could not, understand to what she alluded. Still it
was evident the poor father knew too well, for throwing himself on
his knees, he said, as the tears rolled down his cheeks, "Indeed, it
is but too true, that on Wednesday last I decided to cut my throat;
but as I took the razor to do it, I felt that had my child been alive,
she would have shrunk from me with horror, and this very thought
was the saving of me."

  My frequent seances were attended by persons who

               MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                        85

were introduced to me by friends, and I met at this time many
hundreds. One of these seances is spoken of in the "New York
Conference," of December 26, 1854, and may serve to give an idea
of my mediumship at this time.

   "A gentleman present related the facts of a circle which met on
Wednesday evening last. Mr. Home was the medium. When
seated, the first thing noticed was an undulating motion of the
table, which was followed by its being lifted entirely clear off the
floor. This was repeated several times. Once or twice it was raised
as high as the chins of the party sitting at it, the hands of every
person in the room being upon the table. A guitar in its case
standing in one corner of the room was heard to move, and on
examination, the end resting upon the floor was found to have
moved several inches. Loud raps were heard in its vicinity while
this was being done, and a closet door opening upon the room in
which they were seated, was shut with considerable force. The
circle during these occurrences remained seated at the table, and
some six or eight feet from where they took place. The guitar case
was then unlocked, and the instrument placed under the table. In
this position it was played upon repeatedly, not, to be sure, in the
highest grade of the art, but with very fair average skill. The hands
of the party during this performance were all upon the table in
plain sight of every one. There was no chance for trick, the room
being sufficiently light for all to see the exact position of every
person and thing in the room. The guitar was then placed in the lap
of each member of the circle in rotation. Each one took hold

86             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

of the end presented, and held on until the instrument was removed
by the invisible agency. The table, the chair, in which they were
seated, and the floor of the room itself, were made each in turn to
exhibit a tremulous motion sensible to all. The large rocking-chair
in which Mr. Home was seated, was next rocked forcibly. Then,
by direction through the alphabet, the whole party of ten persons,
in rotation took the same chair, and were rocked in the same way.
The application of the power was as though a person had hold of
the upper part of the back of the chair with one hand, and the other
on its arm. The application of the force at these points could be felt
distinctly at every vibration; and the force necessary to produce
them may be appreciated by stating that the feet of the sitter were
held out straight, and were frequently made to strike the under side
of the top of the table. Every one was touched in turn as by human
hands, some large and some small. A lady present who had been
touched with what purported to be the hands of her little daughter,
asked if she could take the handkerchief out of her lap? Very soon
it was seen to move slowly from her lap, and disappear beneath the
table. In a few minutes, raps indicating the alphabet were heard,
and this sentence was received:" Mother, now look and see what
we have done." On looking, the handkerchief was found knotted
and twisted into the form of a doll-baby, not very symmetrical, but
sufficiently like to show the evident design, as well as ingenuity
and power to execute. Several other interesting facts occurred
during the evening.

  Dr. Hallock said he was present when the facts

               MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                           87

just narrated occurred. The point which he particularly wished to
illustrate, was the open character, so to speak, of these
manifestations. When an important fact is stated, accompanied
with the explanation that it occurred in a dark room, it naturally
raises the question of deception in the mind of the hearer, which
the most elaborate statement of particulars cannot eradicate. From
beginning to end, these manifestations were free from that
objection. Every person in the circle, Mr. Home included, was in
full view. When the guitar was played, all our hands were seen to
be on the table. A man could not have touched the strings of that
instrument with the toe of his boot even, much less with his hand,
without detection. So of all the other facts of the evening. In one
instance, after several unsuccessful attempts to retain a sheet of
paper upon the smooth surface of the table when elevated to a
considerable angle, the table with the sheet of paper on it was
turned so as to rest on its edge, the top being vertical, and the
paper still retaining its position, until it was suffered to fall at the
request of one of the gentlemen present. The exhibition of power
and intelligence manifested on that evening, were done for us, and
not by us—if ten pairs of eyes, with the remaining complement of
senses, are to be taken as evidence."

  In January, 1851, the weather was more than usually cold and
severe, and my cough had so increased, with other symptoms of a
more alarming nature, that all idea of completing my medical
studies had to be abandoned entirely. The medical men whom I
consulted, all coincided in saying that my only hope of having

88             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

my life prolonged, was to visit Europe. This was to me a hard
struggle, in being thus separated from those who would have
tended me with every affection, and to be thrown as it were a
stranger in what was now to me a strange land. My family had by
this time all been residents of America for some time, and I knew
no one friend in all England. I would not have heeded the advice
of my medical men, and I should have remained where I was to
pass from earth; but my spirit friends told me that I must go, and
their counsels could not be unheeded. I accordingly went to pay a
series of farewell visits to those friends who had been so kind to
me; they as well as I feeling that in all probability it was the last
time we should meet" in the flesh." While at Hartford in March, on
one of these visits the seance here alluded to took place.

   "The following occurrences transpired in this city, on the
evening of the 14th ultimo. A small party were seated with Mr. D.
D. Home, who is probably the most remarkable of modern
mediums for spirit-manifestations of a, physical or tangible order.
It was intimated that if we would procure a tablecloth and place it
upon the table, the unseen presences would manifest themselves
by lifting up the cloth. The cover was accordingly procured, when
we placed it upon the table, put the lamp upon it, and drew back
fax enough to prevent the possibility of any one of the party
touching it, unless by stretching forward; and the slightest
movement of the kind by any one present would have been
instantly detected. In a moment more the table-cloth was plainly
lifted up, on the side opposite to the medium, and in the full light
of the lamp. It presented

               MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                         89

the appearance of something under it, for it moved about under the
cloth, going first to one side of the table and then to the other.
Presently it reached out, lifting the sides of the cloth, towards each
one present, in succession. In this manner the force, or substance,
(for it was a substantial thing, resembling a hand) reached out and
shook hands with the company. It felt, through the cloth, like a
hand; but on retaining it for a closer inspection, it seemed to
evaporate or dissolve, and was rapidly lost. In its nature and
composition it resembled, apparently, the hand and arm seen on a
previous occasion by a party of six, and described in a former
article.

   "Soon after this, the thing, (whatever it was) again lifted up the
table-cloth, moving apparently all about the table, and raising the
cloth as it moved. In a moment more it reached forward and
touched one of the party; then drew back and again reached out
and touched another. Different parts of the person were thus
touched; and presently the hand—if it was a hand, left its
protection of the table-cloth, and commenced touching the party,
in succession, some in one place, and others in another. But
nothing could be seen! If requested to touch, for instance, the right
shoulder, the hand would unexpectedly respond by, touching the
left; or if asked to touch the leg, perhaps the breast or hand of the
one asking would be touched—seemingly with a view to indicate
in the clearest manner that the power and the intelligence was
separate from the mind of the party. The invisible agency thus
operating touched the writer at first on the knee, and, gradually
advancing upwards, finally took him by the

90             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

hand; but, although this was in a pretty good light, (a little below
the edge of the table), no traces of the hand that was palpably
touching mine could be seen.

   "A guitar, of a size and weight somewhat unusual, had been
placed beneath the table, in the hope of getting some music from
the spirits. I placed also a quire of letter paper and a pencil upon
the instrument, that they might, if able and so disposed, give us a
sample of writing without mortal hands. (Both of these
performances have been witnessed at circles in New York, and
elsewhere). As soon as we were again seated and quiet, the guitar
was sounded, and then played upon, evidently by real, substantial
fingers, for the touches on the strings were strong and distinct.
Presently the quire of paper was thrown from the instrument upon
the floor, a distance of some three or four feet, and the music was
again produced, louder than before. Next, the guitar, large and
heavy as it was, was dragged out from its place, and carried away
to a door, a distance of five fee from the table and there the music
recommenced, stronger and clearer than ever. This had all been
done while the party sat quietly at the table. At this juncture, in
order to see the performance going on at that distance, the writer
leaned forward towards it, and in so doing, accidentally
extinguished the lamp on the table; but as a good light was
reflected upon all of us from a grate of glowing coals directly, in
front of the party, it was decided not to break the circle to relight
the lamp, and the manifestations went on.

   "While we sat thus, the guitar, at a distance of five or six feet
from the party, was played upon exquisitely,

                MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                       91

and for several minutes, by some power other than that of any one
bodily present. The instrument was partially in shadow, and the
hand that swept its strings could not be seen; but the music was
surpassingly beautiful. It was of a character entire new to those
who listened, and was sweeter, softer, and more harmonious than
anything I have ever heard. Portions of it were filled with a certain
soft and wild melody that seemed to be the echo of other music far
away, and for the exquisite sweetness of which there are no words.
It was of that
   ——'Music that softer falls
   Than petals from blown roses on the grass,
   Or night dews on still waters between walls
   Of shadowy granite in a gleaming pass.'

Anon it changed, and rose to a 'full orb' of strong, tempestuous
melody, filling the house with its sounds. It was heard by a lady
residing in another part of the house, who inquired about it the
next day, thus proving the strength and the reality of this immortal
music.
  "It was asked by one of the circle, 'Can you strike on all the
chords at once?' Ans. (by responses on the strings)—'Yes,' and this
was actually done.
   The guitar was then removed to a corner of the room, still
farther off; and as soon as all were seated, it was again played
upon, at that distance, for some time; then it was brought back by
invisible means and placed near the table. Mr. Home remarked that
all this transcended anything of the kind in his previous
experience, and he proposed to 'see what they

92             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

could do,' taking the guitar to the most distant corner of the room.
It was suggested to him by us that this would be useless, as they
could do nothing at that distance from himself; but upon his taking
his seat again, the spirits began playing the instrument in that
farthest corner!—at a distance (as ascertained by subsequent
measurement) of nearly eleven feet from the circle or the medium!
Then the guitar was moved from its place by the spirits and
brought towards the circle; but, encountering a heavy mahogany
chair on the way, the instrument was laid down and the chair
dragged several feet out of the way; after which the guitar was
taken up and carried all around the circle by the invisibles, and at
length deposited in the opposite corner! In a few moments more
the writer saw it poised in the air, top upwards, and nearly over his
head! The remark was made, "Well, if I did not see this myself, I
wouldn't believe it On other testimony"—whereupon the
instrument reached forward and playfully tapped the speaker three
times upon the shoulder. Then it was passed across the table (over
his head) towards Mr. Home, whom it lightly touched several
times upon the head! Being close to it during this performance, I
watched it narrowly by the aid of the fire-light. The bottom end of
the instrument was very near my face, while the opposite end was
thus being used; it was not, in fact, six inches above my head, and
just in front of me. The indistinct outline of a human hand could be
seen grasping the, instrument just below its centre.

  "Reaching up, I grasped the instrument firmly in both hands and
held it above my head, requesting at

                 MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.                               93

the same time that the one who had been performing would now
play it if possible. Immediately the strings were touched as if by
human fingers, though now invisible, and the guitar was played as
well while thus held in the air as it had been while on the floor!

  "The quire of paper before spoken of was taken from the floor,
slowly lifted up, and placed upon the table, as I can affirm, without
the aid of a human hand. Sitting at that end of the table where this
was done, I was enabled to see the whole of this proceeding. The
quire of paper was placed upon the edge of the table, and so near
my hand as to touch it. This was done slowly and deliberately, and
this time at least I was permitted to see plainly and clearly the
hand that had hold of it. It was evidently a lady's hand—very thin,
very pale, and remarkably attenuated. The conformation of this
hand was peculiar. The fingers were of an almost preternatural
length, and seemed to be set wide apart. The extreme pallor of the
entire hand was also remarkable. But perhaps the most noticeable
thing about it was the shape of the fingers, which, in addition to
their length and thinness, were unusually pointed at the ends; they
tapered rapidly and evenly toward the tips.* The hand also
narrowed from the lower knuckles to the wrist, where it ended. All
this could be seen by, such light as was in the room, while the
hand was for a few moments holding the paper upon the edge of
the table. It suddenly
———
   * The writer has since been shown a daguerreotype taken from a picture of
the lady whose name was written as above described, and whose disease was
consumption. The portrait was taken just before her death, and the hands and
fingers in the daguerreotype, although rather indistinct, bear a most close and
remarkable resemblance to the hand described above.

94             MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA.

disappeared, and in a moment the pencil was thrown from some
quarter, and fell upon the table, where the hand again appeared,
took it, and began to write. This was in plain sight, being only
shaded by one of the circle who was sitting between the paper on
the table and the fire. The hands of each one present were upon the
table, in full view, so that it could not have been one of the party
who was thus writing. Being the nearest one to the hand, I bent
down close to it as it wrote, to see the whole of it. It extended no
farther than the wrist. With a feeling of curiosity natural under the
circumstances, I brought my face close to it in the endeavour to
see exactly what it was, and, in so doing, probably, destroyed the
electric or magnetic influence by which it was working; for the
pencil dropped and the hand vanished. The writing was afterwards
examined, and proved to be the name, in her own proper
handwriting, of a relative and intimate lady friend of one in the
circle, who passed away some years since. Other marks were also
made, and the word 'Dear' had been written just as the pencil
dropped. This writing has been preserved, and remains as an
evidence of the reality, of the fact. That it was produced by no
hand of any one bodily in that room I know and affirm.

    The hand afterwards came and shook hands with each one
present. I felt it minutely. It was tolerably well and symmetrically
made, though not perfect; and it was soft and slightly warm. IT
ENDED AT THE WRIST."

                           CHAPTER IV.

                            IN ENGLAND.

  ON the 31st of March, 1855, I sailed from Boston for England in
the 'Africa,' the late Captain Harrison being the captain of the ship.
On the ninth day of our voyage we neared England, and the signal
cannon was fired. I never can forget my feelings as I looked
around me, and saw only joy beaming on the faces of my fellow-
passengers; some there were who were about to reach their home,
and the thought of kind friends waiting to welcome them brought
the smile of joy on their countenances. Others were travellers who
saw the Old World with all her art treasures spread before them,
and the monotony of a sea-voyage so near its termination. I stood
there alone, with not one friend to welcome me, broken down in
health, and my hopes and fairest dreams of youth, all, as I thought,
for ever fled. The only prospect I had was that of a few month's
suffering, and then to pass from earth. I had this strange power
also, which made a few look with pity on me as a poor deluded
being, only devil-sent to lure souls to destruction, while others
were not chary in treating me as a base impostor. I stood there on
the ship's deck amongst the crowd of passengers,

96                        IN ENGLAND.

and a sense of utter loneliness crept over me, until my very heart
seemed too heavy for me to bear up against it. I sought my cabin,
and prayed to God to vouchsafe one ray of hope to cheer me. In a
few moments I felt a sense of joy come over me and when I rose, I
was as happy as the happiest of the throng.

  I reached Cox's Hotel in Jermyn Street on the evening of the 9th
of April; and as soon as Mr. Cox knew who I was, he welcomed
me more as a father would welcome a son, than as a stranger
whom he had never seen, and from that time to this he has been to
me the most sincere and generous friend.

  It soon became known that I was in England, and in less than a
month I had more engagements than I could well fulfil. While at
Cox's Hotel, Lord Brougham expressed a desire to see me for the
purpose of investigating the phenomena, and as his lordship's
evenings were fully occupied, I appointed an early afternoon.
Accordingly his Lordship came accompanied by Sir David
Brewster, with whom and Mr. Cox I had a seance, which shortly
afterwards, in consequence of the misrepresentations and evasions
of Sir David Brewster, became of considerable public interest,
inasmuch as it was made the means of a general discussion in the
newspapers on the subject of the spiritual phenomena. There are
few matters in which Sir David Brewster has come before the
public which have brought more shame upon him, than his conduct
and assertions on this occasion, in which he manifested not only a
disregard for truth, but also a disloyalty to scientific observation,
and to the use of his own eyesight and natural faculties. In order
that Lord Brougham might not be

                          IN ENGLAND.                            97

compelled to deny Sir David's statements, he found it necessary
that he should be silent, and I have some reason to complain that
his Lordship preferred sacrificing me to his desire not to immolate
his friend, since his silence was by many misconstrued to my
disadvantage. The correspondence which ensued was so
interesting and characteristic, and is moreover so useful as being
the first great occasion on which one of the pretended magnates of
science has come forward on the subject of these phenomena, that
I have thought it well to give the substance of it, with some
pertinent remarks on Sir David Brewster's conduct in an
Appendix. It will be a means whereby his character may be the
better known, not only for his untruthful dealing with this subject,
but also in his own domain of science in which the same
unfaithfulness to truth will be seen to be the characteristic of his
mind.

  The immediate effect, however, of this ventilation of the subject
was, as I have invariably found it, to excite only, the greater
interest in the phenomena, and it was thereby the means of
convincing numbers of all classes who visited me. My, time was
fully occupied, notwithstanding my delicate health, in giving
seances to anxious inquirers of all ranks and classes, from the peer
to the artizan, and including men of all the professions high in art,
science, and literature, who were both more competent and truthful
than I found Sir David Brewster to be to form a correct conclusion.

  After some time in Jermyn Street, I went to stay with a friend at
Ealing, who was deeply interested in the subject, and his house
was, during the greater part of my stay, almost besieged by
persons wishing to witness

98                        IN ENGLAND.

the phenomena. Hundreds had their wishes gratified, and saw what
has proved enough to be the turning point of their lives, and what
rendered no longer possible those materialistic and sceptical
notions, which are still unhappily so rife amongst the most highly
educated classes at this day. Many interesting incidents occurred
during my stay at Ealing, and the hands and once or twice the head
of the spirit form were repeatedly seen by many, who publicly
testified to the fact. But although I was apparently wearing out my
life by the fatigue and excitement which these constant seances
caused to me, I was not allowed to become proud of my position,
for the good clergyman of Ealing found it his duty to publicly
preach against me, and to attribute the manifestations to the devil.
The position which is taken up by many of the clergy, is to me, in
itself, an extraordinary manifestation, for certainly these
phenomena, whether from God or from the devil, have in ten years
caused more converts to the great truths of immortality and angel
communion, with all that flows from these great facts, than all the
sects in Christendom have made during the same period. Indeed,
whilst the churches are losing their adherents, the belief in spiritual
laws caused by these external manifestations, is becoming widely
spread through the sceptical masses. It is not at all improbable that
in pursuing their new studies, these last may be the means in their
turn of converting the clergy to a belief in spiritual laws.

  Whilst I was at Ealing, a distinguished novelist, accompanied by
his son attended a seance, at which some very remarkable
manifestations occurred, and

                          IN ENGLAND.                            99

which were chiefly directed to him. The rappings on the table
suddenly became unusually firm and loud. He asked "what spirit is
present?" the alphabet was called over, and the response was, "I
am the spirit who influenced you to write Z—— !" Indeed, said
he, "I wish you would give me some tangible proof of your
presence." "What proof? will you take my hand?" "Yes," and
putting his hand beneath the surface of the table, it was
immediately seized by a powerful grasp, which made him start to
his feet in evident trepidation, exhibiting a momentary suspicion
that a trick had been played upon him; seeing, however, that all the
persons around him were sitting with their hands quietly reposing
on the table, he recovered his composure, and offering an apology
for the uncontrollable excitement caused by such an unexpected
demonstration, he resumed his seat.

  The following words were then spelt out, "We wish you to
believe in the ——" and then stopped. It was asked of the spirit:
"In what am I to believe? in the medium?" "No." "In the
manifestations?" "No." At that moment he was gently tapped upon
the knee, and putting his hand down, a cross was placed there by
the spirit, which thus significantly finished the sentence.

   The cross was made of card-board, and had been lying on a
small table with other ornamental articles in a distant part of the
large room in which the party were seated. The investigator,
apparently much impressed with the incident, turned to Mrs.
Rymer, and asked permission to retain the cross as a souvenir, to
which she assented, saying that its only value to her was that it had
been made by her boy, then recently

100                      IN ENGLAND.

deceased, but she could have no objection to him keeping it, if he
would remember the injunction. He bowed his assent, and placing
the souvenir in his breast pocket, carried the cross away with him.

  On another occasion the children had been playing in the garden
with some fresh-gathered flowers, out of which they had formed a
wreath. A seance was proposed. It was a calm summer's evening,
with the full moon just rising. A large circular-shaped table was
selected in the drawing-room, which room was on a level with the
garden lawn, the French windows extending to the ground, and the
moonlight-twilight shone through them sufficiently to make
everything in the room visible.

  The party seated themselves around the half circle of the table,
leaving the other half nearest to the garden window vacant. After
several minor incidents had occurred, the table rose slowly from
the ground, and ascended to the ceiling of the room, out of the
reach of all but Mr. Coleman, who was tall enough to just touch its
rim. It then descended steadily and settled on the floor with no
more sound than if it had been a feather's weight.

   Having taken their seats again, a beautifully-formed feminine
hand became distinctly visible to all the party present. It came up
from the vacant side of the table, and made an unavailing effort, at
first, to reach a small hand-bell which had been placed there. In a
short time, the fleshy and delicately-formed arm became visible up
to the elbow, and was enveloped in what appeared to be a gauze
sleeve, through which it was transparently seen. The fingers then
took up the bell,

                          IN ENGLAND.                            101

held it suspended for a moment, rung it, and slowly carried it,
ringing, beneath the table. Mr. Coleman finding the bell jingling
against his knee put down his hand, received it, and placed it on
the table. He then asked if he might feel the hand, which was
neither warm nor cold, but of velvety softness, and it was placed
with a gentle pressure in his.

  When the hand first appeared, all in the circle had hold of each
other's hand, I having, at Mr. Coleman's request, placed both my
hands in Mr. Coleman's grasp.

  Whilst seated in this position, the wreath of flowers, which had
been made by the children, was seen by all to be lifted from my,
head, where it had been playfully placed a short time previously.
No hand was visible. The wreath then descended to within an inch
of the surface of the table. It then slowly traversed round the circle
and back again to Mr. Coleman who took it, and retained it at
home until the flowers withered.

   At another sitting, each person in the circle who wore a ring had
it gently removed by a spirit hand, the hand being seen afterwards
with all the rings on its fingers, and after displaying itself by
turning about, shewing the back and palm two or three times,
inverted itself, and cast the rings upon the table.

   One evening at Ealing, Sir David Brewster, Mrs. Trollope the
authoress, and her son Mr. Thomas Trollope, and several others
were present. The table at which the party sat was a long
telescopic dining table, having two legs at each end and none in
the centre. One end of it was occupied by Mr. Trollope, Sir David
Brewster, and a lady. I sat about the centre of one

102                       IN ENGLAND.

side, having Mrs. Trollope on my left; the others present
occupying, the remainder of the table. There was no cloth or
drapery of any kind. Sir David was invited to look under the table
and make every investigation, and he did most properly avail
himself of the opportunity afforded him by carefully looking under
the table, both before sounds were heard and during the time they
were being made. On this occasion Sir David tried to lift the table,
sometimes he could not, at other times he could, or, as Sir David
said, "the table was made light and heavy at command."

   An accordion was called for: hymns and tunes were played, and
without any visible agency. After the party broke up, Sir David, in
the course of conversation, said, "I should have liked if we had
been all standing when the table lifted." Sir David, Mr. Trollope,
and Mr. Rymer then sat down to see if it were possible to move the
table or to raise it by their feet, but it could not be moved by the
united efforts of the feet of all three. Sir David was invited to come
the next evening for the purpose of complying with his request of
standing at the table, but he could not come, having a pre-
engagement.

  This table, which was twelve feet long, has been sometimes
completely turned over, replaced, and again turned over, all our
hands being on the surface. Occasionally it has been moved while
we were all standing, without any one touching it, even with their
hands.

  Mr. Trollope came on the following evening, we sat round the
same table as on the previous evening; the alpha, bet was called
for, and three of us were told to go into another room, to get a
smaller table,

                          IN ENGLAND.                           103
and stand. We were not to sit, but to stand. We did so—and a
heavy card table, on pillar and claws, and which was brought from
another room, and at which we had never sat before, was
repeatedly lifted off the ground at least twenty inches.
   One evening a gentleman was present when it was intimated to
him through the alphabet by knocks on the table that his aunt
Dorothy was present; he was surprised, and assured us that could
not be so, for he never had an aunt; he afterwards wrote to his
sister, who was residing in the north of England, and this was her
reply:
  "I never heard of our father having a sister, there were four sons,
and their father died when they were all very young; but I expect
to see my elder sister who knows more of our family, and I will
ask, her.
  "P.S.—She has just come, and I find our father had a sister—
our grandfather was twice married; by his first wife he had one
daughter whose name was Dorothy, and who died an infant, and
who, of course, was our aunt."
  One evening as Mr. Rymer was passing through the room he
stood for a few moments at the end of the table. His attention was
arrested by the sounds, and it was stated to be his little boy, who
had passed away some years before. He asked if he recollected
how pleased he was when on earth to place him a chair on his
return home, the chair was immediately moved round the corner of
the table, by no visible agency. It was placed behind him, and he
sat down upon it.
  This was in the presence of five persons, one of

104                        IN ENGLAND.

whom was the editor of a well-known work on the" Occult
Sciences." All at the table saw the chair moved to where the father
was standing. Tile hands of all were on the table; no one knew that
he intended to ask for a chair, and until that instant, he said, that he
did not know it himself.

  Another evening we were told through the alphabet that the
same little boy was present in spirit. It was asked if he could write
as on earth, and he answered that he would try. A sheet of note
paper, clean, and without any writing on it of any description was
taken, and placed on the cloth. The brass fastenings of the table
were then displaced one by one, and fell to the ground; the table
was opened or pulled out by no human agency; every one in the
room was seated at the table and had their hands on its surface. It
was then asked if the paper and pencil should be placed on the
table near the opening under the cloth; three sounds, "Yes."
Immediately the form of a small hard was seen under the cloth. It
was felt by some who placed their hands upon it. The paper and
pencil were then removed, the form of the hand disappearing at the
same time. In a few minutes the same form of hand was again seen
replacing the paper and the pencil, the alphabet was called for:
"Dear papa, I have really done my best." The father removed the
paper and pencil, and on that paper was written," Dear papa, dear
mamma," and signed "Wat." Watty was the name of the child. No
one was previously aware that it was intended to ask for this to be
done.

  At Sandgate in Kent, where I stayed for some time,

                         IN ENGLAND.                          105

at a seance, we numbered thirteen. The table was elevated at least
two feet, and the accordion was played. The tune was not known
to any of us. We asked the name, and were told that it was the
"Song of the Sea." A hand and arm in white drapery appeared, it
was seen by all at the table on several occasions during the
evening, and they had every opportunity of carefully examining it.

   A few evenings afterwards the table was near the window. It
was twilight. Sounds were heard on the accordion. The tune was
new to us, and we were told that it was the "Song of the Angels to
the Mourners." It was followed by a hymn which had been
frequently played before. It war, spelt out by sounds on the table,
some will shew you their hands to-night. The table was gently,
raised and lifted up several times, a hand appeared above the table
and took from the dress of one of the party a miniature brooch, and
handed it to several at the table. Hands and arms were then
distinctly seen by all at the table of different forms and sizes:
sometimes crossed as in prayer, and at other times pointing
upwards: on another occasion sounds were heard, communications
were made, and hands and arms in white drapery were again seen.
A spirit hand took up a Bible which was on the table, and opened
it. This was seen by all, and a leaf was folded down, the hand took
a pencil and marked the two verses sixteen and seventeen of the
thirteenth chapter of St. Matthew: "But blessed are your eyes, for
they see: and your ears, for they hear. For verily I say unto you,
that many prophets and righteous men have desired to see things
which

106                       IN ENGLAND.

ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear these things which ye
hear, and have not heard them."
  At this time hands and arms were frequently seen, and they were
repeatedly felt by all at the table as distinctly as though they were
the hands and arms of living mortals, and frequently they shook
hands with them as really and substantially as one man shakes
hands with another.
   Of all the accounts which have been given of the phenomena
there has been none so good as that of Dr. J. J. G Wilkinson, who
towards the close of the Brewster controversy, wrote a letter to the
"Morning Advertiser," under the signature of Verax. He had been
frequently present at seances, and was eminently qualified not only
for the investigation, but for a philosophical expression of their
results and consequences, and I need offer no apology for giving at
length his eloquent narration which was entitled "Evenings with
Mr. Home and the Spirits."
  "The 'Great Wizard of the North' has roused attention to the
subject of spiritual manifestations in such a manner, that
everybody is talking about them; and, moreover, the country
papers are the battle-ground of letters pro and con., which debate
the subject with some warmth; and, wherever a name can be got at,
with a little personality. But, hitherto, I have seen no statement of
the experience of any of the writers in regard to these
manifestations. This is to be regretted, perhaps, because by
bringing forward experiences and explanations, the subject might
have been divested of some of that heat which is so bad a scientific
medium. I will now endeavour, with your permission, to tell what

                         IN ENGLAND.                           107

I saw and felt on three separate evenings, stating them in their
order.
   "It was late in the spring of this year that I was invited by a
friend, well known in the literary world, to pay a visit to the
lodgings of Mr. Daniel Dunglas Home, then recently arrived from
America, for the purpose of witnessing certain remarkable
phenomena alleged to be from supernatural causes. Many feelings
prompted me to accept the invitation; as, also, did the knowledge
that Mr. Home was familiarly known, as a plain honest man, to Dr.
Gray, the first homoeopathic physician in New York, and for
whose character I have the highest esteem.
    I went to his house in Jermyn Street, and introduced myself on
the appointed evening to Mr. Home, who, I found, was a modest,
intelligent youth of about twenty, in ill-health; and, indeed, as he
himself informed me, and as, on inspection, I found to be the case,
with the marks of consumption legible upon his frame. My wife
accompanied me, and I met in Mr. H's rooms three friends, all of
them men of talent and integrity. Bent upon narrative, and not
upon defence or hostility, I will omit nothing; and so I here
observe that we were, all of us, believers, beforehand, in the
possibility of spiritual manifestations.
  "Before sitting down in 'the circle,' I asked Mr. Home for some
account of his antecedents. To the best of my recollection he gave
the following particulars. He was born in Scotland, and was taken
to America when a child. Very early in life he used to surprise
those with whom he was, by spontaneously narrating, as scenes
passing before his eyes, distant events, such

108                       IN ENGLAND.

as the death of friends and relatives; and these instances of second
sight were found to be true telegraphy. It was not his fault—he
could not help seeing them. Later on in his career, various noises
were heard in the room beside him. This was about the time when
the spiritual 'rapping' became known in America.

   "He lived with an aunt, who was greatly scandalised at these
circumstances. A member of the Presbyterian Church, these
knockings even accompanied him to Divine worship; and, coming
to the knowledge of his ecclesiastical overmen, he was adjudged to
be the victim of satanic influences, and either excommunicated, or
otherwise banished from the congregation. Afterwards he became
a medical student; but ill-health forced him to abandon the idea of
pursuing medicine as a calling such were the heads of what he told
us, in answer to our enquiries, about himself.

   "We were in a large upper room, rather bare of furniture; a sofa,
a large round table, and a little buffet, together with a few chairs,
were the fittings up. One of the party had brought with him a hand-
bell and an accordion. We sat around the table, with the hands
resting upon it. In a few minutes the table vibrated, or shuddered,
as though actuated from within; it then became still, and instantly
every one of us shook in his chair, not violently, but intimately,
and like a jelly, so that objects 'dothered' before us. This effect
ceased; and now the heavy table, with all our hands upon it, raised
itself high up on its side, and rocked up and down; the raising
proceeding from all different quarters, Mr. Home and all the rest
of us (excepting our hands and arms, which were necessarily
moved,) sitting death-still. The lamp on

                          IN ENGLAND.                            109

the table seemed as if it must tumble off; but he assured us there
was no danger of that—that it was held safely in its place. The
hand-bell had been placed upon the wooden rim round the pedestal
of the table, and it now began to ring, apparently under different
parts of the circle. Mr. Home said that the spirits were carrying it
to one of the party, and suggested myself. I was sitting nearly
opposite to him, at about three feet distance. I put my hand down
under the margin of the table, and in perhaps a minute's time, I felt
the lip of the bell poked up gently against the tips of my fingers, as
if to say, 'I am here, take me.' This palpitation of the bell continued
until I moved my fingers up its side to grasp it. When I came to the
handle, I slid my lingers on rapidly, and now, every hand but my
own being on the table, I distinctly felt the fingers, up to the palm,
of a hand holding One bell. It was a soft, warm, fleshy, substantial
hand, such as I should be glad to feel at the extremity of the
friendship of my best friends. But I had no sooner grasped it
momentarily, than it melted away, leaving my hand void, with the
bell only in it. I now held the bell lightly, with the clapper
downwards, and while it remained perfectly still, I could plainly
feel fingers ringing it by the clapper. As a point of observation I
will remark that I should feel no more difficulty in swearing that
the member I felt was a human hand of extraordinary life, and not
Mr. Home's foot, than that the nose of the Apollo Belvidere is not
a horse's ear. I dwell chiefly, because I can speak surely, on what
happened to myself, though every one round the table had
somewhat similar experiences. The bell was carried under

110                       IN ENGLAND.

the table to each, and rung in the hand of each. The accordion was
now placed beneath the table, and presently we heard it moving
along. Mr. Home put down his hand to the margin, and the
instrument was given to him. With one hand upon the table, and
with the other grasping the white wood at the bottom of the
accordion, he held it bottom upwards, the keys hanging down
over, and the instrument resting for support on his right knee. It
played 'Home, sweet home,' and 'God save the Queen,' with a
delicacy of tone which struck every one present: I never heard
silence threaded with such silver lines. Afterwards, in the same
way, we were favoured with 'The Last Rose of Summer.' The
accordion was then taken to each member of the party in
succession; we could hear it rustling on its way between our knees
and the pedestal of the table; and in the hand of each person, a few
notes, but no whole tunes, were played. When in my own hand, I
particularly noticed the great amount of force which was exerted
by the player. It was difficult to hold the instrument from the
strong downward pull, and had I not been somewhat prepared for
this, the accordion would have fallen upon the floor. In the course
of the evening we all felt either a finger, fingers, or a whole hand,
placed upon our knees, always with a pleasant impression at the
time. A white cambric handkerchief was drawn slowly under the
table, and in the course of a few minutes handed to another person,
tied in two knots, and put as a bouquet into the bell. And this
experiment also was repeated for nearly all present. While these
things were going on, rappings were heard in all parts of the room,
in the

                          IN ENGLAND.                            111

table, in the floor, and the ceiling; and sometimes they were so
loud, that the medium requested the spirits to remember that he
was only a lodger, and that these noises might disturb the people in
the rooms above and below. They were very unlike the 'Great
Wizard's' raps, and occurred indifferently, as I said before, in all
places and corners of the chamber. Towards the end of the seance,
five distinct raps were heard under the table, which number, Mr.
Home said, was a call for the alphabet. Accordingly, an alphabet
was made; and on Mr. Home asking if any spirit was present who
wished to speak to one of the party, the following sentence was
given by the alphabetic telegraph:—'My dear E——, Imortality is
a great truth. Oh! how I wish my dear wife could have been
present.—D.C.' It purported to be a near relation of one of those
present, who died last year. The spelling 'imortality,' surprised me
at first; but I recollected that the deceased, whom I knew well, was
constantly versed in black letter writing,—which makes elisions in
that way. This ended, the medium fell into an apparently mesmeric
trance, from which he addressed some good words of exhortation
to each of us; and told one of the party in particular, several details
about deceased members of the family, which were not known in
the circle at the time, but verified to the letter afterwards. These, I
forbear to mention, because they were of a strictly private nature.
In his address, Mr. Home spoke, not as from himself, but as from
the spirit assembly which was present; and he ended with a
courteous 'Good night,' from them.

  "Considering that it requires a large apparatus of

112                       IN ENGLAND.

preparation for the greatest of wizards to effect the smallest part of
what we saw on this evening, namely, a few raps, one might have
expected that Mr. Home would have had rather bulging pockets, to
do what I have related, but I can assure your readers, that he was
as meagre and unencumbered as the scantiest dresser need be: he
had no assistants, and no screens. When, during the evening, I
asked if the jugglers did their tricks by means similar to the
agencies there present, the raps said 'No:' but in a pronounced
manner they said 'Yes,' when the same question was put with
regard to the 'Indian Jugglers.' We also asked Mr. Home why the
effects generally took place under the table, and not upon it. He
said that in habituated circles the results were easily obtained
above board, visibly to all, but that at a first sitting it was not so.
That scepticism was almost universal in men's intellects, and
marred the forces at work; that the spirits accomplish what they do
through our life-sphere, or atmosphere, which was permeated by
our wills; and if the will was contrary, the sphere was unfit for
being operated upon.

  "It was perhaps a fortnight after this that Mr. Home came by
invitation, to my own house, to sit in the circle of my family. He
was brought to the door in a carriage by some friends, with whom
he was staying, without any paraphernalia which would
characterize a wizard's art. I watched him walk up the garden, and
can aver that he had no magic wand up his trouser leg, nor any
hunch in his dress that could betoken machinery or apparatus of
any kind whatever. Arrived in the drawing-room, the 'raps'
immediately commenced

                          IN ENGLAND.                           113

in all parts of it, and were also heard in the back drawing-room,
which opens into the front by folding doors. The party assembled
to constitute the 'circle' consisted of Mr. Home, my wife, my four
children, and myself, and two domestics. We sat round a large and
heavy loo table, which occupied the centre of the room. In a
minute or two the same inward thrill went through the table as I
have described in the first seance; and the chairs also, as before,
thrilled under us so vividly, that my youngest daughter jumped up
from hers, exclaiming, 'Oh! Papa, there's a heart in my chair,'
which we all felt to be a correct expression of the sensation
conveyed. From time to time the table manifested considerable
movements, and after cracking, and apparently undulating in its
place, with all our hands upon it, it suddenly rose from its place
bodily, some eight inches into the air, and floated wavering in the
atmosphere, maintaining its position above the ground for half a
minute, or while we slowly counted twenty-nine. Its oscillations
during this time were very beautiful, reminding us all of a flat disc
of deal on an agitated surface of water. It then descended as
rapidly as it rose, and so nicely was the descent managed, that it
met the floor with no noise, and as though it would scarcely have
broken an egg in its contact. Three times did it leave the floor of
the room, and poise itself in mid air, always in the same manner
During these intervals the medium was in a state of the completest
muscular repose; nor, indeed, had he had the toe of Hercules for a
lever could he have managed this effect, for he and all of us stood
up each time, to follow the mounting table, and he stood with a

114                       IN ENGLAND.

complete absence of strain as the rest of us. It requires two strong
men to lift the table to that height; one person might throw it over,
but could by no means raise it from the floor.

   "The travelling of the hand-bell under the table was also
repeated for every one present, and this time they all felt the hand,
or hands, either upon their knees, or other portions of their limbs. I
put my hand down as previously, and was regularly stroked on the
back of it by a soft palpable hand as before. Nay, I distinctly felt
the whole arm against mine, and once grasped the hand, but it
melted as on the first occasion and immediately a call was made
for the alphabet, there being something to communicate. The
'spirits' now spelt out through Mr. Home who had known nothing
of what I had done under the table, 'Do not grasp our hands.' I
asked why, and Mr. Home said that they had great difficulty in
presenting, and thus rapidly incarnating these hands out of the vital
atmospheres of hose present, and that their work was spoilt, and
had to be recommenced, when they were interfered with, perhaps
as a thought is sometimes broken in twain, and cannot easily be
resumed on the irruption of a stranger. During the seance I had the
border of a white cambric handkerchief just appearing out of the
side pocket of my paletot, which was open; and though I could see
no agency, I felt something twitching at, the handkerchief, and
very gradually drawing it from my pocket. Simultaneously with
this, my eldest daughter, who sat opposite to me, exclaimed, 'Oh! I
see phosphoric fingers at papa's pocket!' and, now visibly to all,
the handkerchief was

                          IN ENGLAND.                            115

slowly pulled out, and drawn under the table; whilst, at the same
time, I felt an arm that was doing it, but which was invisible to me.
At this time I was at least three feet from Mr. Home, with a person
between us, and he was absolutely passive. The feeling I had was
of nudges, as distinct as ever I felt from a mortal limb, and that on
my breast and arm, which were above the table; and yet, though
the operation of abstracting my handkerchief was going on visibly
to all, the rest of the circle, as well as myself (all except my eldest
daughter), could see nothing. I can swear that there was no
machinery, unless the skin, bone, muscle, and tendons of an
unseen hand, forearm and elbow deserve the name.

   "While this was going on, and for about ten minutes, more or
less, my wife felt the sleeve of her dress pulled frequently, and as
she was sitting with her finger ends clasped and hands open, with
palms semi-prone upon the table, she suddenly laughed
involuntarily, and said, 'Oh! see, there is a little hand lying
between mine; and, now, a larger hand has come beside it. The
little hand is smaller than any baby's, and exquisitely perfect.' Our
domestics, and two of the children, as well as my wife, all saw
these hands, and watched them for between one and two minutes,
when they disappeared. I now held my watch at the table side, the
key in my hand, the chain and watch dangling from it, and I felt
the weight of the watch gradually taken off, the chain being raised
horizontally to my hand, and then the key, which I retained, was
pulled laterally, and I let it go. It was taken under the table to my
youngest daughter, and put on her

116                      IN ENGLAND.

knee. Whenever objects were thus removed from the hand, they
were taken with a degree of physical power sufficient to suggest
that the agent was capable of holding the object without letting it
fall. An hour and three-quarters were occupied in these and similar
manifestations, of which I have mentioned only the most striking,
or those personal to myself; and now Mr. Home passed into the
trance state, spoke of the spirit life, and the coming knowledge of
it on earth, and said a few words apposite to each person present;
dwelling also upon the spiritual attendants who were standing
beside each. When he came to my wife he lifted up his hands in an
ecstacy, and described a spirit with her, most tiny, but beautiful.
He said it was a little sister who had gone away a long time. 'But,'
she said, 'I never had such a sister.' 'Yes, you had, though she had
no name on earth.' On inquiry in the family, an event, such as he
alluded to, had happened. This is the chief part of what struck me
in Seance No. 2.

  "At 10 p.m., Mr. Home went away on his own legs, so limber
that I never so much as thought of any explanation of pasteboard
arms or electric batteries concealed about his person.

  "The next seance which I shall describe took place about the
third week in July, at the house of a valued friend in Ealing, who
had become convinced of the genuineness of the phenomena
which accompanied Mr. Home, and with whom that gentleman
was now staying. The party sat down to the table with Mr. Home,
in the dusk of a fine evening, and were nine or ten in number. Here
again I am forced to chronicle

                         IN ENGLAND.                           117

chiefly what befel myself, in order that I may be no second hand
witness. The first thing I remarked was a gentle tremulous flash of
light through the room, but what was the cause of it I am unable to
determine. When we had sat a few minutes I felt a decided but
gentle grasp of a large man's hand upon my right knee, and I said
to Mr. H., 'There is a man's hand upon my knee.' 'Who is it?' he
said. 'How should I know?' was my reply. 'Ask,' said be. 'But how
shall I ask?' 'Think of somebody,' was his answer. I thought
involuntarily of an intimate friend, once a Member of Parliament,
and as much before the public as any man in his generation, and
who died on the 30th of June last. And I said aloud, 'Is it ——?'
Hearty affirmative slaps on the knee from the same hand, which
had remained fixed till then, were the reply to my question. 'I am
glad to be again in the same room with you,' said I. Again the same
hearty greeting was repeated. 'Are you better?' I inquired. A still
more joyous succession of slaps, or rather, if I may coin a word, of
accussions; for the hand was cupped to fit my bent knee, and
gently struck me in that form. 'Have you any message to your wife,
whom I shall probably see in a few days?' Again, affirmative
touches, five in number, therefore calling for the alphabet. Mr.
Home now called over the alphabet. A B C D, and when he called
T, my knee was struck; again when he said "and E, and so on, until
this was spelled out: 'THE IMMORTAL LOVES.' I remember at the
time thinking that this was rather a thin message; but the next time
I saw Mrs. —— I told her the circumstances, and gave her the
words. Her son was sitting with her, and

118                       IN ENGLAND.

said, 'That is very characteristic of my father, for it was a favourite
subject of speculation with him, whether or not the affections
survive the body; of the immortality of the soul itself he never
doubted; but the words, the immortal loves, show that he has
settled the problem of his life.' Such was the import which the
family, of the deceased quite unexpectedly to me conferred upon
the phrase. To return to Ealing, and that evening, after the last
stroke of the hand had indicated the end of the sentence, I said, 'If
it is really you, will you shake hands with me?' and I put my, hand
under the table, and now the same soft and capacious hand was
placed in mine, and gave it a cordial shaking. I could not help
exclaiming, 'This hand is a portrait. I know it from five years'
constant intercourse, and from the daily grasp and holding of the
last several months!' After this it left my knee; and when I asked if
there was anything more, there was no response, and the agent
appeared to be gone. But in two or three minutes more another
hand, evidently also a man's but small, thin, firm, and lively, was
placed in the same position which the former had occupied, and
after some preliminary questioning with Mr. Home, I said, 'Is it
Mr. ——?' naming another valued friend, who, after twenty years
of suffering, had departed this life almost on the same day as Mr.
——. With liveliest finger tips, the affirming hand danced up and
down my leg, and upon my knee. I said, 'I am glad to find you are
so much better.' The playful hand beat 'yes' again. And this, in
reply to renewed questions, for two or three minutes. Their I said,
'Have you any communication for your wife when I see her?'
There was no response, and that

                          IN ENGLAND.                           119

agent there ceased to manifest himself. After another short pause, a
totally different hand, a lady's, came to me, rested in my hand
under the table, rubbed my hand, and allowed me at leisure to
examine the delicate, beautiful, and warmth-raying fingers. It was
signified that it was Mrs. ——, whom I had known in life, and
who wished to greet me. Between and during what happened to
myself, many of the rest of the circle were touched; and described
their impressions much as I have described mine. Some had
merely a single finger put upon their knees. Mr. Home said that the
presenting spirits could often make one finger where they could
not make two and two, where they could not form an entire hand;
just as they could form a hand where they could not realize a
whole human figure; and he also said that this was one reason why
they did not show themselves aboveboard, because they did not
like imperfect members to be seen. "These phenomena occupied
less than an hour; and now the circle was broken up, and
reconstituted, nine persons, to the best of my recollection, being
arranged at the table. The table was placed opposite a window, and
the bright moonbeams streamed down upon its side. There was no
candle in the apartment. The space of table which fronted the
window was not occupied by sitters; but the company sat round
about three-fourths of it, leaving the rest vacant. The right wing of
the party was terminated by Mr. Home; the left by the son of the
host. In a few minutes' time, close beside the latter gentleman,
there emerged into sight above the rim of the table, in the vacant
space, a delicately beautiful female hand and part of the forearm,

120                       IN ENGLAND.

apparently of ghostly tenuity. As I was sitting exactly opposite the
vacant space, I had a fair opportunity of watching this hand as it
projected against the moonlight; it was a filmy-looking woman's
hand, with the fingers drooping forwards from left to right as I sat.
The hand curved up over the table margin, deliberately grasped a
hand-bell placed near, and carrying it partly down, let it drop upon
the floor. It then rose to sight again, and took away a cambric
handkerchief also placed near, which was tied in two knots under
the table, and presented to one of the company, who had been
strongly moved from the time that this hand was first seen. I
forbear to give the further details of this hand, because they
seemed to be of a private nature; suffice it to say, that it caused no
little emotion to a gentleman who seemed concerned. On its
disappearance, another hand, large, strong, and with the fingers
extended, and pushed bolt up in the moonlight, rose above the
table near to Mr. Home. He cried out. 'Oh! keep me from that
hand! it is so cold! Do not let it touch me!' Shortly it also vanished,
and a third hand was seen at the other side of the vacant table
edge: this hand was in a glove. Then presently a fourth hand
ascended on the extreme left—a lady's hand, of beautiful
proportions—and traversed the entire vacant space from left to
right, rising, and displaying the forearm; and then, as it neared Mr.
Home, the entire arm. When it reached him, the hand was level
with his forehead, upon which it laid its palm, and with its fingers
put his hair back, and played upon his brow for perhaps half a
minute. I was sitting next but one to him, and leant forward

                          IN ENGLAND.                           121

past my intermediate neighbour, at the same time requesting that if
the hand belonged to my friend Mrs. ——, it might also be laid on
my forehead. This was deliberately done; and I felt its thrilling
impression as the palm was laid flat upon my brow, where it
remained for several seconds. It was warm and human, and made
of no material but softest flesh. During the interval in which I felt
it, I had abundant opportunity of examining most closely the arm
and forearm. The forearm sleeve appeared to be of white cambric,
plain and neat, and it shone like biscuit-porcelain in the moonlight.
The sleeve of the dress up the arm was darker, but I do not
remember the colour. And bending over, as I did, to the vacant rim
of the table, I saw how the arm terminated—apparently in a
graceful cascade of drapery; much as though an arm were put out
through the peak of a snowy tent, the apex of which thus fell
around the shoulder on every side. On leaving my forehead, the
arm at once disappeared, and I watched it go. It was drawn into the
same drapery; but so naturally that I can only liken it to a fountain
falling down again, and ceasing into the bosom of the water from
which it rose. And I also saw the drapery itself vanish, apparently
by the same dissipative process. And now the spirits spelt out
'Good night.'

   "These events occurred in the house of one of my oldest friends,
whose superior in integrity I have never known, and of whose
talent and sagacity I never heard a doubt entertained, until he
endorsed these unpopular manifestations.

   "Such is my experience. One hope I have in putting it forward
is, that others who have seen Mr. Home

122                       IN ENGLAND.

may do the like, and thus make their contribution to the facts of the
case.

  "In conclusion, I will observe, that Sir David Brewster, and
others almost as eminent, appear to me to make a scientific error in
one respect—viz., in their estimate of the value of a man's
character. They seem to think that charging a man of good
antecedents, and with every appearance of a blameless life, with
lying and imposture of the most systematic kind, is positively the
easiest account that can be given of any rare phenomenon out of
the pale of their own previous philosophy. I submit that this is not,
for their own credit, the very first hypothesis of the case that ought
to rush into their minds. Neither, parallel with this, is the other
hypothesis that men of ability in all other things, and till then,
known to be shrewd and searching, are infatuated dupes, to be
commended as a proper valuation of what is rare and valuable in
the human species. The rule of law, that" a man must be supposed
innocent till proved guilty," is also the rule in such scientific
explorations. This rule loves facts, and hates slander. I differ,
therefore, with Sir David Brewster in his mode of exploration, and
also in his valuation of presumptive honesty and human testimony,
which always hitherto has been the most substantial word in the
world, and a pillar which Divine Providence has not disdained to
use in supporting the canopy of His Revelations.

  "This rule I would especially press upon the great Sir David
Brewster, a man of position, wealth, worldly repute, great talents,
a name no one dare assail, and withal, responsibility to Heaven
and his generation,

                          IN ENGLAND.                           123

when he is dealing with the orphan, Home, a man apparently as
blameless as himself, but with neither riches, nor health, nor
station, nor any possession if not honesty, and a ruinous
peculiarity of gift. It is not, I say, the easiest way out of a
difficulty, to call this youth a cheat. There are cheats of our own
household, cheats in our own heads, sometimes called prejudices,
which might be suspected first, without violating any rule of
scientific inquest, or humane valuation.

"The experience of others in these matters has, perhaps, differed
very widely from my own, and I desire to see this experience also
brought forward. At other seances I have seen only a part of the
phenomena which I have described as taking place on the three
evenings which I have selected as being the fullest and best. And
once or twice, when persons were present whom it was most
desirable to convince, almost nothing occurred. This, I submit, is
one of the strongest arguments in Mr. Home's favour. Were the
phenomena a trick, they might always be produced to order
without variation. 'The Great Wizard' never fails. But as he himself
says, the spiritualists always fail in his company. Let this suggest
that there is a total difference between him and them. It does not
surprise me that spirits and their gifts should retire to a great gulf
distance from where 'the Great Wizard' is.

  "It seems probable from experience as well as reason that,
granting the phenomena to be spiritual, the presence of determined
scoffers at, and disbelievers in them, should in case the said
persons be preponderant in their influence in the circle, render the
manifestations imperfect or perhaps null. The known laws of

124                       IN ENGLAND.

human sympathy, and the operations of our own spirits when
antipathetic persons are near us, may also be cited in proof of this.
I conclude, then, that to the scoffer and the strongly prejudiced,
who want no evidence, and to whom evidence has no appeal,
evidence is, for the most part, not forthcoming. This simplifies the
position; but what still remains is the peculiar Christian politesse
of this century, viz., the necessity of good manners and the
agreeing to differ. On the part of those who believe, this may be
best secured by letting the other party be. Providence can convince
them, too, as easily as ourselves, when the time and their function
comes, but by snatching at them prematurely before they are ripe,
we may evoke, on a great scale, two of the most formidable spirits
of this world—WRATH and FEAR.

  "As a final remark, let me caution the public against being led
by Sir David Brewster, Mr. Faraday, and other men of great names
in their own departments, in this matter which is obviously not
within their field. We hear much of not choosing Crimean generals
on old Peninsular qualifications. But to select a Faraday or a
Brewster for opinion on this case, is a far worse error; for all
generals, past, present, and to come, are in the military line; but
these great men are not and never were in the line upon which they
have professed to decide. They are so alien to the subject, that they
do not know the first condition of prosecuting it, namely, a gift of
sympathy, and openness to conviction. Their very specialty of
excellence in physical explorations, is against them in this new
walk, which is combined spiritual and physical. The common
observer

                          IN ENGLAND.                            125

with little in his mind, with no repute to support, and no case to
uphold, may perchance be equipped by nature for these
revolutionary sciences where the savans are stupid upon them.
Twelve fishermen, and not the High Priests, are the everlasting
resource of Providence. I therefore invite the unattached laity of all
descriptions, the willing fishermen, to remember that they have no
overmen in this department; that it is an untrodden field; and that
by the grace of God, there is at last a freedom for us all from the
pressure of big names; because 'the race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong.'"

   The admirable narrative and reasoning of this letter leave
nothing further to be said as to the manifestations during the
remainder of my stay in England during the year, as I found it
desirable to change the climate for that of Italy in the autumn. But
I did not leave England without the satisfaction of having given
opportunities to many hundreds of persons to investigate the
phenomena for themselves, and through them the subject began to
assume a form and importance which have made it the fear and the
bugbear of those who had completed their circle of knowledge,
and have no room in their philosophy for further facts. There are
unfortunately many, whose minds have been in early life
stereotyped in too hard and unyielding a material, to admit of
either corrections or additions.

                          CHAPTER V.

            AT FLORENCE, NAPLES, ROME, AND PARIS.

  EARLY in the autumn of 1855 I went to Florence accompanied
by the son of the gentleman with whom I had been residing at
Ealing. I remained in Florence till the mouth of February, 1856,
and although some persons there did all they could to injure me by
false statements, I was only the more cherished by those who best
knew me. I met there many distinguished men and women, and a
Prince of one of the Royal Houses became deeply interested in
what he witnessed. The manifestations while I was at Florence
were very strong. I remember on one occasion while the Countess
O—— was seated at one of Erard's grand action pianos, it rose and
balanced itself in the air during the whole time she was playing.
She also, whilst we were seated at a table in the room, took up an
album which chanced to be lying there, and said, "Now if this is in
reality the spirit of my dear father, I know you would wish to
convince me, you can do so if you will, write your name on this
page." She opened the book and placed it on her knees, and held a
lead pencil in her hand. In a moment the pencil

        AT FLORENCE, NAPLES, ROME, AND PARIS.                   127

was taken out of her hand, and the name of her father, the Count
O——, was written. On examination she said, "There is a slight
resemblance to your writing, but I would wish it to be more
distinct." She placed the open book again on her knees, and again
the writing came in the same way, and also the words, "My dear
daughter ——." This last writing she cut from my album, leaving
in it the words first written, where they still are; and on going
home she showed it to an old friend of her father's, saying, "Do
you know whose writing that is?" "Of course," he said, "it is your
father's." When the Countess told him it had been written that very
evening, he thought that to a certainty she had lost her senses, and
on appealing to her husband, and finding that he corroborated her
statement, he was equally alarmed for them both.

  At the house of an English resident at Florence, I had many
seances at which the power was very great, and she wrote a private
account of some of the phenomena, which will show the reader the
nature and extent of the manifestations at that time. I am very glad
that I am able thus to give the results of the observations of others
rather than my own unsupported statements. The lady says:

  "The house in which I at present reside, and which, for some
years past, has been my home, is a large, rambling, old-fashioned
villa in the neighbourhood of Florence, whose internal architecture
gives evidence of its having been built at different periods—those
periods probably distant from each other.

  "The oldest parts of the house, judging from the ornaments of a
chapel which forms part of it, must, I

128                AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

should say, have been constructed in the early part of the sixteenth
century. The rooms which I occupy are almost immediately above
the chapel, and communicate on one side with the lower part of the
house by a narrow stone staircase. On first coming to reside here
we learned that the villa had, in common with many others of the
same description, the reputation of being haunted. Strange lights it
was said had been seen issuing from the chapel windows, and
unearthly noises heard in that part of the house to which I have
alluded. Some friends passed the winter with us some five or six
years since, and their servant occupied a small room on an entresol
between the chapel and my rooms, but his rest became so broken,
and he described the noises he heard as so peculiar, that he
requested to be allowed to sleep elsewhere. I was formerly much
in the habit of dismissing my maid early, and sitting up either
reading or writing until a late hour. At such times I have been
suddenly seized with a strange fearfulness, a kind of nervous
dread, more easily imagined than described. In fact, it would be
impossible to define my sensations at those moments, further than
by saying that I felt I was no longer alone. This feeling usually
lasted from five to ten minutes, and invariably left a painful
impression on my spirits. I also often heard a peculiar rustling
sound in my room, and around my bed, as though some one were
agitating the bed curtains and this sound was invariably
accompanied as if a door had been suddenly opened, and a strong
current of cold wind had rushed with violence into the room.

  "These sounds and the other painful sensations

                      ROME, AND PARIS.                         129

which I have described, and which I was totally unable to explain,
continued at intervals with greater or lesser degrees of intensity
until the month of October, 1855, when much sensation was
created in Florence by the arrival of Mr. Home, whose reputation
as a spirit medium had rendered him celebrated. A short time after
his arrival in Florence, the sounds in my room became more
distinct and more frequent, and the very peculiar nervous feelings
of which I have spoken, were not confined so exclusively to
myself, but were frequently shared by my sister, if she remained
any time in my room. My rest at length became so broken, and in
consequence my health so impaired, that I had my bed removed
into a room adjoining the one in which I had been in the habit of
sleeping, hoping that the change would bring me quiet.

  "The first night was undisturbed, but the next and succeeding
nights were so painful that I frequently lay awake until morning. In
the meantime, we made Mr. Home's acquaintance, and having
been a witness of effects so wonderful as only to be ascribed to a
supernatural cause, I determined to discover, if possible, through
his agency, the real secret of my haunted rooms.

  "Mr. Home having been invited to make a stay of a few days in
our house, was on the first day of his arrival made acquainted with
the mystery of my rooms, and he proposed that a seance should be
held in them for the purpose of endeavouring to ascertain whether
or not the strange sounds which disturbed me were to be attributed
to supernatural agency. Accordingly about eleven o'clock on that
same evening, my sister, Mr. Home and myself repaired to my
room, and placed

130                AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

ourselves at a small round table in front of, and very near the fire-
place. We were warmly covered, and the fire was blazing brightly;
yet the cold that pervaded the room was intense, penetrating to the
very bones. I should mention that for many previous days, I had
suffered from what appeared to be a cold air which was quite
independent of the atmospheric temperature, blowing over my
body, especially over the lower limbs. This feeling never left me,
and all artificial means failed in destroying the sensation of
chilliness. This same cold air was now felt by both my sister and
Mr. Home to such a degree as to be painful to them also. I have
since found that it is a frequent accompaniment of the
manifestations.

  "Previously to placing himself at the table, Mr. Home had
descended to the chapel, where, however, all was quiet. On
reascending the stairs, he heard a sound as of a muffled bell tolling
in the chapel. We had scarcely sat a moment at the table, when it
began slowly to move about in different directions, generally
inclining towards the side on which I sat. Presently the movements
became more violent, and assumed, if I may be allowed the
expression, an angry appearance. We asked if a spirit were present,
and the table replied by making the three usual affirmative
movements.

   "We then further inquired whether the spirit present were a good
one, and were answered in the negative. We spoke in harsh terms,
which seemed to irritate the spirit, for the demonstrations became
very angry. A high backed old fashioned chair, which stood at a
little distance from the table was suddenly,

                      ROME, AND PARIS.                       131

and without human contact, drawn close to it, as though some one,
in sitting down, had so drawn it. Nothing was, however, visible.
Mr. Home proposed that we should move into the next room, my
bedroom, and try whether any further manifestations would be
made there. We did so: but all remained quiet. We then returned to
the room we had just quitted, and sat down at another table
covered with a cloth. We had previously heard a rustling sound
about, and under the tables, such a sound as would be made by a
person moving about in a heavy garment. This noise was
accompanied by a scratching on the wood of the table, as though
some one were scraping it with his nails. We then distinctly saw
the cloth on the side of the table next to me move up, as though a
hand raised it from beneath. The hand appeared to be in a
menacing attitude. Mr. Home was also often touched on the knee,
and he described the touch as peculiarly strong and disagreeable.

  "We then entreated the spirit to leave us, requiring it should
return on the following evening, and declare its purpose in thus
tormenting us. This it promised, and on being further adjured in
the name of the Holy Trinity to leave us, the demonstrations
ceased.

   "The night was very unquiet. The sensation of cold, of which I
have before spoken, accompanied me every where, and I heard a
frequent scratching under my pillow, and on my bed. On the next
evening we met again in my room, and were joined by two other
persons, one a member of our family, the other, a gentleman
known to Mr. Home, and who was then investigating this
phenomenon, both men of strong nerve

132                AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

and dispassionate judgment. The usual cold was felt, and the table
became much agitated. A small stiletto, which I use as a paper-
knife, was taken from the table as by an invisible hand, and drawn
from the sheath. The table was then lifted from the ground, and
was violently pushed across the room. It stopped opposite a door
leading to the staircase, and we resumed our places.

  "A small hand-bell was taken from off the table, and violently
rung in different directions. The dagger was thrown about under
the table, and rubbed against Mr. Home's knees. My elbow was
violently grasped by a hand, the fingers of which I distinctly
saw—they were long, yellow and shining. Other persons present,
who felt its grasp, described its touch as clammy and horrible. I
spoke gently to the spirit, who, in answer to my questions, said he
was unhappy, and that perhaps I might be of some use to him. He
promised to return and speak farther on the following evening, and
after lifting the table several times high above our heads, he left
us.

   "The whole of the next day I was more or less tormented by the
cold air, which blew over my face and limbs, especially in the
evening, a short time before the hour appointed for the seance.
This wind then became very strong, and again a hand raised the
cloth of the table on which I was leaning, and touched my arm as
if to remind me of my engagement. We repaired to my room, one
member only of my family being present, my sister having
suffered too much from alarm on the previous evening to join us.

  "The demonstrations of the table immediately began,

                           ROME, AND PARIS.                                133

but in a quieter manner than on former occasions. I immediately
spoke (I should say that Italian was the only language used*), in a
soothing manner. In reply to many questions the spirit told me he
was unhappy, and had wandered about the house for many many
years, that his name was Giannana, that he had been, a monk, and
had died in the room which I then occupied. I desired to know
whether I should have masses said for the peace of his soul. He
answered in the negative, but requested that I should pray that it
might find some repose. I further begged him to tell me why on the
previous evening he had made so much use of the little dagger,
and he answered that in life he had but too well known how to
employ it. He then promised me never again to return to my
rooms; and since that evening those painful sensations and strange
noises, of which I have spoken so much, have left me, and never
have returned. Frequent seances, where good and loving spirits
have given us comforting communications, have been since held
by their own especial request in my room. The dagger has by them
been drawn from its sheath, and the bell rung, as though the touch
of holy hands were needful in order to destroy any painful
recollections in my mind connected with these articles, or any
reluctance I might feel to again make use of them. In fact my
rooms seem to have undergone a complete purification, and I feel
that whatever painful influence did once exist

———
  * Here the writer omits a rather curious circumstance. The Italian, she
observed, was incorrectly spelled; but, on afterwards comparing it with the state
of the language in the sixteenth century, it was found to be correct.

134                 AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

there, it has disappeared wholly, and I trust for ever."

  The above was written shortly after the strange event it records.
On the 3rd of April, 1860, being then in London, I received a letter
from the same lady, dated Florence, 27th March, of which the
following is an extract:

  "I believe I told you that the noises at the Villa are worse than
ever, and the new proprietor is dreadfully disturbed by them. The
house has been exorcised, but without effect. My own rooms are
the most disturbed."

  On the 5th of December, 1855, whilst I was returning to my
rooms late at night in Florence, the streets being deserted, I
observed a man stepping from the doorway of the adjoining house.
I was on the step leading to my own door, and was looking up at
the window to see if the servant was still up, when I received a
violent blow on my left side, the force of which and the emotion
caused by it, threw me forward breathless in the corner of the
doorway. The blow was again repeated on my stomach, and then
another blow on the same place, and the attempted assassin cried
out, "Dio mio, Dio mio," and turning with his arm outstretched, he
ran. I distinctly saw the gleam of his poignard, and as he turned,
the light of the lamp also fell full on his face, but I did not
recognise his features. I was perfectly powerless, and could not cry
out or make any alarm, and I stood thus for at least two minutes
after which I groped my way along the wall to the door of a
neighbour, where I was admitted. I thought I must have received
some serious injury,

                      ROME, AND PARIS.                         135

but on examining myself I found that the first blow had struck the
door key, which I happened to have in my breast pocket,
immediately over the region of my heart. I wore a fur coat, and
this had chanced to be twice doubled in front. The second blow
had gone through the four folds of it, through a corner of my dress
coat, my waistcoat, and the band of my trousers, without inflicting
any wound. The third blow had penetrated the four folds of my
coat, and also my trowsers and linen, and made a slight incision,
which bled, but not freely.

   I had that morning received from a dear friend, who had in his
house a clairvoyant of remarkable powers, a letter begging me not
to go out that evening, as she had received a warning of impending
danger, but to this I paid no attention. I never discovered the
perpetrator, nor the cause of my life being attacked. Many reasons
were assigned, amongst them robbery, mistaken identity, and
religious intolerance.

  In the month of January, Signor Landucci, then Minister of the
Interior to the Grand. Duke of Tuscany, sent to me to request that I
would not walk about the house at night between the lights and the
window, or go out in the streets in the day time, giving as a reason
that some of my enemies had been playing upon the superstitions
of the peasantry, and telling them that it was my practice to
administer the seven sacraments of the Catholic church to toads, in
order by spells and incantations to raise the dead. This had so
enraged and excited them that they were fully bent on

136                AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

taking my life, and for that purpose were concealed about the
neighbourhood with fire arms.

   I met at this time a Polish nobleman, who with his family was
about to visit Naples and Rome, and who most kindly pressed me
to accompany them. I was left in Florence without money, and my
friends in England having their credulity imposed upon by some
scandalmongers, and thinking me to be leading a most dissolute
life, refused to send me even money of my own which had been
entrusted to their care. I told the Count B—— that I would travel
with him, and the very day I gave this assent, the spirits told me
that my power would leave me for a year. This was on the evening
of the 10th of February, 1856. Feeling that the Count and his
family must have felt an interest in me, arising only from the
singular phenomena which they had witnessed in my presence, and
that this cause being removed, their interest in me would have
diminished, I wrote the following morning to inform them of what
I was told, and to say that I could no longer entertain the idea of
joining them. They at once told me that it was for myself, even
more than for the strange gift I possessed, that they had become
interested in me. I went to them, and in a day or two we left
Florence for Naples. While here, although my powers had left me,
still my presence seemed to develope the power in others; for I
met, at his own residence, the Hon. Robert Dale Owen, who was
the American Minister to the Court of Naples, and it was in the
presence of one of the Royal Princes of that family, himself a
medium, that he was first convinced. Mr. Owen has since written a
most able and carefully

                       ROME, AND PARIS.                         137

arranged book of authentic facts, entitled, "Footfalls on the
Boundaries of another World," in which he has brought together
both the facts and the philosophy of this great subject. We
remained in Naples nearly six weeks, and then proceeded to Rome.
Here in the absence of the power, my mind sought in the natural
world for that consolation—which it had hitherto found in the
spiritual, and now this being withdrawn, life seemed to me a blank.
I read with intense eagerness all the books I could find relating to
the doctrines of the Romish church, and finding them expressive
of so many facts which I had found coincident in my own
experience, I thought that all contending and contradictory beliefs
would be for ever set at rest, could I but be received as a member
of that body. My experiences of life and its falsity had already left
so indelible a mark on my soul, from my recent experiences of it at
Florence, that I wished to shun every thing which pertained to this
world, and I determined to enter a monastery.

  After two or three weeks of serious deliberations on the part of
the authorities, it was decided that I should be received as a
member of the church, and I was confirmed. The Princess O——
was my godmother, and the Count B—— my godfather on, the
occasion. I was most kindly received by the Pope, who questioned
me much regarding my past life. He pointed to a crucifix which
stood near to us, and said, "My, child, it is upon what is on that
table that we place our faith." He also gave me a large silver
medal, which it has since been my misfortune to lose.

  It has since been frequently said of me that at this

138                AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

interview with the Pope, I had promised him that I would not have
any more manifestations; but it is hardly necessary, after what I
have narrated, to say that I could not have made any such promise,
nor did he ask any such promise to be made.

  In June, 1856, I went to Paris, and as I had been advised to do
by the Pope, I sought the counsel of the Pere de Ravignan, one of
the most learned and excellent men of the clay. The purpose of my
remaining in France was to acquire a facility in the language.
During the winter I again fell ill, and Dr. Louis, one of the most
celebrated physicians in France for consumptive cases, decided on
auscultation that my left lung was diseased, and advised a more
genial climate. This could not, however, be accomplished, and for
some time I was confined to my bed. The time was fast drawing
nigh when the year would expire, during which my power was to
be suspended. The Pere de Ravignan always assured me that as I
was now a member of the Catholic church it would not return to
me. For myself I had no opinion on the subject, as I was quite
without data except his assurance on the point.

   On the night of the 10th of February, 1857, as the clock struck
twelve, I was in bed, to which I had been confined, when there
came loud rappings in my room, a hand was placed gently upon
my brow, and a voice said, "Be of good cheer, Daniel, you will
soon be well." But a few minutes had elapsed Wore I sank into a
quiet sleep, and I awakened in the morning feeling more refreshed
than I had done for a long time. I wrote to the Pere de Ravignan,
telling him what had occurred, and the same afternoon he came to
see me.

                       ROME, AND PARIS.                         139

During the conversation loud rappings were heard on the ceiling
and on the floor, and as he was about to give me his benediction
before leaving, loud raps came on the bedstead. He left me without
expressing any opinion whatever on the subject of the phenomena.

   The following clay I had sufficiently, recovered to take a drive,
and on Friday the 13th, I was presented to their Majesties at the
Tuileries, where manifestations of an extraordinary nature
occurred. The following morning, I called on the Pere de Ravignan
to inform him of this. He expressed great dissatisfaction at my
being the subject of such visitations, and said that he would not
give me absolution unless I should at once return to my room, shut
myself up there, and not listen to any rappings, or pay the slightest
attention to whatever phenomena might occur in my presence. I
wished to reason with him, and to explain that I could not prevent
myself from hearing and seeing, for that God having blessed me
with the two faculties, it was not in my power to ignore them. As
for shutting myself up, I did not think, from my having before tried
the experiment, that it was consistent with my nervous
temperament, and that the strain on my system would be too great
if I were thus isolated. He would not listen to me, and told me I
had no right to reason," Do as I bid you, otherwise bear the
consequences." I left him in great distress of mind. I wished not to
be disobedient, and yet I felt that God is greater than man, and that
He having bestowed the power of reason on me, I could not see
why I should be thus deprived of it. On reaching my room, I found
there a very dear and valued

140                AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

friend, the Count do K——. He observed my agitation, and
questioned me as to the cause. I told him all, and he said, "There is
but one thing to do, come home with me, and we will send for the
Abbe de C——, and consult him." The Abbe came, and after
hearing my story, he said, "That they might as well put me in my
grave alive, as to carry out what had been ordered," adding, "I
would like very much to witness some of these wonderful things."
Most fortunately my emotion had not destroyed the power, as is
usually the case when I am agitated, for while we were together
several interesting phenomena occurred. His words were, "Let this
power be what it will, it is in no way of your making." He
recommended me to seek another spiritual adviser, and added, "I
myself would gladly be your adviser, but as it would be known, I
should only be persecuted." He gave me the name of one of the
most eloquent preachers of the day, and I introduced myself to
him, and remained under his guidance during the few weeks of my
stay in Paris previous to my going to America to bring back my
sister. During my absence, the curiosity had become very great to
find out who was my confessor, and the Countess I——, having
heard that he was a distinguished man, called upon several of the
most noted in Paris, and after a short conversation, she abruptly
said to each, "So you are Mr. Home's confessor." Most naturally
on one such occasion, she chanced to find the right one, and his
look of surprise betrayed him. His surprise was that I should have
revealed his name, and this he expressed to the Countess, who told
him that I had not betrayed him, but that she had

                        ROME, AND PARIS.                          141

used that artifice to ascertain the fact. This was the cause of my not
continuing with him longer as my confessor.

  The extract I here give is one from the recently published life of
the great confessor, the Pere de Ravignan, who had been
recommended to me by the Pope, and I can only regret he is no
longer here to contradict, with his own pen, the false statements
concerning me, made by his biographer, the Jesuit Father A. de
Ponlevoy. At the termination of Chapter XXIV, this person says,"
We could not close this chapter without making mention of that
famous American medium, who had the sad talent of turning other
things than the tables, and invoking the dead to amuse the living.
A great deal has been said, even in the papers, of his acquaintance,
religiously and intimately, with Father de Ravignan, and they have
seemed to wish, under the passport of a creditable name, to
introduce and establish in France these fine discoveries of the New
World. Here is the fact in all its simplicity. It is very true, that the
young foreigner, after his conversion in Italy, was recommended
from Rome to the Father de Ravignan, but at that period, in
abjuring Protestantism, he also repudiated magic, and he was
received with that interest that a priest owes to every soul
ransomed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and more, perhaps, to a
soul which has been converted, and brought to the bosom of the
church. On his arrival in Paris, all his old practices were again
absolutely forbidden. The Father de Ravignan, according to all the
principles of the faith, which forbids superstition, forbade under
the most severe penalties he could inflict,

142                 AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

that he should be an actor in, or even witness of these dangerous
scenes, which are sometimes criminal. One day the unhappy
medium, tempted by I know not what, man or demon, violated his
Promise; he was retaken with a rigour which overwhelmed him.
Coming in then by chance I saw him rolling on the ground, and
drawing himself like a worm to the feet of the priest who was in
saintly anger. The Father, however, touched by his convulsive
repentance, lifted him up, forgave him, and sent him away, after
having exacted, by writing this time, a promise under oath. But
soon there was backsliding which made much noise (rechute
eclatante), and the servant of God, breaking off with this slave of
the spirits, had him told never again to appear in his presence."

   If the rest of the book be no more truthful than this statement, it
is certainly not worth reading. The good Father de Ravignan well
knew that I was not an American, and that this power had began
with me before I ever saw America, for I had told him all my
history. He also knew that I never invoked the spirits. No good
name is, or ever will be, required to introduce, or accredit a God-
given truth, and I knew far too well the power of facts to think that
they required the passport of even Father Ravignan's name. His
biographer must have had a limited education too, both religious
and historical, to write of these things as being the" fine
discoveries" of the New World, for they are to be readily traced in
every age and country of the world of which we have any record
or history preserved to us. It is perfectly untrue that I ever abjured
any magical, or other processes, for I never knew anything

                       ROME, AND PARIS.                          143

of such, and therefore I could not abjure them. The Father de
Ravignan used to say to me, when I told him that the spirits had
said they would return to me on the 10th of February, 1857,
"There is no fear of that, my child, so long as you go on as you are
now doing, observing carefully all the sacraments of our holy
church; they will not be allowed to return." I followed out his
injunctions most conscientiously; but on the very day promised,
they came as I have described, and told me they were glad to find
me in so pure a state of mind, as it greatly facilitated their
approach. I never yet violated any promise to my knowledge, and
as to the biographer coming in and finding me rolling on the
ground, and crawling like a worm, it is an entire falsehood. But
had it even been true, it would not have been the place of a priest
to make such a thing public. If I took an oath, and wrote it down as
alleged, that writing will have been kept. Let it be forthcoming to
save the character of this Father A. de Ponlevoy, that he may prove
the truth of the statement he makes. In the meantime, I say that it is
without even any foundation of truth. The last time I saw the good
Father de Ravignan, I would only reason with him, for as I then
said to him, no man had a right to forbid that which God gave. I
left him without confessing even, so I had not been on my knees at
all, much less crawling like a worm.

  As I have said, when the Abbe C—— came to see me, the
conversation I had with him only tended to strengthen me in my
opinion of what was right, for when priests are not agreed as
touching such a matter, whom or what are we to rely on, if not on
the reason

144                AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

God has given us. The Father de Ravignan Dever had me informed
that he would not see me again. On the contrary, it was I who said
I would not go to him till he would reason with me. I have letters
of his to me in my possession, which will shew the kind feeling he
ever had for me previous to this period, and I am well assured in
my own mind, that he never said aught against me, even when I no
longer saw him. He was so good, so pure, and so high minded, that
I would that he had had a more truthful and honest chronicler to
write his life.

  The Countess I—— was herself a firm believer in the
manifestations which she had frequently witnessed in my,
presence, and she was also present when I had a vision which is
described in one of the Paris papers in the following words:

   "The recent failure of Mr. Thurneyssen recalls to us a strange
fact that signalized the sojourn of Mr. Home in Paris during the
last winter. The Countess —— had a dozen years ago a strange
hallucination. One evening being busy with some embroidery,
alone with her brother, he was reading to her one of the most
irreligious books of the eighteenth century. As she listened
mechanically to his reading, she raised her head, and looking at
her brother she was struck with terror at the sight of the strange
expression of his face. He was ordinarily a most gentle,
benevolent, and sympathetic young man, with calm, quiet features,
but at that moment they were frightfully contracted, the eye-brows
singularly convulsed, the eyes wide open, the corners of the mouth
distorted by a bitter and despairing smile, and altogether he had
the peculiar expression

                      ROME, AND PARIS.                         145

which painters would give to a fallen angel. The frightened
Countess had immediately, as it were a thought revealed to her,
(for she never previously dreamed of the possibility of such a
thing), she was convinced that her brother was possessed by a
demon. Frequently afterwards she saw the same infernal
expression on the face of her brother, even when he was most calm
and happy; but the idea was so horrible to her that she never
mentioned the circumstance. Last winter Mr. Home was
introduced to the Countess. Being at her house one evening, and in
his usual quiet frame of mind, his attention was drawn to a
beautiful marble bust. He was not aware of its being that of the
brother of the Countess, but immediately his whole visage
changed, and he became in a state of most violent agitation. The
Countess much alarmed inquired why he was so affected, when
Mr. Home replied, 'Madame, the man whose bust this is, is
possessed with a demon.' One may judge of the astonishment of
the Countess on hearing Mr. Home say what she had thought
twelve years before. She pressed him with questions, and he,
recovering from his emotion, rose and went to examine the bust
more closely, then turning to the Countess he said, 'In a short time
your brother will have a great misfortune, and this misfortune will
deliver him from his enemies.'

  "And so it has occurred, the Count de P—— has lost in the
bankruptcy of M. Thurneyssen a considerable part of his fortune.
The prophecy came four months previous to the failure. Could it
have been that the spirits saw the dishonesty of Thurneyssen? if so
this might account why certain persons are so ready

146                AT FLORENCE, NAPLES,

to oppose all communication with the other world, preferring the
darkness to the light."

  The day previous to my leaving Paris, a wonderful case of
healing occurred through me in the manner which I will now
relate.

   On the 19th of March, 1857, when I was residing at 13, Rue des
Champs Elysees, I received a letter from a stranger to me,
Madame A. Mavoisin de Cardonne, of 233, Rue St. Dominique,
St. Germain, stating that she had had a dream, in which she had
seen her own mother and mine, and that the latter had told her to
seek me at once, in order that her son, who had been deaf for four
years from the effects of typhoid fever, might be cured. This was
so strongly impressed upon her mind, that she wrote to me to say
that she would call upon me with her son, the following morning
at ten.

   Accordingly the next morning she presented herself with her son
at my rooms, there being present the Princess de B—— and Miss
E——, who were with me, previous to my leaving Paris that very
clay, to proceed on my voyage to America. I had been so
overwhelmed by persons wishing to see me that I had uniformly
refused such visits; but on this occasion I had been so much pre-
occupied by my engagements in preparing for my voyage, that I
had not been able to acknowledge her letter, or to write to her
either in the affirmative or negative. I therefore received her with
considerable embarrassment, which was fully reciprocated on her
part. It was indeed an embarrassing meeting for both of us, the
mother yearning for

                       ROME, AND PARIS.                         147

her son's recovery, and I, not knowing how I was expected to be
instrumental in healing this long total deafness; the more so that
operations had been performed on the boy, as I afterwards found,
by eminent surgeons of Paris, who had said that it was impossible
he should ever be restored to hearing.

   She sat down on a chair near a sofa, I taking a seat on the sofa,
and beckoning the son to be seated on my left. The son was in his
fifteenth year, tall for his age, of a delicate complexion, with large
dreamy blue eyes that looked as if they would supply the place of
hearing, with their deep, thoughtful, enquiring gaze. The mother
began her description of the boy's illness, commencing with the
attack of the fever, and ending in the entire loss of hearing. During
the recital, told with all the warmth and tenderness of a mother's
heart, and describing the various surgical operations to which he
had been subjected, my sympathies were deeply moved, and I had
unwittingly thrown my left arm about the boy and drawn him
towards me, so that the boy's head rested upon my shoulder.
Whilst in this position, and Madame de Cardonne was telling some
of the most painful particulars, I passed my hand caressingly over
the boy's head, upon which he, partly lifting his head, suddenly
exclaimed in a voice trembling with emotion, "Maman, je
t'entends!" (Mamma, I hear you!) The mother fixed on him a look
of astonishment, and said, "Emile," the boy's name, and he at once
replied, "Quoi?" (What?) She then, seeing that the child had heard
her question, fainted with emotion, and on her recovery the scene
was a most

148    AT FLORENCE, NAPLES, ROME, AND PARIS.

thrilling one—the poor mother asking continually questions for the
mere pleasure of hearing her child reply. The boy was able to
resume his studies, and has continued to hear perfectly up to the
present time.

                           CHAPTER VI.

                   IN AMERICA. THE PRESSGANG.

  ON reaching America, I found that the American press had been
publishing some ridiculous paragraphs about me, one of which
was of a practical joke said to have been perpetrated by General
Baraguay d'Hilliers and others in the presence of the Emperor, and
that I myself had become greatly alarmed, and finally very angry
on discovering the trick. The whole was a fabrication, as will be
seen, for at that time I had never even seen either of the three
gentlemen who were said to be actors in it. The following
paragraph was, also, of the same character, as I had not then met
M. Dumas.

  "Home, the table-turner and magnetiser, who has of late caused
such attention in Paris, has predicted to M. Alexandre Dumas that
he would live to the age of 113 years, and be killed in a duel."

  The following is another specimen of a similar kind.

  "Mr. Home, the medium who has made such a sensation in
Paris, is on his way to this country, to visit his sister. He has been
offered marriage by a lady of immense wealth, but has refused
her."

150                       IN AMERICA.

  The" New York Herald," a paper better known for its
untruthfulness than otherwise, published letters from its special
correspondents at Paris, stating" from the most reliable sources,"
that I had stolen £230,000, and was now for ever banished from
France. I had at that very moment my return ticket in my pocket,
and knew that an Imperial Prince, then on a visit to the Emperor
was awaiting my return. Indeed, if the public judged of my life
from what the newspapers said of me, they must have been greatly
puzzled by the statements and contradictions which successively
appeared. I was quite content to leave both without notice, and I
have never been at the pains to set them right. The following
notice is of the same class as the preceding.

  "The 'Independance Belge' states that Napoleon sent away Mr.
Home, the American spirit-rapper, because the Empress was so
much affected that the Emperor dreaded the continuance of the
diabolical scenes. The ladies of honour were equally excited and
could talk of nothing else. It is said that Home was quartered in the
royal household, and was paid at the rate of £40,000 pounds per
year."

  The "Hartford Courant," states:

  "The 'Times' says that Daniel Dunglas Home, the famous
medium, whose performances are so peculiar as to utterly baffle
the most acute and sagacious minds, and who is a gentleman of
education and character quite out of the range of the common
mediums, was in this city last Saturday. We regard him as the most
remarkable man living; and no man who has not witnessed what is
done in Home's presence, can claim a right to

                       THE PRESSGANG.                           151

give an opinion on Spiritualism. Mr. Home says the jokes of the
newspaper correspondents about him are entirely untrue. He had
some sittings at the Tuileries, but declined conversation on that
subject."

  Another paper, "The Springfield Republican," noticed my
presence in America as follows:

  "Home, the distinguished spiritual medium, who has recently
been raising spirits in the presence of the Emperor Napoleon, is in
Springfield on a brief visit. He will return to France shortly, where
his services are in great request among the savans."

  A New York paper gave the following account, correcting some
of the misstatements about me:

  "What terrible gossipers some of our letter writers are. The New
York Editor of the 'London Letter,' in the last 'Sunday Times,' has
the following paragraph: 'It is whispered, in Paris, that Home, the
American spirit-rapper, was producing so much mischief in the
Court that he was ordered off by the alarmed Emperor; and the
fellow who, though playing the part of a personage with £40,000 a
year, was really penniless, has left for the country of the rappers.'

  "Possibly it may interest some of our readers to know something
of Mr. Home, who has lately afforded a prolific subject to
paragraph makers. We have nothing to say as to his 'spiritual'
belongings here, but simply speak of the lad—for he is scarcely
more, being but twenty-two years old now—in reference to such
reports as the above. Home, the 'American,' is of an old Scottish
family of standing, and was born in Scotland, but brought very
young to this country. Quiet and unobtrusive in his manners, he
never has thrust

152                       IN AMERICA.

himself forward, nor specially sought nor avoided the notoriety
which attends him; never has exhibited himself as a public
medium, as many suppose, but has simply suffered events to take
their course with him.
  "As to the above story of his quitting Paris, which has gone the
rounds, in various shapes, we have only to say, that some two
Sundays since, while reading from the English papers an account
of his doings in Paris, and supposing him snugly ensconced in the
Tuileries, the door opened, and to our astonishment, in walked Mr.
Home, to take dinner 'at home'—it being under our own roof that,
some six years since, at the age of sixteen, he found his first
shelter in New York (Brooklyn), a temporary refuge from
horrorstricken relatives, who had turned the 'rapper' adrift as being
'possessed of a devil;' thus starting him as a young martyr at least,
whether deservedly so or not.
   "He told us of his arriving a day or two before, at Philadelphia,
and stated what he had come for, and when he was going back. He
has accomplished his errand—part of which was to obtain his
sister, with whom he sailed from Boston, a few days since, on his
return to Paris.
   "So much for the 'mischief' and the 'alarmed Emperor,' who
'ordered him off,' a story made of the same bit of cloth as the
Socrates joke by Baraguay d'Hilliers and others."

  Whilst on the subject of these newspaper inventions, I may as
well allude to a curious series of them which occurred in 1858. I
had then left Paris for Rome, on account of my health, and on the
13th of March, the following telegraphic dispatch reached me
there from

                       THE PRESSGANG.                           153

a friend in Paris," Tell me immediately if you are still at Rome. I
have a request to make." I replied that I was still at Rome, and in
course of post I received a letter of the 14th March, as follows:

  "Dear Friend.—I sent you yesterday a telegraphic dispatch that
you might write to me at once if you were at Rome. I made pretext
of having a commission to ask you to do; but it was in reality only
to have, a letter from you as soon as possible. Scandal says you
have been arrested, and the Hague papers say that you are in
prison at Mazas. Monsieur B——, whose son is a medium, has
sent to know the truth, and I have authorized him to publish that I
have a letter from you, bearing date of Rome the 7th of March. I
have also sent to inform 'La Patrie,' that a stop may be put to these
base calumnies. I trust you will approve of what I have done."

  The Parisian papers took up the report, and it was confirmed by
them that I was truly in prison at Mazas. Persons even in official
positions told my friends that they had seen and spoken to me in
that prison, and one, an officer, went so far as to state that he had
accompanied me there in the carriage.

  Being at Rome, and altogether unaware of all this scandal which
was passing about me, I had felt forcibly impressed, I knew not
why, to write to M. Henri Delage, the well known mystic writer of
Paris. I did so, and it will be observed by the following paragraph
introducing my letter, how very opportunely my impression

154                       IN AMERICA.

had been given, and how well I had acted in following it out.

  Paris correspondent of "Le Nord."
                                                  "Paris, 17th March.
  "Allow me to begin by a good action; it is to free an honourable
man from calumnies, arising from what source I know not, but
which for the past few days have been rapidly spreading. I speak
of Mr. Home, who is, for the moment, in Italy, whereas it is
whispered both secretly and openly that he is in the prison of
Mazas, for we know not what crimes. The letter here given, dated
Rome, 7th of March, was received yesterday by M. Henri Delage,
an intimate friend of Mr. Home. The letter is there before me with
the postal mark, and I will give you his literal words:

                                           "'Rome, March 7th, 1858.
   "'Dear M. Delage,—You were without doubt much surprised to
hear of my departure for Italy; but the truth is I was very ill. I had
an impoverishment of the blood, so what could I do. My power
had quite left me. The dear spirits thought me too ill to see
strangers. Here in Rome I go but little into society, a complete rest
being necessary. Write to me soon, and will you kindly remember
me to M. H——, you know I like him very much.
                                                   "'Yours faithfully,
                                                      "' D. D. Home.'

  "I beg of you to give the publicity of your well known journal to
this letter of Mr. Home. It being

                       THE PRESSGANG.                           155

the best reply which can be given to those base calumnies which
attack his honour."

  I well know the origin and cause, of this intrigue and I have in
my possession a friendly letter, bearing date the 18th July, 1868,
from the Bureau du Ministre de l'Interieur, which is a sufficient
refutation of the wicked calumny. His Highness the Prince Murat
also made it the occasion of proving to me not only the Christian
principles which actuated him, but also the true nobleness of his
heart, in doing for a comparative stranger, that which a father
alone could be expected to do for a son. He, at his own expense,
sent persons to Germany, to Italy, and to England, to ascertain the
foundation of such a libel, and generously gave me his public and
private testimony to its entire untruth.

   I have now to present the following letter, and the enclosed
programme, which I also received while at Rome, and which
disclose a case of personation, which is by no means either the
first or the last of that kind which I could give. It is, however, an
amusing specimen of them.

                                                  "Paris, April 7th.
  "Dear friend,—I send you a programme taken from one of the
Lyons papers, that was sent to M. Allen Kardec. What a shame to
think such an imposition should be allowed in your name. I would
advise you to write at once to the Prefect of Lyons, or to the
police, that the villain should be unmasked as soon as possible, not
only for the wrong he does to your name, but also to the cause of
spiritualism. Do not allow a

156                      IN AMERICA.

moment to pass, and we on our side will do all we can. Only think
of the audacity in daring to say that he had been received by the
Emperor.
                                                  "I am, &c., &c.

  "P.S.—I have this moment heard that the imposture was at once
discovered, and he has fled from Lyons."

  I give the original programme, with an English translation.

  *"Salle du Grand Theatre. Jeudi, Avril 1, 1858, a huit heures.
Soiree Americaine ou Seance de Spiritualisme de H. Home.
  "'Je ne me guide jamais d'apres la science, mais d'apres ma
conscience; je crois done fortement aux faits magnetiques, je crois
quo la force magnetique augmente prodigieusement la force de
vision de l'homme; je crois que ces faits sont constates par un
certain nombre d'hommes tressinceres et tres-chretiens.'—L'ABBE
LACORDAIRE.
  "Programme: Experience de vision par M. Home et l'Ange
miraculeux.—Obeissance a l'ordre du public.—Seance de
spiritualisme par la sensitive Mme. de Cabanyes.
  "Production des visions demandees par les spectateurs
Fremissement, Joie, Colere, Idiotisme, Piete, Multiplication des
sens, Augmentation et diminution des forces.
  "Reproduction de plusieurs de ces phenomenes sur des jeunes
gens que le public est prie de presenter.
  "M. Home, qui a eu l'honneur de faire ses experiences devant Sa
Majeste' l'empereur, invite MM. les

                        THE PRESSGANG.                           157

medecins, docteurs, chirurgiens, etc., etc., a monter pres de lui sur
la scene, afin de controler la veracite des phenomenes curieux qu'il
a l'honneur d'offrir au Public. Des sieges seront disposes a cet
effet.
   "Prix des places: Premieres loges, fauteuils et stalles, 6 fr. (sans
augmentation pour la location a l'avance);premieres galeries, 5
fr.;—secondes, 3 fr.;—parterre, 2 fr. 50 c.;—troisiemes, 1 fr. 60
c.;—quatriemes, 1 fr."
  "At the Great Theatre, Thursday, 1st of April, 1858,
commencing at eight o'clock, American Soirgee or Seance of
Spiritualism, by Mr. Home.
  "''I never allow myself to be guided by science, but by my
conscience. I therefore believe firmly in the facts of magnetism. I
believe that the magnetic force augments prodigiously the power
of man's vision. I believe that these facts are certified by a certain
number of men very sincere and very christian.'—THE ABBE
LACORDAIRE.

  "Programme: The vision experience of Mr. Home, and the
miraculous angel.—Obedience to the order of the public.—
Spiritual seance by, the sensitive Mme. de Cabanyes.
  "Production of visions asked for by the spectators: Tremblings,
Joy, Anger, Idiotcy, Religion, Piety, Multiplication of the senses,
Augmentation and diminution of strength.
 "Reproduction of several of those phenomena on young persons,
whom the public are requested to introduce.

158                        IN AMERICA.
  "Mr. Home, who has had the honour to go through his
experiences before His Majesty, the Emperor, invites the Doctors
of Philosophy and others, also Surgeons, &c., &c. to sit near him
on the stage to satisfy themselves as to the truth of the curious
phenomena which he has the honour to present to the public.
Chairs will be arranged for that purpose.
  "Price of places: First boxes, fauteuils and stalls, 6 frs, (no extra
charge for booking); first gallery, 5 frs.; second, 3 frs.; pit, 2 frs.
60 c.: third places, 1 fr. 50 c.; fourth, fr."
  This was contradicted by the Paris papers, which gave only as a
reason that I was in Turin, whilst at the time it happened that I was
really at Naples.
  But it would be wrong to confine these falsehoods to the press
of America or France, when the English press vied with them in
fabricating and dispensing equally false statements about me. The
Socrates story was from the forge of the "Court Journal" and was
disseminated through a great part of the English press. No wonder
that with such teaching there should be misconception about me,
and about the phenomena. I can only say that the whole of the
following statements, names, dates, circumstances and persons are
false from beginning to end.
   Extraordinary Spirit Affair in Paris. Singular and Successful
                   Hoax on the Spiritualists.
  Mr. Home, the all-hearing, all-seeing spirit-rapper, is gone
suddenly, without warning. Many stories are afloat respecting the
cause of this abrupt departure

                       THE PRESSGANG.                           159

amid such striking success, when Paris was just filled with his
renown, and even from the pulpit had threats and warnings been
launched forth against those who dared to frequent his company,
or believe in his incantations. Some newspapers have declared that
he is gone to America in search of his sister, whom he pronounces
a more powerful medium than himself; others that, in consequence
of some of his tricks having assumed the character of tours de
passe-passe, he had been forbidden to practise his deceptive arts
upon the high personages whom he had chosen, on pain of proces-
verbal: and that the metamorphosis of the Princess Mathilde's
pocket-handkerchief into a living scarabeus—after which exploit
the practitioner had fallen into catalepsy, and remained senseless
for five hours—had awakened certain scruples and suspicions in
the minds of those who had witnessed the feat, which had caused
his exclusion from that circle of society. Nothing of all this is the
case, and your readers may be assured of the truth of what we are
about to relate, and of the adventure being the whole and sole
cause of the abrupt departure of the discomfited wizard.

   "A few nights ago a grand seance had been prepared for him at
the house of one of the principal officials about the Court, who had
witnessed the divers experiments made at the Tuileries, and which,
although failing to convince him entirely, had yet not left him
wholly incredulous. The company was limited, and of the first
water. The names had all been submitted to the practitioner—those
of Eugene Guinot, the feuilletoniste: General Baraguay d'Hilliers;
and Nadaud,

160                       IN AMERICA.

the composer; all of them atrocious unbelievers, wretched infidels,
and scoffers, wholly devoid of all sensibility or imagination.
Numerous were the experiments tried, and all, as usual, eminently
successful. The accordion glided, as usual, from knee to knee, all
round the circle, and played the tunes most loved by the inquirers;
the bell wandered round the ceiling, and rang, its merry peal or
tolled its doleful note, according to the will of any member of the
company who chose to command it. But the wizard had promised
that night to evoke the spirits and render them visible to the sight,
and every preliminary experiment was attended to with
impatience, so great was the hurry to witness the crowning
masterpiece of the performance. At length the lights were all
extinguished but one, a solitary wax taper on the mantel-piece,
behind the figure of the practitioner, which cast its long, gigantic
shadow on the walls and ceiling of the room. The silence was
complete; some of the ladies crouched behind their neighbours,
and resisted the temptation to faint only by reason of their
curiosity; others stared around, hoping, yet dreading, to see
something awful and terrific, that they would be driven to
hysterics. The voice of the wizard was heard, amid the silence,
demanding whose spirit should be summond to appear. A faint
whisper, from a distant corner, thrilled through the room—"Let it
be Socrates, the greatest of philosophers!" A pause ensued—no
objection or opposition being manifested, the wizard raised his
arm, and waving it towards the door, solemnly bade the spirit of
Socrates appear and stand before him. Again the silence was
resumed, and the wizard remained, with extended arm

                       THE PRESSGANG.                         161

and muttering lips, gazing towards the door. It slowly opened; and,
amid the utmost terror, the company beheld the entrance of a
figure, enveloped in a kind of floating drapery, something like a
winding—sheet, which advanced with noiseless tread over the
carpet, and stood before the conjuror. The white and flowing
beard, the bald head and crushed nose were unmistakable—
Socrates stood, as in life, in the very midst of that gay and
frivolous circle, evoked from his slumber of centuries to furnish
sport for a Parisian salon! The awe and terror of the company was
at its highest, and the figure glided back in silence while yet the
effect produced was at its culminating point. When it had
disappeared, compliments, of course, poured in upon the operator,
who, shaken to the very fingers' ends, could not help expressing
his surprise at the unusual promptitude with which the summons
had been answered, and, full of the excitement of unlooked for
success, yielded to the entreaties of the same voice which had
spoken before, and which now implored the evocation of Frederick
the Great. The wizard again stretched forth his hand towards the
door, although doubtful if his electric current would be strong
enough to accomplish two evocations so rapidly one after the
other. He was observed, however, even in the dim light of the
apartment, to turn deadly pale as the door again opened at his
summons, when, he called aloud for Frederick the Great, King of
Prussia, to appear before him. The moment's pause was truly
awful. By degrees, amid the shadows of the room could be seen
gliding through the door-way, a short figure, wrapped, like the one
which had preceded it, in a kind of winding-sheet

162                       IN AMERICA.

clinging to its limbs, and held around the waist by the grasp of the
hands. The face, however, was undeniably that of the great hero,
and the head surmounted by the little traditional cocked hat which
makes every Prussian heart beat with gratitude and loyalty even to
this day. The figure advanced as that of Socrates had done before,
close up to the magician, and there stood still and motionless
within a few paces of the chimney. Presently, the excitement of the
magician became intense, the perspiration roiled in huge drops
from his "forehead, and the teeth chattered. "Enough, enough—
begone, depart!" said he, in a hoarse whisper, as the eyes of the
figure glared upon him with a fierce and menacing expression.
"Begone I say!" repeated he, in a, hollow tone, as the figure still
stood motionless in spite of the command. In another moment,
however, the spell was broken. Rousing himself by an effort
which, considering the circumstances in which he was placed, may
be regarded as sublime, he suddenly exclaimed," I have been made
the dupe of some mystification," and stepped close to the figure,
which had still retained its menacing attitude until that moment,
when a loud and uncontrollable laugh burst from its lips, and it
exclaimed:" What! don't you know me? I am Nadaud, and here is
my friend, Socrates, otherwise Marshal Baraguay d'Hilliers, ready
to appear again whenever you choose, and close at hand is my
comrade, Eugene Guinot in life, and Alcibiades in death, waiting
to be summoned after me, as he would most assuredly have been,
had I been able to follow up the joke." You can just imagine the
effect produced by the discovery of the mystification. Mr.

                       THE PRESSGANG.                           163

Home was struck powerless and dumb; when he recovered, he
begged it to be remembered that he had been the first to find out
the deception, and asserted that the spirit summoned would have
appeared, for that he does possess the facility of raising them. In a
few moments, however, he disappeared, and the next day we
heard, without astonishment of his sudden departure from Paris. It
seems that the three mauvais plaisans who had been excluded
from the company had been determined to revenge themselves;
and, with the assistance of a confrere aided likewise by the false
white beard of Socrates and the cocked hat of Frederick the Great,
had almost succeeded in duping the operator, had it not been for
the uncontrollable laughter of Nadaud which betrayed the whole
conspiracy.

   "This is the story told of the sudden desertion of the camp by
Mr. Home. Time will show us if it be truth, for he has promised to
return; and should we not behold him according to his promise in
the space of three months, we shall know what to believe and what
to doubt of his mysterious power."

  I could tell much more of a similar kind, but what I have already
given is sufficient to shew the reckless invention of those who
assume to enlighten the public through the press. I found it the
easiest to let them have their own way, for if I had begun to
contradict all the falsehoods told about me, my time would have
been fully occupied in vain attempts to stop a torrent which seems
as if it would never cease to flow.

                        CHAPTER VII.

       1857-8.—FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.—MARRIAGE.

  I RETURNED from America to Paris in May, 1857, and I
remained there till July, having seances every day. The power was
very great at that time, and the phenomena were witnessed and
investigated by many hundreds of all classes. The spirit hands
were frequently visible, and were seen by many to take pen or
pencil and write in the autograph of the person whose spirit was
represented to be present.

   One morning the concierge came to me saying, "Please, Sir,
there is an old gentleman here, and I think you must see him, he
seems so anxious and careworn." I must mention that I had been so
overrun by visitors, that I had been obliged to refuse to see any
strangers, as all my time was taken up by engagements with my
friends. I acceded to his request, and he announced the Count de
X——. At the first moment of looking at him, I saw none of the
signs of anxiety and care which had struck the concierge, nor did
he seem to me so very old. He advanced to where I stood, and
taking me kindly by the hand, he said to me, "I have been sent to
you, and you will yet know

               FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.                     165

the reason why, though you do not even know who I am. I live at
No. 4, Rue ——, and you will be obliged to come to me." I shook
my head at this incredulously, and told him that my time was so
taken up, that I had scarcely time even to call on my friends. He
smiled, and said: "You will see, you will see." The conversation
then changed, and he left me after having written his address. I
was to dine that evening with the Baroness de M——, and
previous to leaving the house to go to her, I heard a spirit voice
saying distinctly to me, "You will go to see my father, won't you?"
The voice did not seem as if it required an answer, for it was said
so affirmatively, and I made no reply. On reaching the Hotel de
M——, and entering the drawing-room I saw a young man
standing there. I was surprised at this, expecting to have met no
stranger. With his eyes fixed upon me, he said, "I am glad you
have come, for we will go together to see my father," and he then
suddenly disappeared. I had thought till then that he was a guest,
so real was the vision. The Baroness was in the room, and saw that
I was agitated, and asked me what had occurred, but I did not enter
into any explanation. When about to take my seat at the dinner
table, again I heard the same voice saying, "You will go to my
father, won't you?" This so unnerved me that I told the Baroness
the circumstance, and she kindly advised my going. The evening
passed on, and after two hours I had Dearly forgotten the
occurrence, and had returned to the drawing-room, when suddenly
I saw by my side the same young man. His face now wore a pained
expression, and I was horrified to see blood on his breast.

166             FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.

He said to me, "My father is waiting for you; he has had much
sorrow; it is your mission to console—go to him." I told him I
would on the following day, but he replied that I must go then, that
very night. He disappeared, and I told the Baroness of what he
said, and she allowed me to leave. On reaching No. 4, Rue ——, I
was directed to the rooms of the Count, and his valet told me that
his master was preparing to retire, and in all probability could not
see me. Again the voice told me to announce myself, and at that
very moment a door was opened, and the Count came towards me,
and said, "I have been waiting for you, I knew you would come." I
described to him the young man I had seen, and all that had
happened, and he at once recognised him as his son who had been
murdered. He shewed me a portrait of him, which exactly
corresponded with my visions of him, and I have since seen him
often. He has told me, that on his appearance that first day, he
showed the blood upon his breast, merely to impress me the more
deeply with the necessity of going to his father. His father told me
that he had been himself for long a partial medium, and that he had
been told to seek me for the purpose of having his mediumship
increased, in order that his son might be able the more easily to
impress him with his presence. It has since been a great comfort
and relief to his mind to have the certainty of his son being with
him to console him in his affliction.

  About this time my guardian spirits told me that it seemed
necessary that I should go to Turkey, as a way was opening by
which I might be the means of bringing light there. I accordingly
made all preparations

                FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.                      167

for the journey and my power left me. I had received letters of
introduction to persons holding high positions at Constantinople.
My trunks were packed, my passport sent for vise. I was making a
farewell call on the Duchess de A——, and while in conversation
with her, the drawing-room seemed filled with rappings, the
alphabet was called for, and I was told that my journey must be
postponed, as some political troubles were just about to occur.
Instead, therefore, of going to Turkey, I went to Baden-Baden. My
power while there was not great, as my health was again failing,
but I met the King of Wurtemburg, and the then Prince, now King
of Prussia, both of whom investigated the phenomena.

  My guardian spirits continually told me at this time that there
was trouble in store for me, but that from the darkness light would
come, and that whatever might seem to be a loss, would in the end
prove to be a gain, and in all this they were correct.

  I left Baden-Baden sooner than I had expected, and went to
Biarritz. Here I was told that the first darkening of the cloud would
come, and that those who might have understood me better, would
be led to think ill of me by those about them, who, to serve a
purpose, would fabricate a statement, the very absurdity of which
ought to have been its refutation. The pre-knowledge of what was
to occur to me, combined with nervous debility, made me more
than usually agitated, and whilst at a seance, where almost the only
manifestation was the taking of a bracelet from the lady sitting on
my left, and the carrying of it to a lady opposite me, the gentleman
on my right hand declared

168             FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.

it to have been transported by my feet. If my legs were eight feet
long it would have still been a miracle, but in such wonderful
occurrences as these we must not be surprised at any absurdity that
may be invented, however painful it may be to be charged with
dishonesty and imposture.

  Some instances of the manner in which it is said the phenomena
are produced are sufficiently amusing to be repeated. A very
popular idea in Paris was that I carried in my pocket a tame
monkey trained to assist me. Another is that my legs are so formed
as to be capable of elongation, and that my feet are like those of a
baboon. Many people suppose that when I go to a strange house,
my tables have to be sent first, and that, like Sir David Brewster's
"conjectural" table, they are always copiously draped, and that I
take with me wax hands and arms to show at the proper moment.
Some suppose that I magnetize or biologize my audience, and that
they only imagine they see what they see. Some that I carry with
me lazy tongs and a magic lantern, and others have stated that
when I am said to rise in the air, it is only a balloon filled with gas
in the shape of a man. Others again will have it that is done by a
magic lantern, whilst some doctors declare that I administer "a
thimblefull of chloroform to each of the sitters." Sir David
Brewster must have had his thimblefull when he could only say
that the table "appeared to rise," and that "spirits were the last
things he would give into." Some have enough spiritual belief to
say that I have the devil at command. Others that I raise spirits by
forms and incantations. Then we have involuntary muscular
motion

                FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.                       169

to account for the phenomena by the learned Professor Faraday.
Dr. Carpenter speaks of their being produced by unconscious
cerebration, and Mr. Morell, the philosopher, tells us that they are
caused by "the reflex action of the mind." A common explanation
is ventriloquism. Electricity is another, and it is said that I have an
electric battery concealed about my person. Then there are the od
force and fluid action, and the nervous principle, and collusion,
illusion and delusion. Mechanical contrivances attached to the
lower extremities are also suggested by Sir David Brewster, but
without specifying their particular nature. But the most scientific
and learned explanation, leaving no room for conjectures, was
given by an old woman in America, who when asked if she could
account for what she had seen, replied, "Lor, Sirs, it's easy enough,
he only rubs himself all over with a gold pencil." The rappings are
produced in many ways, each philosopher having his own theory,
beginning low down with the snapping of the toe-joints, others
getting up to the ancle, whilst some maintain it to be in the knees,
or thigh bones. Professor Huxley has his own "spirit-rapping toe"
with which he amuses his friends. It has even been attributed to a
strong beating of my pulse. Some say I rub my boots together,
others my thumb nails, and that springs are concealed in the table
and about the room. It has been said that I have an electrical
quality which I can throw off at the command of my will. A
general belief is that I bribe the servants at whatever house I visit,
that they may aid me in concealing my machinery. The
intelligence displayed in obtaining names, dates, and other
circumstances, is previously

170             FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.

communicated to me either by my own inquiry, from servants or
by visiting the tombstones of the relatives, or even by a body of
secret police who are in my pay. Others know that I am
clairvoyant, and that I read the thoughts of those present. I am an
accomplished juggler according to others, and have always refused
to be seen by any others of the craft, although the fact is quite the
contrary, and the greatest juggler of France has stated that he could
not at all account for what he witnessed by any of the principles of
his art.

   However flattering all this might be to my vanity, in conferring
upon me such astounding qualities and scientific acquirements
which I do not possess, it has been to me a source chiefly of
amusement and wonder, to see how learned persons could so
widely and absurdly disagree among themselves, and strain at
gnats, though swallowing camels with such surprising greediness.
I have wandered from my, narrative to give my readers these
attempted explanations of mediumship, hoping, however, that they
will never try any of the experiments suggested by the learned in
the presence of persons of average understanding. The excellent
establishment at Earlswood, at the head of which is the good Dr.
Conolly, would be more likely to furnish the sort of audience
suited for these explanations of the men of science.

  My good friends the Count and Countess De B—— left Biarritz
with me on a visit to the chateau of a mutual friend, near
Bordeaux; and here there were several instances of direct spirit-
writing on paper placed before us on the table in full view. Whilst
we were sitting one evening, hands appeared distinctly above

                FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.                      171

the table, and we saw them successively take up a pencil and write.
One of these hands was a small one, apparently of a child, another
appeared to be that of a full grown man. The hand of the child
wrote a little message to her mother who was present, and signed it
with her christian name. There was a striking peculiarity in this, as
the child had always left out the last letter of her name, which
then, instead of being a female name, became a male one. Her
name was Denise, but she wrote it "Denis." Her mother had often
spoken to her of this, and yet the child had not corrected herself of
the habit during her life and now to prove her identity, the filial
letter was again left out. This was of course unknown to me, and to
all except her father and mother both of whom were there. The
larger hand wrote several communications in our presence, some
for his wife, who was at the table, and others to persons who were
not there present. This handwriting was in his peculiar autograph.

   The lady of the house turned to me and said abruptly, "Why you
are sitting in the air;" and on looking we found that the chair
remained in its place, but that I was elevated two or three inches
above it, and my feet not touching the floor. This may show how
utterly unconscious I am at times to the sensation of levitation. As
is usual when I have not got above the level of the heads of those
about me, and when they change their position much, as they
frequently do in looking wistfully at such a phenomenon, I came
down again, but not till I had remained so raised about half a
minute from the time of its being first seen. I was now impressed
to leave the table and was soon carried

172             FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.

to the lofty ceiling. The Count de B—— left his place at the table,
and coning under where I was, said, "Now, young Home, come
and let me touch your feet," I told him I had no volition in the
matter but perhaps the spirits would kindly allow me to come
down to him. They did so, by floating me down to him, and my
feet were soon in his, outstretched hands. He seized my boots and
now I was again elevated, he holding tightly, and pulling at my
feet till the boots I wore, which had elastic sides, came off, and
remained in his hands. The Count has all his life been well known,
holding an important public position, and as truthful as his heart is
good. To him and his dear wife, who has recently passed from
earth, I owe a deep debt of gratitude, they having been my firm
and fast friends ever since I made their acquaintance, six years
ago. This was, I believe, the first time of my being raised in the air
in France, and it has been of very seldom occurrence there, though
it happened so frequently afterwards in England, as will be seen in
future pages. Since I wrote the narrative of this seance, I have
applied to the Count for his verification of it, and I have his letter
stating its correctness.

  Another incident occurred in the presence of the Count de B—
— The Countess X—— was present for the first time at a seance,
when a spirit manifested himself, purporting to be that of her son.
The accordion was being played, and she asked if he could
remember a piece of music which had particularly struck them
both whilst they were travelling together for his health. It had
escaped her mind she said, but it could be easily recalled to her if
he

               FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.                     173

would play it. Upon this the accordion played some intricate
passages from the opera of Norma, which she at once recognized.

  I now returned to Paris, and went to reside with my friend the
Count de K——, and whilst there I had sittings almost every day. I
also went on a visit to the Chateau de R——, to the family of the
Marquis de ——. The second evening of my stay, as we were
about to take tea, a table standing at the further end of the large
saloon where we were, came up to us with extreme violence, We
were all rather startled, as we were not expecting any
manifestations, and for the next two hours they were unceasing.
The elder son of the family, the Count L—— came to my room,
when I had wished the family good night, and these proofs of a
spirit presence were again made most evident. Amongst others
there were the sound of heavy footsteps which shook the room. I
also saw the distinct form of a boy, and described his appearance
to L——, adding that I could recognize him if I could see his
portrait. On meeting the family at breakfast the following morning
the Marquis said, "What time did L—— leave you last night, and
what were you both doing jumping about the room?" We told him
that we had both of us our slippers on, and that he must have heard
the noises made by the spirits. The chateau, being one of the very
oldest in France, has the walls in some places nearly twenty feet
thick, indeed dressing-rooms have been made in them, and they
are quite spacious. There is solidity to every floor. In order,
therefore, to have been heard in the room beneath, the
manifestations must have

174             FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.

been of very great force. After breakfast the Marchioness asked
me if I would not like to go over the chateau, and on my assenting,
she said we will begin with my boudoir. We went there, and on
reaching the centre of the room I looked round and there I saw the
very face I had seen the night previous. For a moment I could not
bring myself to believe it to be other than the spirit himself, but it
was only a portrait. My emotion was such that I caught hold of
L——, who stood near me, and said, "There, that is the boy I saw
last night." I was so overcome that I had to leave the room, and
they then told me that L—— having related what had occurred to
his mother, they had arranged to put me to the test, and not having
even told me of the existence of the portrait, they wished to see if I
could recognize it.

  In an hotel situate on the Boulevard des Italiens in Paris, I was
introduced to a family, consisting of Mr. H——, his wife, and
their two sons, both of whom were at that time in the English
army, and had just returned from the Crimean campaign. The
father, a cool-headed, truthful minded man, was a countryman of
mine, and our conversation soon turned upon the wonders of
second sight and ghost seeing. Presently, whilst we were talking
together, we were startled at hearing loud sounds coming from a
distant part of the room, and slowly approaching us. I at once
suggested to them that some spirit desired to communicate with us.
The unseen one assented to this by making the sounds for the
alphabet, and the name of "Gregoire" was spelt out, with the
additional information that he had passed from earth, giving the
time of his departure.

                FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.                       175

This the two young officers at once and strongly, contradicted, for
they recognized in the name a very intimate friend, an officer in
the French army in the Crimea, whom they had only just left there
suffering under a slight wound, but so slight that it gave no
apprehensions of an unfavourable kind. He, however, now gave
them other proofs of his identity, and during the whole of the
remaining hours of the afternoon and evening he continued to
make his presence manifest. Several times things were brought
from parts of the room distant from us, and there were frequent
raps, and his friends felt touches. Sounds resembling the firing of
musketry were heard, and indeed so indisputable were some of the
signs given that no one could fail to have been convinced of spirit
power and presence, though having seen him so lately, and having
since heard nothing to make them think his death probable, they
could hardly realize the likelihood of it.

   I left the family late in the evening, bidding them goodbye, as
they were to leave for England the following day. From a member
of the family who resides in Paris, I ascertained shortly afterwards
that they had written to ascertain the truth as to what had been
communicated to them by the spirit calling himself Gregoire, and
that in every detail, they were informed, the spirit had been
correct. I ought here to state, however, that the eldest son, previous
to this corroborative testimony reaching his family, had been sent
with his regiment to Canada, and he was sitting in his tent when a
letter reached him from his father, relating the results of their
inquiries from the Crimea. While he was reading his father's letter,
informing

176             FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.

him the details of his friend Gregoire's departure from earth, he
was startled by hearing a rustling sound amongst some loose
papers and pens, which were carelessly strewn on his table.
Fearing lest his imagination might be taking advantage of his
reason, he called for his servant to come in and look at the table,
and, to their mutual astonishment, they saw a pen move itself into
an erect position and deliberately write the name of Gregoire on
some blank paper. This fact was told me by the father of the young
man, and I see no reason to disbelieve it. What object could tempt
the young man to tell so deliberate and wilful an untruth, if it were
one, on such a subject? Other strange occurrences continued with
other members of this family after their return to England, for
many months, and then left them in as sudden and unexpected a
manner as they had made their appearance.

   In January, 1858, I went to Holland, accompanied by Mr. T——
, and was presented to the Queen. The manifestations at the Hague
were in some instances very strong, and again sometimes I had
seances at which nothing would occur, and this although in the
presence of persons who were most desirous of witnessing them.

  I went to Amsterdam, for the purpose of meeting the proprietors
of and writers for a magazine of infidel tendencies. I well
remember it. We were staying at a large old-fashioned hotel, the
cheerless cold of the rooms with their bleak walls and their beam-
bare ceilings, as I sat before the fire, which was but the ghost of
such as we are accustomed to in England, when these eight or ten
gentlemen were announced. None

               FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.                     177

of them were known to me or to my friend, and I desired them at
once to sit down, and see if any manifestations would occur. They
appeared clever, shrewd persons, deeply read and thinking men.
Cold reason had wrapped her chill mantle about their minds, and
all that was not tangible could have no truth in it for them. The
first tremulous sensation in the table and floor, which often
precedes other manifestations, was felt. They delegated two of
their number to sit under the table to watch me and my
movements. Faint rappings were heard, and the table legs were
examined to see that I had no springs concealed there. These
manifestations increased in force, and they, after the most close
and strict scrutiny, were obliged to acknowledge that they had
witnessed that which they could in no wise account for. The
alphabet was called for, and intelligent communications were
received. This was a stop in advance of their philosophy, and to
them most singular, and soon the manifestations ceased, but not
until they had each expressed their conviction that there was no
imposture. I have since been informed, by letters from Amsterdam,
that one of them became a medium, and that their general disbelief
in spiritual causation was greatly modified. I remember as my
friend and I sat together after the party had left, we expressed a
wish that they had seen more, and we spoke of ourselves as being
sorry prophets for such a mission. This idea pursued me after I had
gone to bed, and the spirit of my mother came and comforted me
by saying that sufficient had been given, and that "the wind must
be tempered to the shorn lamb."

178             FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.

   We returned to the Hague, and a deputation of young gentlemen
from the University of Leyden called to ask me to visit Leyden.
My engagements, however, were such as to necessitate my
departure, and we left the following day for Brussels. There the
power left me, and I was told by the spirits that it would be
sometime before it would return, and that many things of the
utmost importance to me would occur in the meantime. I had taken
a severe cold while in Holland, but had intended to have remained
sometime in Brussels to have seances with my young friends there,
and when I found that my power had gone, I considered it better to
return to Paris to consult my medical adviser there, I accordingly
went there, and he pronounced my disease to be impoverishment
of the blood and great nervous depression, and advised my going
to Italy. I strongly objected to this, inasmuch as every time I leave
Paris some silly stories are put in circulation, such as my being
ordered away by the Emperor, or that I go to fly from the law. I
remained, therefore, growing daily worse for two or three weeks,
when I left, intending to stay at Turin with my friends there. On
reaching Turin in February, I found the snow covering the ground
to a considerable depth, and the cold more intense than it had been
in Paris, and so I left the same evening for Pisa, to join some
friends there. I found Pisa very cold, and was advised to proceed to
Rome.

  I reached Rome in March, and refused nearly all invitations out,
wishing to be quiet to regain my health. A friend mentioned one
afternoon, whilst we were walking together to the Pynchon, the
name of a

                FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.                      179

Russian family of distinction then in Rome, and added that they
were anxious to make my acquaintance. I excused myself on the
ground of my health. At this moment a carriage was passing us
and stopped, and my friend before I was aware of what he was
doing, introduced me to the Countess de Koucheleff, who asked
me to come and sup with them that evening, adding that they kept
very late hours.

  I went about ten in the evening, and found a large party
assembled. At twelve as we entered the supper-room she
introduced to me a young lady, whom I then observed for the first
time, as her sister. A strange impression came over me at once,
and I knew she was to be my wife. When we were seated at table
the young lady turned to me and laughingly said, "Mr. Home, you
will be married before the year is ended." I asked her why she said
so, and she replied, that there was such a superstition in Russia
when a person was at table between two sisters. I made no reply. It
was true. In twelve days we were partially engaged, and waiting
only the consent of her mother. The evening of the day of our
engagement a small party had assembled, and were dancing. I was
seated on a sofa by my fiancee when she turned to me and abruptly
said, "Do tell me all about spirit-rapping, for you know I don't
believe in it." I said to her, "Mademoiselle, I trust you will ever
bear in mind that I have a mission entrusted to me. It is a great and
a holy one. I cannot speak with you about a thing which you have
not seen, and therefore cannot understand. I can only say that it is
a great truth." The tears came welling into her eyes, and laying her
hand in mine she said, "If

180             FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.

your mission can bring comfort to those less happy than ourselves,
or be in any way a consolation to mankind, you will ever find me
ready and willing to do all I can to aid you in it." She was true to
this noble sentiment to the last moment of her short life, and she is
still my great comfort and sustainer since we have separated in this
earthly sphere. She was my own true, loving wife for, oh! too short
a period for my happiness here, but for hers I was content to lose
her for a time, till it shall please God that I too pass away to join
her!

   Shortly after our engagement the family went to Naples, and I
with them, and we remained there six weeks. Then the family left
for Florence, and my fiancee was entrusted to the care of a Russian
family about to return by Paris to Russia, that she might join her
mother, and get ready the necessary papers, that the marriage
might take place as soon as the family returned to St. Petersburgh.
I accompanied them to Paris, and after they had left I went to
Scotland for my certificate of birth, the parish clerk having sent me
one with my name written Hume instead of Home. Knowing this
to be incorrect I was obliged to make a journey to have it rectified,
and then I returned to Paris, and joined the family who had arrived
there from Italy.

  We left for St. Petersburgh in June, accompanied by M.
Alexandre Dumas, who was to officiate as godfather at my
marriage. An amusing account of our journey may be read in
Dumas' book entitled "De Paris a Astrachan." On reaching St.
Petersburgh I was honoured by a most kind invitation to be
received

                FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.                       181

by the Emperor, but which I was obliged to decline not being in
power at the time, and his Majesty most graciously sent to me to
say that under any circumstances be would be pleased to see me. I
excused myself on the ground of having so much to attend to
previous to my marriage. A month after this, certain difficulties
having arisen, and the papers which were necessary not being
forthcoming, the marriage seemed on the point of being
postponed. I had had no manifestations for several months, but on
this was told by the spirit of my mother to inform the Emperor the
next day that my power had returned. I did so, and was received by
his Majesty at the Palace of Peterhof, where I spent a week, and all
the obstacles in the way of my marriage were removed by his most
gracious Majesty, who upon this, as upon every occasion, has
shown to me the greatest kindness. I have the highest veneration
for him, not only as a monarch, but as a man of the most kind and
generous feelings.

We were married on Sunday the 1st of August, 1858, or according
to the old style, on the 20th July, first in the private chapel at the
country house of my brother-in-law, according to the rites of the
Greek church, and afterwards at the Church of St. Catherine,
according to the rites of the Romish church. A short time after our
marriage, my wife being in a sound quiet sleep, I saw the spirit of
my mother come into the room, followed by one, who though I
had never known him on earth, I knew to be my wife's father. My
impression was one of relief that my wife was asleep, and thus that
she would not see what I feared would frighten her. My surprise
was therefore

182            FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA.

very great on hearing her say, "Daniel, there is some one in the
room with us. It is your mother, and near her stands my father. She
is very beautiful, and I am not afraid." Her actions, however,
betrayed a certain shrinking, for she turned to the side of the bed
where I lay, trembling violently. The spirits now disappeared, but
loud rappings were heard in and about the room, and our questions
were answered. This was my wife's first introduction to anything
of the kind.

                          CHAPTER VIII.

                   RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

   IN two weeks after our marriage we left to visit some of my
brother-in-law's estates, some of which were situate on the
Crimean coast, and others in the interior of Russia. The journey
lasted about six weeks, and we then returned to a country house of
his in the neighbourhood of Moscow. At the end of November,
1868, we were at St. Petersburgh, in the house of my brother-in-
law, the Count Gregoire Koucheleff Besborodko, from whom and
the Countess I have ever met with the readiest sympathy and
brotherly welcome, and to whom I owe, and ever shall owe, a debt
of the deepest gratitude. Here from time to time my power
returned, but generally only faintly. Still a great deal of good was
done. As all instance, I may mention that a young officer, who
having been convinced of the truths of immortality by what he saw
in my presence, gave a supper to his friends, at which he publicly
announced that in place of laughing at religion as he had done, he
had seen in these phenomena what convinced him of the reality of
a future life, and that thence forward he should lead a different life.

184            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

   In the middle of January, 1859, I fell ill with severe internal
inflammation. This lasted some time, and was increasing to an
alarming extent, and beyond the power of the physician who
attended me, and the dangerous symptoms were greatly increased
by my usual nervous debility. Friction was recommended, but the
extreme pain which it caused precluded its use. I was in this state
when one evening my wife and a friend, the Baron de M——,
were present, and my hands were suddenly seized by spirit
influence, and
   I was made to beat them with extreme violence upon the part
which was so extremely sensitive and tender. My, wife was
frightened, and would have endeavoured to hold my hands, but my
friend who had had sufficient knowledge of spirit manifestations
prevented her. I felt no pain, though the violence of the blows
which I continued giving to myself made bed and the whole room
shake. In five minutes time the swelling had visibly decreased, and
the movements of the hand began to be more gentle. In an hour I
was in a quiet sleep, and on awaking the next morning I found the
disease had left me, and only a weakness remained. The
expression of the doctor's face baffles my description when he
visited me early that morning, expecting to have found me worse,
and felt my pulse and saw that a great change must have occurred
beyond his skill to account for.

   On the 26th April, old style, or 8th May, according to our style,
at seven in the evening, and as the snow was fast falling, our little
boy was born at the town house, situate on the Gagarines Quay, in
St Petersburgh, where we were still staying. A few hours after

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                       185

his birth, his mother, the nurse and I heard for several hours the
warbling of a bird as if singing over him. Also that night, and for
two or three nights afterwards, a bright star like light, which was
clearly visible from the partial darkness of the room, in which
there was only a night lamp burning, appeared several times
directly over its head, where it remained for some moments, and
then slowly moved in the direction of the door, where it
disappeared. This was also seen by each of us at the same time.
The light was more condensed than those which have been so
often seen in my presence upon previous and subsequent
occasions. It was brighter and more distinctly, globular. I do not
believe that it came through my mediumship, but rather through
that of the child, who has manifested on several occasions the
present of the gift. I do not like to allude to such a matter, but as
there are more strange things in Heaven and earth than are dreamt
of, even in my philosophy, I do not feel myself at liberty to omit
stating, that during the latter part of my wife's pregnancy, we
thought it better that she should not join in seances, because it was
found that whenever the rappings occurred in the room, a
simultaneous movement of the child was distinctly felt, perfectly
in unison with the sounds. When there were three sounds, three
movements were felt, and so on, and when five sounds were heard,
which is generally the call for the alphabet, she felt the five
internal movements, and she would frequently, when we were
mistaken in the letter, correct us from what the child indicated.

  Our boy was christened a fortnight after his birth,

186            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

his godfather being the Marquis de Chateaureynard, at present
Minister of France at Hesse Cassel, and his godmother his aunt,
the Countess Luba. His second godfather was his uncle, the Count
Gregoire, and his second godmother was his relative Sophie.

  A week after the christening, we went to the residence of the
Count in the immediate environs of St. Petersburgh. Whilst here,
there were many striking manifestations which were witnessed by
many, who investigated as others had done before, and with the
same results. One evening I remember, one of my friends was
converted from his previous unbelief by seeing a female hand,
which was visible to all of us in the room, slowly forming in the
air a few inches above the table, until it assumed all the apparent
materiality of a real hand. The hand took up a pencil which was on
the table, and wrote with it a communication which deeply,
affected my friend, who recognised it as being from his mother.
The general belief is, that the spirit hands always appear from
beneath the table, and already formed, but this is incorrect, for on
many occasions in the presence of several persons at a time, they
are seen to be formed in full sight of all, in the manner I have just
described, and to melt away, as it were, in the same way. Often
too, they have been seen to form themselves high above our heads,
and from thence to descend upon the table, and then disappear.

  The anniversary of our wedding-day found us on the steamer
'Baltic' bound for Dunkerque, from whence we went to Ostend on
a visit to my mother-in-law, who was there for her health. On
seeing her, at the moment of our embracing one another, I had
another of

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                      187

those singular impressions which so often come to me at the
moment of external contact. It has seemed to me as if they were
caused by the disturbing element of a physical substance which
causes some secret chord of the soul to vibrate and awaken what I
may call a memory of the Future, or that a flower of the springtime
has been shadowed forth among the chill blasts of autumn, as a
token of the never ceasing care of God, our loving father, for His
children whether in the Past, Present or Future, all being alike
known to Him. My sensations are so peculiar at the time when
such foreshadowings are granted me, that words can but feebly
express them. I distinctly saw at the first moment of touching my
mother-in-law, that after I should leave Ostend, we should meet no
more on earth. This impressional prediction, did, as has ever been
the case with those which have come to me in this way, prove
correct.

  We arrived in Paris in August 1859, and whilst there, I paid a
short visit to a friend then in Switzerland, and there we had one or
two sittings. On returning to Paris, a friend had kindly offered us
the use of the Chateau de C——, where we remained about two
months, at the expiration of which time we came to England. This
was in October. My power had left me for some weeks. One
evening in November while I was absent, my wife being in the
room with the child and his nurse, loud raps were heard upon the
ceiling. They both supposed that the sounds proceeded from some
one walking overhead, when they changed their position, and were
heard upon the wall of the room, and in a few moments they came
on the table. My wife asked

188             RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

who was the medium upon the occasion, and the reply was given
that it was the sleeping child. It was further said, that they had
power to manifest through him, but that they would not, "as the
atmosphere which they made use of was necessary for his physical
development in the natural world." From this time we have but
once had any external evidence of any spirit presence through him,
though he has given up many indications of his being a seer.

  In the latter part of November we were in England, and the
power returned, and I began to hold seances as usual, and
continued to do so until the. 24th of July in the following year.
During this time, the manifestations were seen and investigated by
persons of all ranks and classes, from statesmen down to those in
humble life, and to them again I would rather refer for the
accounts of what they witnessed, than to give my own
descriptions. I select, therefore, portions of their writings, a few of
which have already been published in "The Spiritual Magazine"
and other Journals, and the others now eppear for the first time.
These will give the reader an idea of the nature and extent of my
mediumship during this period.

   The subjoined is a portion of a letter from Mr. Pears, who was
accompanied by my friends Mr. and Mrs. Cox. He now saw the
manifestations for the first time. "Almost immediately the table
tilted towards Mr. Home, who, raising his hands from the table,
which still retained its inclined position, invited me to look under
it, to see that no material means were used to produce this result. I
did look, and saw none. On resuming my seat, the table returned to
its position,

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                        189

and then it passed into an undulatory movement, as if it were in
motion on waves; it seemed, indeed, almost as if the top of the
table were flexible: then from this movement it passed into a
perfectly horizontal state, so that a vessel filled to the brim, would
not, I think, have spilled a drop, and it rose from eighteen to
twenty-four inches clear from the floor, all hands at the same time
continuing on the top of the table; and finally with perfect
evenness it gradually descending to its place.

  "Raps were then heard on the table, in the vicinity of Mrs. Cox,
which, by reference to the alphabet, purported to be produced by a
deceased child of hers. Then faint deliberate raps came near to
Mrs. P., purporting—by the same mode—to come from Phoebe,
our deceased little daughter to whom I referred before.

  "Raps were then heard under my own hands, and at the same
time the depending cloth covering the table seemed to be moved
up by something under it, and was made thus to strike against my
wrist. I called my wife's attention to this, and she confirmed the
fact, that it really did seem as if some one's hand was under the
cloth, trying to touch my wrist. I said, half laughing, which you
might expect from my scepticism, that I should not wonder if there
were not some one for me also. Immediately there were raps under
the same hand, strong enough to shake the table.

  "Perhaps I looked dubiously at a phenomenon so unexpected,
for Mr. Home said, 'I should like Mr. Pears to be convinced that
we do not make these sounds; perhaps he would get under the
table and

190             RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

observe.' I did so; and while I saw that they were not produced by
any visible agency beneath, they were sounding as vigorously as
ever; Mrs. P. being witness to their not being produced by the
hands, or any other visible means above board.

  "When I found that the raps under my hand purported to come
from my grandfather's 'spirit,' I asked if he could take the large bell
from me if I held it. It had already been taken out of Mr. Home's
hand and rung under the table. The response to my question was
given by strong knocks. I held it under the table, being careful to
hold it in the direction of my wife, whose hands were on the table,
and I felt it tugged with strength out of my hand; it was rung, and
then deposited on the floor.

  "Many little things which struck me at the time, occurred during
our seance, which lasted between two and three hours. But there
was one part of the seance which forcibly struck me, and which I
must relate. Mr. Home, soon after I had assumed the presence of
my grandfather's spirit, passed into a singular state—half
unconscious as it were and said, 'Here's a tall, old, upright,
Quaker-like man, yet not a Quaker;' then he seemed to take on the
manner and gesture, as closely as a young man can, of those of an
old one—held out his hand to me, and grasped it in a way that
further reminded me of my grandfather, and addressed me in
words somewhat characteristic of him, and went on to speak of
one whom he had held very dear, but from whom he had been long
separated to his great grief, but that they had happily met in the
other world and were reconciled. All upon this point was said in a

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                       191

broken way, but with gestures and allusions which were
intelligible solely to myself, as the person and events so alluded to
touched closely upon my grandfather's history in conjunction with
my own. My astonishment was increased, when, from Mr. H.'s
lips, fell the name of her to whom the allusion had been made—
my grandfather's daughter! both dead when Mr. Home must have
been a boy in America! Long as I have known you, friend Dixon, I
think I never told you that my grandfather was of a Quaker family,
which was the case.

  "I was by this incident, astonished beyond expression, and
acknowledged to Mr. Cox, that the history which had been
sketched, and the reflections upon it, were just what I should have
expected might have been made by my grandfather.

  "I have not yet found a place in my system for these phenomena,
but that they are genuine phenomena, is settled in my mind."

  Another account is given by Mr. J. G. Crawford, a gentleman
who had for years resisted all belief in such phenomena as being
impossible and absurd. It happened that a friend of his from
Liverpool was coming to meet me at the house of Mr. Coleman, in
Bayswater, and he induced him to accompany him. He shall tell
the story in his own frank and truthful words:

   "Mr. Home laid his left hand on the table and with his right
lifted an accordion, which he held under the table. My friend and I
were asked to look below, when

192            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

we distinctly saw it move up and down, apparently held and
touched by one hand only.
    We continued to sit round the table. The room was made so
dark that we could not see each other. The table gave a violent
stamp upon the floor; still we kept our hands upon it. Then it rose
in a mass, twelve or fifteen inches quite off the floor, so far as I
could judge.
  "Mr. Home now said that he held the accordion under the table
by one hand only, when it played our beautiful English tune,
'Home, sweet Home!' in a most finished style.
  "Shortly after this occurred, a very curious affair took place, in
explanation of which I cannot hazard a conjecture. Mr. Home
remarked, 'I feel as if I am going to rise.' The room was quite dark.
He said, 'I am getting up,' and as I was only a few feet from him, I
put out my hand to him; I indubitably felt the soles of both his
boots, some three feet above the level of the floor. On my doing
so, he said, 'Don't touch me, or I shall come down;' of course I
instantly desisted, but down he came. In less than five minutes
after this, he remarked, 'I am again ascending,' and from the sound
of his voice, we could not but infer that he was actually rising
towards the ceiling of the ante-room.
  "He then appeared to float under the archway, then to rise to the
cornice of the room we were sitting in, and we heard him quite
distinctly make three cross marks on the ceiling, besides doing
some other writing. Then he came softly down, and lay stretched
out with his back upon the table, in which position we found

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                     193

him when the gas was lighted, and when we distinctly saw the
marks on the ceiling, which we had heard him make.

   "I am well aware there is a ready answer by many well-disposed
persons to what I have written—that it is all done by collusion and
trick. In many countries at the present time, and in our own not a
century back, all phenomena of a then extra-ordinary kind, were
quickly put down to the account of the devil. He prompted Galileo
to the adopted system of astronomy; Harvey to the circulation of
the blood; he was the cause of witchcraft in Scotland, and had
much to do with the wonders of chemistry, before it attained its
present scientific certainty and value to the arts and agriculture.
But the testimony of thousands of excellent witnesses cannot be
set aside by any such plea. Not many years ago it was fashionable
to deny the facts and uses of chloroform, homoeopathy,
hydropathy, magnetism, mesmerism, &c.; now the curative powers
of these agents are commonly received amongst us as household
words! There appears to be a law of progressive development in
the universe. Should the supposed facts of Spiritualism be found to
be real, after oft-repeated experiments, we cannot doubt but they
also will have a permanent place with recent discoveries. No one,
now-a-days, who thinks at all, can be so bold and unwise as to
deny that 'there are more things in heaven and earth than are
dreamt of in our philosophy.'

  "In the simple statement I have given, of what my friend and I
were satisfied occurred on the evening of our visit to —— Villas, I
have avoided colouring the

194            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

events, and for the sake of greater definiteness, have given figures
of sizes, which, however, must be taken merely as a near
approximation to the actual measurements."
                                                   J. G. CRAWFORD.

  Mr. Crawford mentions the circumstance of my immediately
coming to the ground again on his touching my feet. I have
observed that this is invariably the case when I am touched, or
even anxiously gazed at, until I have risen above the heads of
those who are in the room, but after I have attained that height,
their looking at me, or touching me, has no effect upon me. What
the cause may be I cannot explain, but it may perhaps be some
break in the magnetism which is caused in the former case, and
which does not occur in the latter.

   On the 3rd of April, 1860, I had been with some friends to a
lecture given in St. John's Wood, by M. Louis Blanc, "On the
Mysterious persons and agencies in France towards the end of the
eighteenth century." His lecture was a good deal occupied with
Cagliostro, and during the time he was speaking, I had the
strongest impression of the presence of Cagliostro, and the lady
who was sitting next me, was also aware of some strong spirit
presence by having her dress pulled, and by other manifestations.

  On returning home, I found that my wife had retired earlier than
usual in consequence of a severe headache. In the course of
conversation together, she having asked how I had liked the
lecture, I said, "I have been haunted all the evening by Cagliostro,"
on which

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                      195

she exclaimed, "Pray do not use that word haunted, it sounds so
weird-like, and quite frightens me." I had by this time,
extinguished the light, and was now in bed, when to my
amazement the room became as light as if the sun had for an
instant shone fully in at the window. Thinking that this effect
might have been only on my spiritual perception, I said, "Sacha,
did you see anything?" Her reply was, "No, nor could I, for my
face was quite buried in my pillow, the pain in my head is so
intense." I asked her to observe, and I then mentally asked that if
the light had been external, it might be reproduced. Almost
simultaneously with the thought, came the light again, so distinct,
and with such brilliancy, that no noon-day was ever brighter. My
wife asked if this was the spirit of Cagliostro, and the affirmative
reply was instantly given by three flashes of light, so vivid as
almost to be blinding and painful to the sight. Answers were given
to various questions in the same wonderful manner, and then in
answer to a question asked, came a musical tinkle, as if a silver
bell had been touched directly over our heads. In this way our
farther answers were now given, and we then heard a footstep on
the floor, falling so gently as if it feared to disturb us by its
approach. My wife asked that it should come nearer, and it
approached us till we felt a form leaning over the bed. In doing
this, it pressed upon the bedclothes just as an actual material
presence would have done. We asked him if he had been a medium
when on earth, and a distinct voice, audible to both of us, said in
answer, "My power was that of a mesmerist, but all-misunderstood
by those about me, my biographers

196            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

have done me injustice, but I care not for the untruths of earth."
Both my wife and myself were by this time so impressed by such
startling and almost terribly real evidence of the presence of one
who was in no way related to us, that for a few moments all power
of utterance seemed to have left us. We were, however, soon
recalled to ourselves by a hand being placed on our heads, and she,
seizing my hands in hers, held them up, saying, "Dear spirit, will
you be one of my guardian angels—watch over me with my father,
teach me what you would have me do, and make me thankful to
God for all his mercies?" Our hands were clasped by a hand, and
her left hand was gently separated from mine, and a ring, which
was the signet-ring of my father-in-law, was placed on her third
finger. This ring was previously in the room, but at a distance of at
least twelve feet from where the bed stood. "Good night, dear
ones, and God bless you," was then audibly spoken, and
simultaneously with the sound came three wafts of perfume, so
delicious that we both exclaimed, "How truly wonderful!"

   Her headache was perfectly cured, and although our nerves had
been greatly agitated, we slept soundly. The following day, and
indeed for several days afterwards, my wife had occasional proofs
of the presence of this spirit, and he remained with her up to the
time of her passing from earth, and during the last months of our
stay in England she frequently saw him.

  About the middle of May, 1860, my mother-in-law wrote to us
from St. Petersburgh, as follows:

  "Dear children,—You may not be aware that to-morrow

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                     197

I am to undergo a surgical operation. I have seen my confessor; I
have taken the sacrament, and I now feel quite happy. Do not be
alarmed, but do as I do—trust in God."

   On the morning of Monday, the 29th May, my wife being then
engaged at a bazaar held at the Crystal Palace, Sydenham, I
proposed to visit with a friend the establishment of Messrs.
Barclay and Perkins. We drove there, and had gone over Dearly all
the establishment, when in the barrelling-room one of the
workmen proposed our tasting the porter. My friend was tasting it,
and the attendant brought me a pot. I put out my hand to take it,
and as my fingers came in contact with the metal, a deep shudder
convulsed my frame, and I suddenly knew that my dear mother-in-
law, who had been for many years a patient sufferer, had been
released from her earthly troubles. I refused the porter, and
requested my friend to accompany me home. He wished to remain
with me, but I begged to be alone. In an hour's time I was calm,
and I reasoned with myself how I could best conceal the painful
intelligence from my wife. That evening at a seance she asked how
her mother was. The reply given was, "It is well with her now."
All present but herself understood well to what this alluded, and a
friend on my left did all she could to conceal her tears.

  On the Thursday afterwards I heard my wife running up to my
room. As she opened the door, and before she had time to speak,
and indeed before I had seen her, I said, "Why, Sacha, I knew it
last Monday." She came to my bedside, and gave me a letter

198           RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

addressed to me from my sister-in-law containing a telegraphic
dispatch, announcing that my mother-in-law had passed from earth
on the Monday, and this letter my wife had opened. Two nights
after this, at, a seance where the Count T—— and an atheist friend
of his were present, her dear spirit came, and her hands were made
visible, resting on her daughter's head, and afterwards on mine.
She wrote in her own peculiar handwriting, "You will love her
always, won't you?" and she signed it "Nathalie." He who came an
atheist, was one no longer.

  I take the following account of some new manifestations from
the "Spiritual Magazine." It is called "Two Evenings with Mr.
Home," and is introduced by the editor, who says:—

"We have received from two correspondents, well known to us, the
following account of manifestations on the evening of the 1st and
9th of May last, each evening in the presence of nine persons,
whose names have been furnished to us, and which we are
permitted to supply privately to any inquirer who feels that the
knowledge of the names is necessary for his belief. In the
meantime we can vouch publicly for the perfect confidence which
the narratives inspire us with, having heard the whole account
from the lips of the narrators, previous to receiving the MS. from
them.

                                                  "May 1st, 1860.
  "The party was composed of Mr. and Mrs. Home and seven otter
ladies and gentlemen. We sat at the round table in the large
drawing-room. Mr. Home's

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                      199

hand was moved to write:—'The spirit of John is one who was
kind to your father during the voyage to America.' No one
understood this; but Mr. —— entering the room a minute
afterwards, expressed his conviction that it was intended for him,
as his father had been to America. Three loud raps gave assent to
what he said. The table then moved away from us, and we
enquired if they wished us to draw it to the window. It was
answered, 'Yes.' We accordingly did so, leaving a vacant space
against the window, unclosing the shutters, and by their directions
extinguishing the candles. The fire burned brightly. It was spelled
out, "There is a little too much light." Mr. —— and —— screened
the fire as much as possible, and the moon and gaslight from the
street then alone lighted up the table; but did so completely as the
moon was very bright. The spirit of Albert then took the
accordion, and played a beautiful air of unearthly harmony. Mr.
Home and I held the accordion together under the table, for the
power was very strong, and the music loud; and the instrument at
times was nearly carried away from us.

  "After a short time there rose slowly in the space made by the
window a most lovely hand of a female—we saw also part of the
beautiful arm as it held it up aloft for some time—we were all
greatly amazed. This hand was so transparent and luminous, and
so unearthly and angelic, that our hearts were filled with gratitude
towards the Creator for permitting so wonderful a manifestation.
The hand was visible to us more from the internal light which
seemed to stream as it were out of it, than from the external light
of the

200            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

moon. As soon as it slowly vanished, Mdlle. ——, who sat next to
the open space, saw another hand forming itself close to her; and a
man's hand was raised and placed on the table, far more earthly
and life-like in appearance, and one that I thought I recognized,
(we were subsequently told that I was right in conjecture). Then
came a dear baby-hand: then the baby (Mrs. L——'s adopted
child) showed its head; and finally, spirit-hands held up the little
child, so that all nine of us saw her shoulders and waist. After this,
a hand and arm rose luminous and beautiful, covered with a white
transparent drapery; and this hand remained visible to us all for at
least five minutes, and made us courteous and graceful gestures.

   "Then spirit-hands held up to us an exquisite wreath of white
flowers. I never saw any wreath made by human hands so perfect
in form and design; and calling for the alphabet said, 'The spirit
emblem of William's mother.' Then we were told they would shew
us 'The emblem of superstition;' and a black shrivelled hand arose.
On some of us remarking that we could not see it well, the curtains
were at once moved aside, and the blind drawn away from the top
of the window. It was beyond the reach of any of us; and they then
showed us the hand again, so that we all could see it. The 'emblem
of truth' was then shewn. This was more beautiful than all the
rest—a fairy-like fountain of apparently clear sparkling water
which threw up showers of silvery rays, vanishing from our sight
like mist, and dwelling on the memory as perfection. After this it
was rapped out, 'We can do no more.'

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                        201

   "Mr. Home was put into a trance, and as he fell back in his chair
a gleam of the most vivid light fell upon me. This light fell over
my shoulders, and gleamed on my right hand, and came from a
direction whence no earthly light could have come. It came from a
part of the room where the spirit of one who was a friend of mine
when on earth has often stood before, and from whence he has
communicated to us. This light was seen by no one but myself; but
as I turned round in hope of seeing the spirit, Mr. Home said to
me, 'Yes, he is there;' and added a communication from him. He
then told us that the first hand that we saw had been that of his
own mother; the second was my father's, as I had silently
expected; and the hand and arm in drapery that remained so long,
came for Prudence, and was the same that she had seen one night
when alone, several years ago, at Paris, before she had ever heard
of spirit-manifestations. He also gave us the full name of the 'spirit
John,' who had gone to America with Mr. A——'s father; and
added some private information, which Mr. A—— confirmed as
true.

   "The events of this evening having been so wonderful, I have
begged my friends present on the occasion to read over this
account, and to sign it as witnesses to the truth of what I have
stated."

                                                  "May 9th, 1860.
  "Mingling with those interested in witnessing evidences of spirit
power, I gladly accepted an invitation to meet a few friends on
Monday the 9th of May, 1860, at a house at the West-end. At a
quarter after eight

202            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

o'clock, we went into the adjoining back drawing-room, and sat
down to a loo table. There were Dine of us, Mr. Home being one
of the number. Immediately the table commenced vibrating and
gently lifting itself off the floor I say lifting itself, because no
human beings in human clay were the actors. Nothing occurred for
a few minutes, during which conversation was kept up, and then
the table gradually rose up off the floor about four feet, or rather
more than a foot beyond our outstretched arms, the hands of which
had rested gently on the table before its ascent. It then descended.
Mr. Home took the accordion in his right hand, by the rim at the
bottom of the instrument, leaving his left hand on the table, and
then were played some beautiful voluntaries, exquisitely
attenuated, yet clear and melodious. They then came out gradually
fuller, and yet more full, till the room seemed filled with the
volume of sound like a pealing organ, and still no false note. A
friend, sitting next to me, forgetting himself, exclaimed, 'My God,
how wonderful!' and after a breath, asked I if they would give us
some air we knew?' and having asked for 'God save the Queen,' it
was played at once.

   "A lady present, whose little boy had recently died, had
indications of her son being in the room; and the accordion
suddenly commenced playing a well-known air, which on earth the
little boy was very fond of, as tallying with his mamma's name.
Reader, was not there a truth of life and of love in the incident?
The mother thought so, and her tears betrayed her thoughts.

  "The detonations on the table, and sometimes under

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                     203

my hands, were as sharp, and as clear, and as loud, as if struck
vigorously with the edge of a penny-piece.

"It was then rapped out by the sounds—'Go to the window;' we
rose, and moved the loo table to about eighteen inches from the
window. We sat down again, but more closely, so as to allow a
vacant space at the side of the table, opposite the window. The
sounds then gave out, 'Put out the lights,' which was done. We
found that though the room was dark, yet the light from the
window was sufficient for us to faintly see each other. The
window-blind then commenced moving up and down—no one
near it—evidently to tone the light; and while we were remarking
the singularity of the phenomenon, and how high it went, all
looking at it—suddenly it sprung up to the top, and then came
gently down to its original position. Mr. Home felt something on
his head, and found it was a leaf. Suddenly the leaf of a geranium
was taken and dropped into the lap of a lady sitting at the table.
We heard the snap as if breaking off the stem of a flower, and
immediately came down past the left ear of my friend, and on to
his knee, a sprig of geranium; while he held it up for us to see, I
expressed a wish to have one, when a sprig came past my right ear
on to my knee. I picked it up, and while showing it, another came
past my face as if from the ceiling. The geranium plant was in the
room several feet from any of us, and the sprigs came down both
on the right and left of me.

   "After a pause, Mr. Home said he felt as he were about to be
lifted up; he moved from the table, and shortly he said, 'I am
rising'—but we could not see

204             RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

him—'they have put me on my back.' I asked, will you kindly
bring him, as much as possible, towards the window, so that we
may see him; and at once he was floated with his feet horizontally
into the light of the window, so that we all saw his feet and a part
of his legs resting or floating on the air like a feather, about six feet
from the ground, and three feet above the height of the table. He
was then floated into the dark; and he exclaimed: 'They have
turned me round, and I am coming towards you.' I saw his head
and face, the same height as before, and as if floating on air instead
of water. He then floated back, and came down and walked up to,
and sat on the edge of the table we were at, when the table began
to rise with him on it. Mr. Home was then taken behind to the
settee next to me, and while there, we heard sounds several times
as of some one giving utterance to a monosyllable in the middle of
the room. Feeling a pressure against my chair, I looked, and saw
that the ottoman had been brought along the floor about six feet, no
one touching it, and close to Mr. Home. He said, 'I suppose it is for
me to rest on,'—he lay down, and the ottoman went back to its
original position—'Oh! I am getting excited, let some one come
and sit with me.' I went, and sat beside him; he took my hand; and
in about a minute, and without any muscular action, he gently
floated away from and was lost in the darkness. He kept talking to
let us know where he was. We heard his voice in various parts of
the further end of the room, as if Dear the ceiling. He then cried
out, 'Oh I they have brought me a cushion to sit upon—I am sitting
on it—they are taking

                RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                       205

it away.' Just then the tassel of the cushion of another ottoman in
the room struck me on my hair and forehead as if coming from the
ceiling, and the cushion was deposited at my feet on the floor,
falling as if a snow flake. I next saw the shadow of his body on the
mirror as he floated along near the ceiling. He said, 'I wish I had a
pencil to make a mark on the ceiling. I have made a cross with my
nail.' He came down near the door, and after a pause, he was again
taken up; but I did not see him, but heard his voice as if near the
ceiling. Again be came down, and shortly returned to the table we
were at; and the sounds on the table bade us 'Good night.'"

  This is an account of "Another evening with Mr. Home." It is
given us in the words of the lady at whose house the
manifestations occurred. I have not, for good reasons, the liberty to
give her name, but I can answer for her position and character, and
for the perfect truthfulness of the narrative. I have, in addition, the
names of the nine persons who were present.

   "May the 3rd, 1860—The table was moved away from the
remaining seven of us, and we followed it; suddenly it rose in the
air, and without any help from us was placed on a large sofa that
stood before the window. The spirits told us to move this sofa
away, which we immediately did, and the table then moved of its
own accord up to the window where the hands had appeared to us
on former occasions, The shutters were opened and the candles
extinguished by their desire. Mr. Home sat next to the window,
and I sat next to

206            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

him with Miss H. on my other side. After sitting a few minutes
quietly I felt a form glide behind me: it touched my chair, placed
two hands on my shoulders, and then drew the heavy silk curtain
from a window behind me (we sat in a bow formed by three
windows) and folded the drapery round me like a cloak. The hands
and arms which enfolded me felt as palpable as human arms would
feel. On one of the party guessing the Dame of the spirit, it was
answered in the affirmative by three startling raps, which shook
the table, and felt as if produced by a bar of iron—no human hand
could have knocked with such force. As I was intently listening to
catch any sound, and straining my eyes to see any form that could
make itself visible, my comb was taken out of my hair by a spirit
hand, and laid on the table at a distance from me. By tiny gentle
raps my darling spirit child told me that he had taken it. Then a
hand rose under the window, and pulled down the blind. We
distinctly saw the fingers clutch the string—this is a green
transparent blind, through which the light can flow softly. The
hand then made graceful gestures and pointed upwards, and when
it disappeared it was followed by another, and then by a child's
hand. Suddenly I was touched on the shoulder, as if by some one
standing behind me and wishing to draw my attention. I thought it
was my daughter, and turned to speak to her, but I found no one. I
had hardly turned round, when my left shoulder was more strongly
touched, and on turning my head a spirit-hand held out to me a box
taken from a table at the other end of the room. I received it with
emotion, and as a precious gift; and the sweet hand that gave it

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                        207

was placed on my shoulder with a loving pressure. The spirit of
A— G— then showed his hand, touched his sister with it, and
played on the accordion, which by degrees was moved up in Mr.
Home's hand over his head, the knocks at the same time beating
measure, like a drum, very loudly on the table. The accordion was
finally taken entirely away by the spirits, who played on it at a
distance from us, the drumming continuing all the time on the
table, whilst another drum accompanied it from the other side of
the room. As soon as this ceased the table rose up in the air, and
floated away from us high above our heads, passing over sofas and
chairs in its way. We were naturally greatly interested at this
wonderful manifestation, and followed it into the darker part of the
room, and here arose a scene of indescribable confusion, but still
producing feelings in no way unpleasant, though we knew not
when we touched each other, who were spirits, and who were
fleshy human beings. The four cushions of the ottoman were
virtually hurled in the air at once, and flew to the other side of the
room. In answer to a remark made, a hand came down on my head,
as from a spirit floating above me, and pressed my forehead and
stroked my hair. As we gathered round the table nine or ten chairs
flew up like lightning, one behind each of us; the chair next to me
was empty (to the sight), but when I tried to move it I could not do
so, it appeared as if nailed to the ground, and by raps we were told
that L—— sat there. The united strength of several could not move
this chair. The heavy sofa on which G—— sat was moved
suddenly to the other end of the room, and the spirit of her brother
placed

208            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

his hand in hers, and held it for several minutes. Before leaving her
he gave a most touching manifestation. He blessed her by making
the sign of the cross on her forehead. He then came to me and did
the same. During these manifestations almost every article of
furniture in the room was moved out of its place."

  My dearly valued friend, Mr. Wason, who after twenty-nine
years of outer scepticism, takes pride in dating his new birth to the
belief of a spiritual life and a spiritual philosophy, from his
observations of the phenomena which he witnessed in my
presence, wrote at this time the interesting letter which I now give.

  "In July, 1860, I was at a seance at the mansion of a person of
distinction, in Hyde Park Terrace, London.

  "Two baronets—one an M.P., and the other the heir and
representative of a deceased M.P. of eminent ability; the wife of a
distinguished living M.P.; and others, including Mr. Home,
making eight in number present. The hour was a little after nine,
p.m. Neither of the three first-named parties had ever seen any
spirit manifestations, and were evidently sceptics: the rest of the
party were mediums of greater or less power, and seemed as much
interested in watching the effects of the spirit manifestations on
the three new comers, as in the manifestations themselves. We all
made a circle round a heavy loo table, capable of seating nine
persons comfortably (crinoline included). It was covered with an
ordinary damask cloth, (a powerful non-conductor of electricity,
completely negativing the theory that spirit manifestations were
brought about by electricity); and we were desired by Mr.

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                      209

Home to chat and talk as naturally and cheerfully as we could, and
not to be too eager or expectant of spirit manifestation, which he
stated had a strong tendency to defeat the object. There were six
lights burning in the room. The floor (a first floor) shook and
trembled in a manner that all thought resembled the vibrations or
tremulous motion on a small steamer's deck when the paddles are
in full work: some said it more nearly resembled the tremulous
motion on a screw steamer's deck, in which I concurred. This
tremulous motion ceased at intervals and was renewed, and this
seemed to strike the new comers very forcibly; it was amusing to
notice their startled looks, though they said but little beyond
concurring in the observations as to the tremulous movements. The
walls also shook at times with a tremulous motion. The table,
which was a very large and heavy one, was frequently lifted a few
inches from the ground, and at last it rose from the ground at least
three feet, and remained thus suspended 'twixt heaven and earth,
like Mahomet's coffin, for a minute or thereabouts, probably more
than less. The gentlemen were invited by Mr. Home to ascertain if
ally machinery was underneath, and the two gentlemen who were
new comers swept with their legs under the suspended table, to
catch any prop or other machinery that might be applied to raise
the table, and they confessed that no such machinery or prop was
present.

   "This seance, wonderful as it will appear—'stranger than
fiction'—was not considered to be an entirely successful one and
the lady of the house, with characteristic kindness, after speaking
of the meagreness of the manifestations, invited me to another
seance on

210            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

the following evening, an invitation I most gladly accepted,
although it kept me in London an extra day, and overthrew my
previously arranged movements. At this second seance we met
rather earlier, a little after eight o'clock, p.m., in the same first-
floor room. The seance consisted of a barrister of eminence and
standing at the bar, and well known to the public, a literary man—
an author of established reputation, and others to the number of
eight; all on this occasion being believers, except the author.

  "The same tremulous motion of the floor and walls as on the
preceding evening, took place; and the table was tilted and turned
with even greater power than before, and rose perpendicularly
from the floor, from three to four feet, and remained in this
position suspended (Mahomet's coffin fashion) for about a minute,
and then descended to its original place as softly and gently as the
fall of a snow flake. An accordion was played by an unseen hand,
whilst it was held by one of the party present, and afterwards by
myself. I held it over the back of the chair on which I was sitting,
using the back of the chair as a rest to my arm, the accordion
hanging over the back of the chair. I sat on the opposite side of the
table to Mr. Home and the lady of the house. The accordion was
also played whilst lying on the floor, and also on the table, and
was lifted without visible means from the floor on to the table. The
music was of a solemn and impressive character.

  "A small spirit-hand, warm and soft like that of a child, touched
my hand, and placed in it a small hand-bell, and, at my request,
took the bell from my hand

               RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.                       211

underneath the table to its mother, who was the lady of the house.
She seemed perfectly satisfied that it was the spirit-hand of her
little boy, who died three or four years since, aged about eight
years, and she received repeated responses, spelt out through the
alphabet, such as might be expected from the spirit of a deceased
child to its mother.

   "The bell was carried to several of the parties present and placed
in their hands; and lastly, was elevated above our heads, and rung
in mid-air, revolving round and touching our heads (my own
included). I could see the bell when it passed round my head
opposite the window. I could see the bell occasionally as it passed
between me and the window, the blinds of which had been drawn
down by invisible agency. Pieces of mignionette and geranium
flowers were placed in my hands by spirit hands, and inside my
waistcoat. I saw one of the hands distinctly, which, as it came
between me and the window was distinctly visible, as the blinds
did not altogether exclude the light of a summer evening and of the
gas lights in the street.

   The curtains at last were drawn by invisible means, and then Mr.
Home stated he was being lifted up in the air, and he crossed the
table over the heads of the parties sitting around it. I asked him to
make a mark with his pencil on the ceiling. He said he had no
pencil. I rose up and said I would lend him mine, and by standing
and stretching upwards I was enabled to reach his hand, about
seven feet distant from the floor, and I placed therein a pencil, and
laying hold and keeping hold of his hand, I moved along with him
five or six paces as he floated above me in the air, and I only let

212            RUSSIA, PARIS AND ENGLAND.

   go his hand when I stumbled against a stool. Mr. Home, as he
floated along, kept ringing the small hand-bell to indicate his
locality in the room, which was probably forty by thirty feet, and I
saw his body eclipse se two lines of light issuing from between the
top of a door and its architrave—such door leading into an
adjoining room that was brilliantly lighted. Mr. Home was
replaced, as he stated, with the greatest care and gentleness in the
chair from which he rose, but this I could not see.

  "Previously to Mr. Home's being raised up, the spirit-hands of
two of the barrister's deceased children touched him. He did not
doubt that the hands were the spirit-hands of his children.

  "Questions were asked, and rational answers given by means of
the alphabet, in one of the ordinary ways of communicating with
spirits. It is right that I should say, that this seance (as in the
preceding evening) was commenced with prayer, which I
understood was the usual course.

  "I make no comments on the above, and advance no theory or
hypothesis. I have confined myself simply to facts, which I can
substantiate by legal evidence in a court of justice; and I add my
name, address, and profession, and have only one desire, and that
is—that truth may prevail.

                                 "I am, Sir, your obedient Servant,
                                        "JAMES WASON, Solicitor.
"Wason Buildings, Liverpool."

                          CHAPTER IX.

            THE "CORNHILL" AND OTHER NARRATIVES.

   IT was at this time that the manifestations occurred which are
described with such accuracy and intelligence by the eminent
literary friend who wrote his account of what he saw in the
"Cornhill Magazine," under the title of "Stranger than Fiction."
This paper travels over nearly the whole ground of the physical
manifestations, and is written with such masterly observation, and
ability of description that I feel it will be a boon to the reader to
have some few extracts from it. He commences by quoting:

  "The reply of Dr. Treviranus to inquiries put to him by
Coleridge as to the reality of certain magnetic phenomena which
that distinguished savant was reported to have witnessed. 'I have
seen what I would not have believed on your testimony, and what I
cannot, therefore, expect you to believe upon mine.'"

  For the information of Professor Faraday and other such persons
who believe in his foolish theory of involuntary muscular motion
as being the cause of the phenomena, he says: "While we were
seated at the

214             THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.

table, we barely touched it with the tips of our fingers. I was
anxious to satisfy myself with respect to the involuntary pressure
which has been attributed to the imposition of hands. In this case
there was none. My friends kindly gratified my request to avoid
resting the slightest weight on the table; and we held our hands
pointing downwards, with merely the nails touching the wood. Not
only was this light contact inadequate to produce the violent
evolutions that took place, but the evolutions were so irregular and
perplexing, that we could not have produced them by
premeditation. Presently, however, we had conclusive proofs that
the vivacity of the table did not require any help from us.

   Turning suddenly over on one side, it sunk to the floor. In this
horizontal position it glided slowly towards a table which stood
close to a large ottoman in the centre of the room. We had much
trouble in following it, the apartment being crowded with
furniture, and our difficulty was considerably increased by being
obliged to keep up with it in a stooping attitude. Part of the
journey it performed alone, and we were never able to reach it at
any time together. Using the leg of the large table as a fulcrum, it
directed its claws towards the ottoman, which it attempted to
ascend, by inserting one claw in the side, then turning half way
round to make good another step, and so on. It slipped down at the
first attempt, but again quietly resumed its task. It was exactly like
a child trying to climb up a height. All this time we hardly touched
it, being afraid of interfering with its movements, and, above all
things, determined not to assist them. At last, by careful and
persevering efforts, it accomplished

                THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.                       215

the top of the ottoman, and stood on the summit of the column in
the centre, from whence in a few minutes it descended to the floor
by a similar process."
  The writer makes the following pertinent reflection on what he
has just described. "It is not to be expected that any person who is
a stranger to these phenomena, should read such a story as this
with complacency. Yet here is a fact which undoubtedly took
place, and which cannot be referred to any known physical or
mechanical forces. It is not a satisfactory answer to those who
have seen such things, to say that they are impossible: since, in
such cases, it is evident that the impossibility of a thing does not
prevent it happening.
  Upon many subsequent occasions the writer says that he has
witnessed phenomena of a similar nature, and others of a much
more startling character. He tells us for instance, "When I saw a
table, at which two ladies were seated, moving towards me without
any adequate impulse being imparted to it by visible means, I
thought the fact sufficiently extraordinary; but my wonder abated
when, on subsequent occasions, I saw tables move apparently of
their own volition, there being no persons near them; large sofas
advance from the walls against which they stood; and chairs,
sometimes occupied, and sometimes empty, shift their places for
the distance of a foot or a yard, in some cases easily, and in others
with a slow, laborious movement."
  As to the peculiar trembling of the table and room, he says, "On
the first occasion when I experienced the effect I am about to
describe, there were five persons

216             THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.

in the room. In other places, where it occurred subsequently, there
were seven or more. The architecture of the houses in each case
was wholly dissimilar, both as to the area and height of the
apartments, and the age, size, and strength of the buildings. We
were seated at a table at which some singular phenomena,
accompanied by loud knocks on the walls and floor, had just
occurred, when we became conscious of a strange vibration that
palpitated through the entire room. We listened and watched
attentively. The vibration grew stronger and stronger. It was
palpably under our feet. Our chairs shook, and the floor trembled
violently. The effect was exactly like the throbbing and heaving
which might be supposed to take place in a house in the tropics
during the moment immediately preceding an earthquake. This
violent motion continued for two or three minutes, then gradually
subsided and ceased. Every person present was equally affected by
it on each occasion when it occurred. To produce such a result by
machinery might be possible if the introduction of the machinery
itself were possible. But the supposition involves a difficulty
somewhat similar to that of Mr. Knickerbocker's theory of the
earth standing on the back of a tortoise, which might be an
excellent theory if we could only ascertain what the tortoise stood
upon."

   He now speaks of the raising of the table altogether from the
floor, which he repeatedly witnessed. "Presently the table rises
with a slight jerk, and steadily mounts till it attains such a height
as to render it necessary for the company to stand up, in order still
to be able to keep their hands with ease in contact with

                THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.                        217

the surface, although that is not absolutely necessary. As there are
some present who have not witnessed this movement before, a
desire is expressed to examine the floor, and a gentleman goes
under the table for the purpose. The whole space, open to the view
of the entire party, is clear. From the carpet to the foot of the table
there is a blank interval of perhaps two feet, perhaps three,—for
nobody has thought of providing a means of measuring it, and we
must take it by guess. The carpet is examined, and the legs and
under surface of the table are explored, but without result. There is
no trace of any connection between the floor and the table; nor can
it be conceived how there could be any, as the table had shifted to
this spot from the place where it originally stood only a few
minutes before. The inspection is hurried and brief, but
comprehensive enough to satisfy us that the table has not been
raised by mechanical means from below; and such means could
not be applied from above without the means of immediate
detection. In its ascent, the table has swung out of its orbit, but it
readjusts itself before it begins to descend, and, resuming its
vertical position, it comes down on the spot from whence it rose.
The downward notion is slow, and, if I may use the expression,
graceful; and the table reaches the ground with a dreamy softness
that renders its touch almost imperceptible.

"Of a somewhat similar character is another movement, in some
respects more curious, and certainly opening a stranger field for
speculation. The table rears itself up on one side, until the surface
forms an inclined plane, at an angle of about 450. In this attitude

218             THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.

it stops. According to ordinary experience every-thing on the table
must slide off, or topple over; but nothing stirs. The vase of
flowers, the books, the little ornaments are as motionless as if they
were fixed in their places. We agree to take away our hands, to
throw up the ends of the cover, so as to leave the entire round
pillar and claws exposed, and to remove our chairs to a little
distance, that we may have a more complete command of a
phenomenon, which, in its marvellous development at least, is, I
believe, new to us all. Our withdrawal makes no difference
whatever; and now we see distinctly on all sides the precise pose
of the table, which looks, like the Tower of Pisa, as if it must
inevitably tumble over. With a view to urge the investigation as far
as it can be carried, a wish is whispered for a still more conclusive
display of the power by which this extraordinary result has been
accomplished. The desire is at once complied with. The table leans
more and more out of the perpendicular; two of the three claws are
high above the ground; and finally, the whole structure stands on
the extreme tip of a single claw, fearfully overbalanced, but
maintaining itself as steadily as if it were an one solid mass,
instead of being freighted with a number of loose articles, and as if
the position had been planned in strict accordance with the laws of
equilibrium and attraction, instead of involving an inexplicable
violation of both."

  Of the music from an accordion playing by itself on the floor, he
says:—"Apart from the wonderful consideration of its being
played without hands—no less wonderful was the fact of its being
played in a narrow

                THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.                       219

space which would not admit of its being drawn out with the
requisite freedom to its full extent. We listened with suspended
breath. The air was wild, and full of strange transitions; with a
wail of the most pathetic sweetness running through it. The
execution was no less remarkable for its delicacy than its power.
When the notes swelled in some of the bold passages, the sound
rolled through the room with an astounding reverberation; then,
gently subsiding, sank into a strain of divine tenderness. But it was
the close that touched the hearts, and drew the tears of the
listeners. Milton dreamt of this wondrous termination when he
wrote of 'linked sweetness long drawn out.' By what art the
accordion was made to yield that dying note, let practical
musicians determine. Our ears, that heard it, had never before been
visited by a 'sound so fine.' It continued diminishing and
diminishing, and stretching far eway into distance and darkness,
until the attenuated thread of sound became so exquisite that it was
impossible at last to fix the moment when it ceased."

   The writer disposes of all question of fraud or mechanical
contrivance, by telling us:—"We need not speculate on what might
be done by skilful contrivances, since the question is removed out
of the region of conjecture by the fact that, upon holding up the
instrument myself in one hand, in the open room, with the full
light upon it, similar strains were emitted, the regular action of the
accordion going on without any visible agency. And I should add
that, during the loud and vehement passages, it became so difficult
to hold, in consequence of the extraordinary power with

220            THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.

which it was played from below, that I was obliged to grasp the
top with both hands. This experience was not a solitary one. I
witnessed the same result on different occasions, when the
instrument was held by others."

   He also several times was present when I was raised from the
ground; and he gives the following description of what he
observed:—"Mr. Home was seated next to the window. Through
the semi-darkness his head was dimly visible against the curtains,
and his hands might be seen in a faint white heap before him.
Presently, he said, in a quiet voice, 'My chair is moving—I am off
the ground—don't notice me—talk of something else,' or words to
that effect. It was very difficult to restrain the curiosity, not
unmixed with a more serious feeling, which these few words
awakened; but we talked, incoherently enough, upon some
indifferent topic. I was sitting nearly opposite to Mr. Home, and I
saw his hands disappear from the table, and his head vanish into
the deep shadow beyond. In a moment or two more he spoke
again. This time his voice was in the air above our heads. He had
risen from his chair to a height of four or five feet from the
ground. As he ascended higher he described his position, as at first
perpendicular, and afterwards horizontal. He said he felt as if he
had been turned in the gentlest manner, as a child is turned in the
arms of a nurse. In a moment or two more, he told us that he was
going to pass across the window, against the gray, silvery light of
which he would be visible. We watched in profound stillness, and
saw his figure pass from one side of the window to the other, feet
foremost,

               THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.                       221

lying horizontally in the air. He spoke to us as he passed, and told
us that he would turn the reverse way, and recross the window;
which he did. His own tranquil confidence in the safety of what
seemed from below a situation of the most novel peril, gave
confidence to everybody else; but, with the strongest nerves, it was
impossible not to be conscious of a certain sensation of fear or
awe. He hovered round the circle for several minutes, and passed,
this time perpendicularly, over our heads. I heard his voice behind
me in the air, and felt something lightly brush my chair. It was his
foot, which he gave me leave to touch. Turning to the spot where it
was on the top of the chair, I placed my hand gently upon it, when
he uttered a cry of pain, and the foot was withdrawn quickly, with
a palpable shudder. It was evidently not resting on the chair, but
floating; and it sprang from the touch as a bird would. He now
passed over to the farthest extremity of the room, and we could
judge by his voice of the altitude and distance he had attained. He
had reached the ceiling, upon which he made a slight mark, and
soon afterwards descended and resumed his place at the table. Ali
incident which occurred during this aerial passage, and imparted a
strange solemnity to it, was that the accordion, which we supposed
to be on the ground under the window close to us, played a strain
of wild pathos in the air from the most distant corner in the room."

  A most able, quiet, and philosophical description of these and
others of the phenomena which he witnessed, is closed by some
remarks which it is too much to hope that many will profit from.
There is so much

222             THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.

unreasoning opposition to the facts, that an appeal To reason in
favour of them is almost out of place. He says:—"To say that
certain phenomena are incredible, is merely to say that they are
inconsistent with the present state of our knowledge; but knowing
how imperfect our knowledge is, we are not, therefore, justified in
asserting that they are impossible. The 'failures' which have
occurred at seances are urged as proofs that the whole thing is a
cheat. If such an argument be worth noticing, it is sufficient to say
that ten thousand failures do not disprove a single fact. But it must
be evident that as we do not know the conditions of 'success,' we
cannot draw any argument from 'failures.' We often hear people
say that they might believe such a thing, if such another thing were
to happen; making assent to a particular fact, by an odd sort of
logic, depend upon the occurrence of something else. 'I will
believe,' for example, says a philosopher, of this stamp, 'that a
table has risen from the ground, when I see the lamp-posts dancing
quadrilles. Then, tables? Why do these things happen to tables?'
Why, that is one of the very matters which it is desirable to
investigate, but which we shall never know anything about so long
as we ignore inquiry. And, above all, of what use are these
wonderful manifestations? What do they prove? What benefit have
they conferred on the world? Sir John Herschel has answered these
questions with a weight of authority which is final. 'The question,
Cui bono? to what practical end and advantages do your
researches tend?'—is one which the speculative philosopher, who
loves knowledge for its own sake, and enjoys,

                THE "CORNHILL" NARRATIVE.                                 223

as a rational being should enjoy, the mere contemplation of
harmonious and mutually dependent truths, can seldom hear
without a sense of humiliation. He feels that there is a lofty and
disinterested pleasure in his speculations, which ought to exempt
them from such questioning. 'But,' adds Sir John, 'if he can bring
himself to descend from this high but fair ground, and justify
himself, his pursuits, and his pleasures in the eyes of those around
him, he has only to point to the history of all science, where
speculations, apparently the most unprofitable, have almost
invariably been those from which the greatest practical
applications have emanated.'*
  "The first thing to be done is to collect and verify facts. But this
can never be done if we insist upon refusing to receive any facts,
except such as shall appear to us likely to be true, according to the
measure of our intelligence and knowledge."
  This article was received by the public in the only way which
was likely, from the novelty to so many of the subject of the
phenomena; and though those who were acquainted personally
with the marvellous occurrences so well described in the
Magazine, well knew their truth, yet the writer and the Editor of
the "Cornhill" were severely blamed by many for allowing the
appearance of what they designated as such absurdity. As the
article was anonymous, the facts stated in it were deliberately
denied by the press, and to stem the torrent of abuse and unbelief,
a gentleman, who has since become my very esteemed friend,
wrote, giving his
     * Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy, p. 10.

224                  DR. GULLY'S LETTER.

name, the following letter, which is introduced by some prefatory
remarks, in the "Spiritual Magazine." The letter of Dr. Gully, of
Malvern, first appeared in the" Morning Star," which of all the
London papers has been the most fair and candid in dealing with
the facts of Spiritualism:

  "Sir,—In Mr. Coleman's letter of the 11th inst., he gives his
opinion that the gentlemen who were present at the meetings
recorded in the 'Cornhill Magazine,' under the head of 'Stranger
than Fiction,' should confirm or confute the statements made in
that article. I was one of the persons present at the evening
meeting. The other gentlemen were a solicitor in extensive
practice, and two well-known writers of solid instructive works—
not writers of fiction—who, by-the-bye, appear to be so used to
inventing that they cannot believe that any one can possibly be
employed in stating facts. It will be seen that the joke about 'fools
of fashion' does not apply to the gentlemen alluded to, but that we
were all workers in callings in which matters of fact, and not of
fancy, especially come under observation. Further, it may be
useful to some persons to know that we were neither asleep, nor
intoxicated, nor even excited. We were complete masters of our
senses; and I submit that their evidence is worth a thousand
conjectures and explanations made by those who were not present.
Scores of times I have been much more agitated and excited in
investigating a patient's case, than I was in observing what
occurred at the evening meeting in question.

  "With this state of senses at the time, and revolving the
occurrences in my mind again and again, Since

                     DR. GULLY'S LETTER.                         225

that time, I can state with the greatest positiveness that the record
made in the article, 'Stranger than Fiction,' is, in every particular,
correct; that the phenomena therein related actually took place in
the evening meeting; and, moreover, that no trick, machinery,
sleight-of-hand, or other artistic contrivance produced what we
heard and beheld. I am quite as convinced of this last as I am of
the facts themselves.

  "Only consider that here is a man, between ten and eleven stone
in weight, floating about the room for many, minutes—in the
tomb-like silence which prevailed, broken only by his voice
coming from different quarters of the room, according to his then
position—is it probable, is it possible, that any machinery could be
devised—not to speak of its being set up and previously made
ready in a room, which was fixed upon as the place of meeting
only five minutes before we entered it—capable of carrying such a
weight about without the slightest sound of any description? Or
suppose, as has been suggested, that he bestrode an inflated
balloon, could a balloon have been introduced inflated large
enough to hold in mid-air such a, weight? Or could it have been
inflated with hydrogen gas without being detected by ears, eyes, or
nose?

   "It seems to me a much stronger sign of credulity to believe
either of these suggestions, with our present knowledge, than to
adopt the wildest statements or dreams of what is called
Spiritualism. Let it be remembered, moreover, that the room was,
for a good part of the evening, in a blaze of light, in which no
balloon or other machine sufficient for the supposed purpose could
be introduced; or, if already introduced,

226                  DR. GULLY'S LETTER.

could remain unobserved; and that, even when the room was
comparatively darkened, light streamed through the window from
a distant gas-lamp outside, between which gas-lamp and our eyes
Mr. Home's form passed, so that we distinctly perceived its trunk
and limbs; and most assuredly there was no balloon near him, nor
any machinery attached to him. His foot once touched my head
when he was floating above.

   "Then the accordion music. I distinctly saw the instrument
moving, and heard it playing when held only at one end, again and
again. I held it myself for a short time, and had good reason to
know that it was vehemently pulled at the other end, and not by
Mr. Home's toes, as has been wisely surmised, unless that
gentleman has legs three yards long, with toes at the end of them
quite as marvellous as any legion of spirits. For, be it stated, that
such music as we heard was no ordinary strain; it was grand at
times, at others pathetic, at others distant and long-drawn, to a
degree which no one can imagine who has not heard it. I have
heard Blagrove repeatedly, but it is no libel on that master of the
instrument to say that he never did produce such exquisite distant
and echo notes as those which delighted our ears. The instrument
played, too, at distant parts of the room, many yards away from
Mr. Home, and from all of us. I believe I am stating a fact when I
say, that not one person in that room could play the accordion at
all. Mr. Home cannot play a note upon it.

  "To one whose external senses have witnessed these things, it is
hard to increase the insufficiency of those

                    DR. GULLY'S LETTER.                        227

attempted explanations which assert the use of tricks and
machinery. As I said before, it requires much more credulity to
believe such explanations than to swallow all the ghost stories that
ever were related. I may add that the writer in the 'Cornhill
Magazine' omits to mention several curious phenomena which
were witnessed that evening. Here is one of them. A distinguished
litterateur, who was present, asked the supposed spirit of his
father, whether he would play his favourite ballad for us, and,
addressing us, he added—'The accordion was not invented at the
time of my father's death, so I cannot conceive how it will be
effected; but if his favourite air is not played, I pledge myself to
tell you so.' Almost immediately the flute notes of the accordion
(which was upon the floor) played through 'Ye banks and braes of
Bonnie Doon,' which the gentleman alluded to assured us was his
father's favourite air, whilst the flute was his father's favourite
instrument. He then asked for another favourite air of his father's,
'which was not Scotch,' and 'The Last Rose of Summer' was played
in the same note. This, the gentleman told us, was the air to which
he had alluded.

   "I have thus borne testimony to the truthfulness of the facts
related by the writer in the 'Cornhill Magazine,' whom I recognise
as having been my neighbour during the meeting. And I have
endeavoured to show that, as regards the principal and most
wonderful phenomena, there could have been no contrivance by
trick or machinery adequate to produce or account for their
existence. How, then, were they produced? I know not; and I
believe that we are very—very far from having accumulated facts
enough upon which to frame

228                  DR. GULLY'S LETTER.

any laws or build any theory regarding the agent at work in their
production. Intelligent phenomena, such am the music played at
request, point to intelligent agents; and spiritual bodies that have
quitted fleshly bodies may be at work. I, for one, wish that it were
proved to be so; for a more solemn discovery than that of a means
of communication between embodied and disembodied sentient
beings cannot be imagined. It giddies the brain to think of the
possible result of such a discovery. But, whilst I obstinately stand
up for the integrity of my senses during my observation of the
wonders above related, my inner senses cannot but observe many
gaps that must be filled up before the bridge between the spiritual
body's life here in the flesh, and its life elsewhere out of the flesh,
can be finished. Meantime the facts must be patiently and honestly
accumulated, and enthusiasm must be banished from the minds of
the enquirers. And as regards the denials, and abuses, and jests of
the non-enquirers, let it be remembered that scurillity and laughter
never discovered or disproved anything in the world's history.

  "Respecting the purely physical phenomena, such as the raising
of weights whether of human bodies or tables, it may be that we
are on the verge of discovering some physical force hitherto
undreamed of; who shall say that we know all the powers of
nature? Here, too, dispassionate inquiry must go on, regardless of
the noise outside; regardless, too, of the ignorant and malicious
prejudice which would blast the reputation of those who enquire in
a direction opposite to that prejudice.

                      DR. GULLY'S LETTER.                        229

  "Enquirers, unlike routine people, must be prepared to rough it
among their fellow-creatures. And I suppose that I, for having
asserted that I have five senses as yet unimpaired, and for having
testified to what the majority disbelieve, shall come in for my
share of pity or abuse. Let it be so, if it helps on a truthful search.

                                                          "I am, Sir,
                                                    "Yours faithfully,
                                                 "J. M. GULLY, M.D.

"Malvern, Oct. 14."

                          CHAPTER X.

     MIRACULOUS PRESERVATION. FRANCE AND ENGLAND.

  WE left London the 24th of July, 1860, for the Chateau de C—
—, near Paris. One of the most remarkable interpositions of
Providence which have ever happened to me occurred at this
place. Many doubt the possibility of such interpositions, but I have
not been allowed to doubt them, and I have to thank our Heavenly
Father that I have so often been made aware of His ministering
care and kind Providence. I do not suppose for a moment because
of this, that His Providence is more over me than over all His
children, and I believe that in looking back over our past lives,
there are none of us who can fail to recognise the finger of God
directing and protecting them, often in some remarkable and even
almost physical way, though generally, perhaps, through means
apparently more remote than those which saved my life on the
16th September, 1860.

   I had just returned from Naples, whither I had been to visit a
friend—but who had passed from earth before I had arrived—and I
found my health affected by fatigue of travelling and mental
depression. Being recommended to take much out-door exercise,
during my

                MIRACULOUS PRESERVATION.                         231

stay at the Chateau de C——, I used to take with me my gun—
more that it might be said I was out shooting than for any great
attraction the sport has for me. The Chateau de C——, distant
half-an-hour by railway from Paris, stands in a beautiful old park.
Some of the trees are of very great height; one of the largest, a
northern poplar, stands a quarter of a mile from the chateau at an
angle of the park, where it is separated from the outer grounds by a
hedge. To this spot, when there is much shooting going on in the
neighbourhood, the game used to come for shelter; and I, who am
but an indifferent marksman, could get easy shots by planting
myself by the hedge.

  On the day mentioned, I had been walking with my friend,
Mons. T——, and on his leaving me, I bent my steps to this
favourite corner, wishing to take home a partridge. As I neared the
hedge, I stooped and advanced cautiously. When close up to it, I
was raising my head to look for my game, when on my right I
heard some one call out, "Here, here!" My only feeling was
surprise at being thus suddenly addressed in English. The desire to
have a good look out for my game, overruled my curiosity as to
whom the exclamation had come from, and I was continuing to
raise my head to the level of the hedge, when suddenly I was
seized by the collar of my coat and vest, and lifted off the ground.
At the same instant I heard a crashing sound, and then all was
quiet. I felt neither fear nor wonder. My first thought was that by
some accident my gun had exploded, and that I was in the spirit-
land; but, looking about, I saw that I was still in the material world,
and there was the gun still in my

232            MIRACULOUS PRESERVATION.

hands. My attention was then drawn to what appeared to be a tree
immediately before me, where no tree had been. On examination,
this proved to be the fallen limb of the high tree under which I was
standing. I then saw that I had been drawn aside from this fallen
limb a distance of six or seven feet. I ran, in my excitement, as fast
as I could to the chateau. My friends, seeing me running, hastened
to the window to learn the cause of my disturbance. As soon as I
recovered my power of speech, I told them how God, by his good
angels, had saved my life, and they returned with me to the scene
of what I must call my miraculous escape.

  I will not attempt to portray the feelings of those present, but if
ever heartfelt prayer of thankfulness ascended to God's holy
throne, it was then and there, from us all, even to the servants, who
broke off twigs to keep as mementos of the mercy shown me.

   The limb which had thus fallen, measured sixteen yards and a
half in length, and where it had broken from the trunk, it was one
yard in circumference. It fell from a height of forty-five feet. The
part of the limb, which struck the very spot where I had been
standing, measured twenty-four inches in circumference, and
penetrated the earth at least a foot. The next day a friend made a
sketch of the tree and branch. We now speculated as to how it
could have happened. The tree is not a dead one, nor was the
branch at all decayed, and there was scarcely wind enough to stir
the leaves. The branch was so cleanly reft from the trunk that one
might at first think it had been sawn off, and the bark was not in
the least torn about it. I

               MIRACULOUS PRESERVATION.                          233

have been informed since that such accidents are not uncommon
with trees of this species of poplar, and that there are trees of a
similar quality in Australia, under which settlers will not remain
for fear of such sudden breakages.

  A day or two after, Dr. Hoefer, one of the most learned men in
France, and for whom I have the highest esteem and regard, as a
sincere truth-seeker, and a friend deserving every confidence,
came at about noon and requested a seance. We had one, and a
very good one it was. Answers were given to questions of the
utmost importance. All at once, it was spelled out, "Go, see the
branch." Dr. Hoefer, impressed as it were, withdrew from the
table, saying, "Perhaps they are going there." I went to the
drawing-room, and asked the ladies if they would join us, but the
day being damp and the walking bad, they declined.

   I ought to have said, that the thick end of the branch rested, at a
height of eight feet from the ground, firmly against the trunk of the
tree, so much so that the possibility of its coming down had never
for an instant occurred to us, but rather that the strength of several
horses should be required to move it. Our surprise, then, may be
imagined when we now found that it had been moved three or four
inches laterally from its original point of support. Dr. Hoefer said,
"I firmly believe that the branch will be pushed down before us." I
replied, "That seems almost an impossibility." At the same time, I
took in my hand one of the smaller twigs and mentally said, "Dear
spirits, will you push this branch down?" I then distinctly felt as if
some one gently touched the twig which I

234            MIRACULOUS PRESERVATION.

held; this was repeated, and at the third touch, as it felt to me, the
branch fell to the ground.

  Four persons witnessed this, and are ready to testify to what I
here relate.

  I had afterwards a piece of the thickest part of the fallen tree
sawn off, and sent to me in London, where it still is, and with it on
many occasions, some of which will be afterwards mentioned,
some very marvellous manifestations took place.

   One evening, at the chateau, as we were seated at the table, the
spirits having requested that the candles should be extinguished,
the table drawn to the window, and the curtains opened to admit
the moonlight, there had been some striking manifestations, and
the time had been passing almost imperceptibly to us all, when a
gentleman who was present, said that he felt very much exhausted,
and he asked for a glass of brandy and water. It was brought, and
he took it in his hand, and was about raising it to his mouth, when
a spirit hand suddenly appeared, took hold of the lower part of the
glass, and disappeared with it under the table. We laughingly said
that our unseen friends surely did not believe in the use of
stimulants. To this they assented by emphatic raps, and at the same
moment the glass slowly rose again before him empty. The
windows being closed, we supposed the water had been thrown
upon the floor, and we arose to see where it was. We could
discover no trace of it. About two minutes had elapsed, when the
same glass which was standing empty before him, was seen
without any visible cause, gradually to approach the edge of the
table, and to disappear beneath it. I do

               MIRACULOUS PRESERVATION.                       235

not believe that above two seconds could have elapsed, before it
again appeared with the brandy and water in it, apparently not less
in quantity than when first brought in, though the quality had
certainly undergone some chemical change, as it had now lost
much of its brown colour. By the raps, a warning was given to all
of us against such indulgence.

  In September we left the chateau to spend a month in Paris, and
we paid a short visit to our relatives at Biarritz, returning to
England at the end of November, 1861. My wife's health being
delicate, the medical men having discovered an internal disease,
which, though of a serious nature, might yet last for many years,
we did not during this winter see so many friends, but I had
seances as often as I could.

  From an esteemed friend, who had been rescued from scepticism
by the manifestations of spirit power which he had so often
witnessed, I find a letter describing what he saw in London at this
time.

   Seven of us were present in a large drawing-room, lighted by a
good fire and three gas-burners. The accordion was taken by one
of our friends who had never been present at any manifestations,
and in his hands it was forcibly pulled, and several chords
played—in my hand also the same was done; but the weight of the
instrument made the holding of it painful to me. We then began to
be touched; and I felt a soft body passing across my knees. A
gentleman and I wishing our hands to be grasped by a spirit,
placed our handkerchiefs over our hands, in a single fold. Shortly,
the handkerchief was taken off by what seemed to me like air
fingers—so gentle, so soft. It was

236            MIRACULOUS PRESERVATION.

carried to the gentleman opposite, and by him received and handed
to me; the other was restored to the owner tied into a curious knot.
All other hands were on the table during the whole of the time.
Two of the three gas-lights were now put out—and the fire
burning brightly, gave a subdued light in the room. Mr. Home then
became cataleptic in his hands and arms: he was raised from his
seat till he stood upright, and then he rose vertically till he was a
foot above the floor—his head level with the chandelier—this was
repeated twice, but he did not rise higher. On sitting down again,
the table-cloth was several times raised up in different parts of the
table, and, I with others, placed my hand on the substance which
so raised it, and to my sense of feeling, it was as if a plastic hand
and fingers touched mine, yielding to my pressure. During our
conversations, approval or disapproval of some things said were
given by energetic concussions. The loudest affirmatives were
when it was said these manifestations were by, God's permission,
to prove to us the continued existence of our relatives, and of our
immortality; also that we could not be alone, as there were ever
about us unseen active intelligences, who saw our actions, heard
our words, and discerned our thoughts.

  "The lady who was with me had laughed and wondered at my
foolishness for these several years past for believing in spirit-
power manifestations; but now, wonder, joyousness, and belief
took possession of her, and the candid avowal of her conviction,
and the consequences to certain materialistic members of her
family,

               MIRACULOUS PRESERVATION.                       237

seemed to be producing a powerful effect upon her mind.

   "What is the use of spirits descending to the level of our
educational obtuseness, and producing the class of phenomena
detailed in this rough sketch? The question is answered by my
giving a portion of a letter received on the 6th of this month from
one of our literary celebrities, whose name has not yet been
prominently before the public in connection with spirit
manifestations. Having sent to the editors of the daily and weekly
newspapers and magazines a printed letter on spirit manifestations,
I had a reply from one of the editors, who says:

  "'I know all you have stated, and more—I have seen and felt all
you have stated, and more. I believe I am no 'fool'—I am sure I am
no 'rogue.' To me the belief has been an unspeakable comfort,
thoroughly taking me away from that materialism into which I had
crept: and I believe that to be the main purpose of spiritual
teaching, and the reason why, the great principle is developed in
our time.'
  "I have had the same testimony given to me by many others.
                                                    "JOHN JONES.
"Basinghall Street, 14th January, 1861."

  The important testimony of my friend Mr. James Hutchinson,
for many years the chairman of the Stock Exchange, is one to
which I would draw attention, as it appears from his well-known
character and sagacity, to be just such as ought to be received as
conclusive evidence of what he relates. Mr. Hutchinson says:

238                   MR. HUTCHINSON

  "I have for some time past felt an interest in the subject of
Spiritual Manifestations. Like most persons I had great difficulty
in realising the statements made to me of the wonders which were
daily witnessed by others, but the evidence of friends satisfied me
that there must be something worthy of serious investigation, and I
therefore determined to take every opportunity of looking into it
for myself. I have now done so, and I feel it a duty to openly bear
my testimony to the facts, leaving others to theorise on the causes
and tendency of these remarkable phenomena.

   "Recently introduced by a friend to Mr. D. D. Home, a seance
was arranged for the 23rd instant, and together with Mr. and Mrs.
Coleman, Mr. G. S. Clarke, Mr. T. Clarke, Mr. Gilbert Davidson,
and another lady and gentleman unknown to me, we formed a
party of nine. Shortly after sitting down, we all felt a tremulous
motion in our chairs, and in the table, which was a very heavy
circular drawing-room table. This movement of the table increased
in power, and at the suggestion of Mr. Coleman, it imitated the
exact action and sound of a stroke of a powerful marine engine
acting on and vibrating the timbers of a weak-framed vessel.

  "The rapping sounds on the table and floor were constant; the
heavy table was raised up repeatedly—and these manifestations
were continued whilst my friend, Mr. Clarke, and another were
seated, at the request of Mr. Home, under the table.

  "Two hand-bells, one weighing at least a pound and a half, were
passed from one to another of the party by the unseen agencies.
All of us in turn felt the

                        MR. HUTCHINSON                           239

touch and pressure of a soft and fleshy life-like hand. I saw the full
formed hand as it rested on my knee. The accordion, whilst held
by Mr. Home in one hand, discoursed most eloquent music, and
then to our great astonishment it was taken from him, and whilst
both his hands and those of all of the party were visibly imposed
on the surface of the table—the accordion, suspended from the
centre of the table, gave out an exquisite air, no human hand
touching it!

   "These and many other incidents of a seriously impressive but
private character, of which I do not hesitate to speak among my
friends, occupied about four hours of what I must admit to be one
of the most interesting evenings I have ever spent. I place the facts
as we witnessed them at your disposal for publicity, if you please,
merely adding, that contrary to the assertions so constantly made
that the manifestations are always in the dark, the whole of the
phenomena of which I have spoken were manifested in a room
lighted with gas, and a bright fire burning.

                                                       "Yours, &c.,
                                                "JAS. HUTCHINSON.
"January 26th, 1861."

  The following editorial remarks, introducing the letter of "A
Plain Man," appeared in the 'Sunday Times,' of the 17th February.
The "Plain Man" is well-known to me, and I can personally vouch
for his high character and intelligence, but he is in a position,
which makes it a matter of prudence that it should not be known
publicly that he has seen what he has seen. If science and religion
are satisfied with this uncharitable

240                       A PLAIN MAN.

state of things, I confess that I am not, and that I sigh for the days
when every man and woman will be able to tell the truth without
being robbed of their bread by the calumnies of those who are
simply uninformed as to the facts which are observed. The editor
of the 'Sunday Times,' says:

   "In accordance with the pledge we made at the time when we
inserted a notice of Mr. Novra's lecture, we hasten to give
publicity to a letter which we have received, accompanied by the
name and address of the writer. From the high position which that
gentleman holds, and the widely-admitted truthfulness of his
assertions, we cannot do otherwise than believe that he personally
saw all that he relates, and thus we are again thrown back on the
sea of doubt—anxious to arrive at the truth, yet unable to do so.
Fortunately, it is not our duty to decide, or even to give our
opinion on such matters; we, therefore, publish the letter hoping
that if a certain enlightening spirit is granted, which may clear up
the truth, that it may be shed upon us, or that if the whole thing is
fictitious and imaginary, the delusion may soon be dissipated. Too
much credulity on the one hand is contemptible. A blind obstinacy
has often nearly marred the best revelations which Providence has
vouchsafed to science.

               "To the Editor of the 'Sunday Times.'

  Sir,—For some time I have been waiting for a favourable
opportunity to address you, and to state certain facts connected
with Spiritualism, which clearly demonstrate the existence of what
many persons seem

                          A PLAIN MAN.                            241

determined to deny. Such sceptics, by their arguments, so far from
doing any injury to the cause, have been the means of inducing
many to enquire into the phenomena, who otherwise, in all
probability, would never have thought of doing so, and as a
consequence, have converted them into thorough believers. Nine
such cases have occurred at my own house. Again, throughout all
the books and articles I have read, I never have found advanced
one single argument against possibility of a communication with
the spiritual world, but merely expositions of the tricks practised
by some interested persons, thus confirming those who were only
half convinced, and enabling all who are fortunate enough to be
present at a bond fide seance, more easily to distinguish between
reality and deceit. Clearly, such persons deserve the thanks of us
all. The columns of a newspaper could not admit, nor have I the
time to write, the many reasons to be adduced in favour of the
probability of spiritual manifestations; all I ask of you is to insert a
plain statement, from a plain man, of certain facts so striking,
extraordinary, and convincing, that those who have seen them
cannot fail to believe, and by which not only are the ideas of a
man's lifetime upset, but the very laws of nature and gravitation as
hitherto understood, appear to be scattered to the winds.

  "A few nights since, a party of seven, including Mr. Home and
two ladies, assembled, en seance, round a heavy Large circular
table. For a short time nothing extraordinary took place, but at
length a convulsive throbbing was felt in the table, which shortly
began to move, undulating with an easy, graceful movement,

242                      A PLAIN MAN.

and raising itself at times about a foot off the ground. At the same
time there were knocks in quick succession under the table, on the
floor, ceiling, and round the room, a gentleman being under the
table at the time, at Mr. Home's request, to guard against the
possibility of collusion. After some trivial communications, a
small hand-bell was held by me under the table, and in a few
minutes I perceived, on looking down, a small white hand (every
other hand belonging to the party assembled, being on the table),
which commenced caressing and playing with mine. After ringing
the bell once or twice (in my hand), I asked that it should be
conveyed to a gentleman opposite, and no sooner was my wish
expressed than I felt it pulled from my hand, and deposited in that
of the gentleman I had indicated. This was done several times. The
hand was smooth and white as a child's, and was quite visible,
there being two gas jets burning in the room. An accordion was
held at the side of the table by Mr. Home, when the most lovely,
plaintive, and melodious music was played, and no sooner had I
expressed a wish to hear the 'Last Rose of Summer,' than that tune
was played, at which moment the accordion was resting on my
feet, without a hand of earthly, description near it, it having been
taken out of Mr. Home's hand and deposited there. Several hands
now appeared in quick succession moving different articles of
furniture; and one, a particularly powerful one, having touched
Mr. Home, he exclaimed that enormous strength had been given
him. It certainly had, and he proceeded at once to exercise it. A
block of wood,

                         A PLAIN MAN.                          243

from the large arm of the tree of great weight, from the falling of
which he was so wonderfully preserved, was taken up by Mr.
Home as if it were a straw, carried round the room under his arm,
and finally deposited near the table. It seemed of no weight to him,
and yet, when two gentlemen, each of them apparently much more
powerful than Mr. Home, essayed, they could hardly move it. A
singular circumstance connected with Mr. Home's receiving such
extraordinary strength it is necessary to mention. One of the
gentlemen present had lost a very dear friend in the late war in the
Crimea, and who, prior to leaving this country, gave him his
photograph. It was the only one he ever sat for, and after his
decease the family asked for it to get it copied, but they had not
returned it. On several occasions the spirit has manifested himself,
and has constantly reproached this gentleman for having parted
with it. On this evening a similar message was received, when he
mentally asked for such a manifestation as would fully identify
him with the departed friend. When in the world, he was a most
powerful muscular man; and to convince this gentleman it was he,
who enabled Mr. Home, through himself, to lift this mass of
timber, which at another time he could not have moved. The last
words spelt out were, 'Get back a copy at least.'

  "Another hand now appeared: and on Mr. Home being touched
by it, he exclaimed, 'They are raising me; do not look at me till I
am above the level of the table, as it might have the effect of
bringing me down.' Almost at the same moment Mr. Home was
raised up and floated in the air at the height of about five feet,
touching one gentleman on the head slightly as he

244                      A PLAIN MAN.

passed, but on approaching the window he came again gently to
the ground. He remarked, 'Their strength is hardly great enough
yet, but I feel that it will be soon.' The table which for some time
had remained passive, now began to heave and throb most
violently, and finished by moving towards a sofa at the end of the
room, obliging all sitting round to follow it. We had scarcely
resumed our seats, when our attention was attracted by seeing a
small table move across the room; and finally, after much
difficulty, raise itself, and stand in the centre of the large table
round which we were sitting. 'Less earthly light' was now spelt out,
and the two gas-lights were turned down, leaving merely a bright
blazing fire, which clearly illuminated the whole room. This was
scarcely done, when a small baby's hand was seen creeping up a
gentleman's arm, and almost at the same time he perceived
between Mr. Home and himself the form of an infant in white.
Being naturally very fond of children, he thought nothing of it,
merely imagining that his inclinations were known; but on his
wife's asking if it was not the spirit of her little child now passed
away, a timid answer in the affirmative was given—a bright light
appearing close to the sofa at the same moment, which, by
degrees, faded, and at last disappeared. The small table, which it
must be remembered was still upon the large one, now began to
move, and at the same moment the same hand that before imparted
such supernatural strength to Mr. Home was again seen grasping
him. His arms were raised above his head, he was again lifted
about two feet off the ground and carried towards the window, and
when there, he was raised to within about eighteen

                          A PLAIN MAN.                           245

inches of the ceiling. After remaining floating for about two
minutes he descended; but on coming near his chair, he was again
elevated, and placed in a standing position in the centre of the
table, together with the small one. His weight not resting on it, it
had no effect, nor was there even a creak heard. In about a minute
both Mr. Home and the small table were elevated for a fourth time
in the air, about a foot off the surface of the large table, and, after
remaining in that position for about a minute, he descended and
resumed his seat.

  "Such is a short account of this most remarkable and satisfactory
seance. I need scarcely add that of necessity I have been compelled
to omit many small details which, although interesting in
themselves, sink into insignificance by the side of the wonderful
manifestations above described.

                                                     "I remain, Sir,
                                             "Your obedient servant,
                                                 "A PLAIN MAN."

  By this time the health of my wife was failing, and she was
sometimes confined to bed. One night the spirit of her mother
came to us, and after making three crosses upon Sacha's brow, the
hand being invisible but still perfectly tangible, my wife said to
me, "Oh, mama is blessing me, and I feel such a strange thrill of
joy." I now felt the hand laid upon my brow, and again the present
was obliterated from my mind, and I saw the being so dear to me
as passing from earth. It was so terrible a reality that I would have
given worlds to have felt that there could be even the slightest

246                       A PLAIN MAN.

possibility of my having been deceived. Her mother told me that
the disease which would cause her to pass from earth was not the
one we had so dreaded, but would be, in fact, consumption. From
that moment, every time our kind-hearted and experienced doctor
came, I urged him to see whether or no he could detect the
slightest change, as indicating disease of the lungs; but he said,
that though great weakness existed, still active disease was not
going on, and he thought it might be avoided. As soon as the dear
one could undertake the journey, we went to Bournemouth, where
our friend, Mrs. P—— joined us, and we there found the
symptoms of lung-disease to have increased. Accordingly, a
medical man was called in, who, with one of his colleagues,
pronounced the left lung to be unsound. I was alone when they
told me this; and when I entered my wife's room, she wished to
know what the result of their diagnosis had been. We had, when
first married, promised to each other that if ever one knew the
other to be seriously ill, we would not attempt to conceal it. Still I
had never had the courage to tell her what her mother had revealed
to me; for to one so young, and whose life had everything to make
it desirable, it seemed hard to think that a new existence so soon
awaited her. I felt, however, that I must be true to my promise, and
I told her what the doctors had said. She smiled, and said, "Do you
think I can remain on earth ten days?" I told her that not only ten
days, but that in reality she might live ten years, but that still all
was uncertain. She took my hand in hers, and said, "Do you
remember, Daniel, when my mother blessed me a month ago, and I
told you what a

                       MR. COX'S LETTER.                         247

thrill of joy I felt? Well, I feel that she is here now, and I feel a
continuation of the self-same thrill. I am going to her, but God will
not separate us. I will ever watch over Gricha and you." She asked
me for her writing desk, and then wrote letters, which she sealed
and addressed, adding the words, "To be opened after I am gone."
Just as she was about to finish the last letter, our child ran into the
room, and sitting on her knee, he caressingly stroked her cheek,
saying, "Mama is too good to be ill." This so affected her, that she
burst into tears, and these were the only tears she ever shed at the
thought of leaving the body. Distinct musical sounds were now
heard every night in our room, and on more than one occasion the
singing of a bird was heard for more than an hour over her bed.

   "We remained at Bournemouth about three weeks, and finding
the climate very unsuitable, we went to the country-house of our
kind friend, Mr. Cox, in Hampshire, where we remained a month.
My wife now frequently saw both her father and mother, and also a
little boy whom she did not recognise, and her mother told her that
he was her brother who had passed from earth when only a few
hours old. Here occurred some curious phenomena which axe
described in the letter of my friend, Mr. Cox, of Jermyn Street:

  "The late Robert Owen, a short time previous to his passing
from earth, had given me a writing desk which had belonged to his
wife, and which contained amongst other things a box of paints.
As I had other things of his as remembrances, I felt it more just
after his departure, that some member of his family should

248                   MR. COX'S LETTER.

possess the desk, which had belonged to their mother; and I
therefore gave it to his son, Mr. Robert Dale Owen, in order that
he might take it with him to America. I felt, however, at the time
an almost irresistible impulse to retain the desk, but the feeling of
right overcame it. The fact had almost escaped my memory, when
at nearly the first seance I had with Mr. Home after his return from
Russia, the spirit of my old and valued friend, Mr. Owen, came
and said, 'You must tell Robert to return you that writing desk; and
why did You give it to him, for I did all I could to impress you not
to part with it.' I wrote this to Mr. Robert Dale Owen, and in due
time the desk was returned to me. We were then at my house in the
country, and Mr. and Mrs. Home came to spend a short time with
us. My little boy was then, and had been for some time previously,
indisposed, and medical advice had been called in, but to little
purpose. The spirits had previously prescribed for him, and now
they said they would magnetize some pure spring water, which
would benefit him. For this purpose a decanter was procured, and
placed on the middle of the table at which we were sitting. I placed
it there myself, and had taken every precaution that no one should
touch it. The water in the decanter became agitated after a few
moments without any visible cause, and a powerful aroma came
from the bottle. We tasted the water, and found it was strongly
impregnated with something which gave it a decided flavour, but
what it was we knew not: it was not like anything we had tasted
before. Mr. Home was then thrown into the trance state, and taking
the decanter in his right hand, he walked a

                       MR. COX'S LETTER.                         249

few feet from the table, holding it in full view all the time, when,
to my astonishment, I saw another decanter, apparently precisely
similar to the other, in his left hand. Thus, in each of his hands I
saw a decanter; and so real was the second, that I could not have
told which of them was the material one. Even if a trick had been
intended, here was no opportunity for it, and 4 the decanter was a
large one, another one could not have been concealed up Mr.
Home's coat-sleeve, or about his person. A little later, Mr. Owen's
spirit came and desired his wife's writing desk to be placed on the
table.; and now the room was darkened to see if we could
distinguish spirit lights, which were then seen by three of us.
Presently we heard the writing desk opened, and a hand was
placed in mine, another in my Wife's, and a third in Mr. Home's,
each hand differing in size from the others. The alphabet was
called for, and 'I fear I may have spoilt your Claude,' was spelt out.
We could not understand this; but when the lamp was relighted,
we found that some paint had been taken from the box from inside
the desk, and had been freely used on one of my paintings which
hung several feet from where we were sitting.

                                                        "WM. COX."

  We now returned to London; and the first day of our arrival our
valued friend, Dr. H——, called on us, still hoping that the
medical men had made a mistake in pronouncing the lung to be
diseased; and as he was sounding the chest, my dear wife looked
up at him laughingly, and said, "You see how very different it

250             MR. WILKINSON'S ACCOUNT.

is now to what it used to be. I myself can distinguish the difference
in the sound." He sorrowfully shook his head, and said, "It is but
too true, and with your belief I would not attempt to conceal it
from you." Many times did he reiterate these words during her
illness, adding, "With my other patients I have to give them hopes
that they are going to stay, and you are ever asking me for hopes
that you are to go."

   During our stay in London I had a seance almost every night,
my wife feeling that they did her good both physically and
spiritually. The character of the manifestations occurring at this
time will be seen in the accounts which are given by my two
friends. That of Mr. W. If. Wilkinson is as follows:—

                 My First Seance with Mr. Home.

   "Though I have been on terms of intimacy with Mr. Home for
some years, and have heard and read of all the wonderful things
which occur in his presence, yet this 19th June, 1861, is the first
time I have come to see them for myself. It has not been because I
either disbelieved them, or thought them of no importance, for I
quite believed them, and thought them of very great importance.
Having been, however, in the habit of hearing from friends of all
that was occurring, I was fully satisfied with their accounts, and
did not think that they were so much beneath me in observation,
that it was necessary for my own eyes to convince me. I take no
credit to myself for this, for it is mainly a consequence of my own
experience. I remember about twenty-five years ago, when I first
heard of mesmerism,

                MR. WILKINSON'S ACCOUNT.                        251

and of its psychological wonders, I committed the folly of saying
that I did not believe a word of it, and since I had on that occasion
to surrender at discretion on seeing for myself, I have made much
fewer similar mistakes. Since that time, I have pursued this and
kindred subjects, and I may fairly say that I can now readily
believe in much more than I once thought possible. I have found
this, at all events, convenient, for I have not had so often to find
myself at variance with facts, which is always a painful position to
be in; and, besides, it has opened up to me a new world of spiritual
forces, which, though generally ignored, I have found to account
for many of the strangest, and otherwise incomprehensible
chapters of human history.

   "I had on two or three occasions, through Mr. Squire and other
mediums, seen phenomena as wonderful as those which I now
witnessed in the presence of Mr. Home. I had seen nearly all the
wonderful things so admirably described in the 'Cornhill
Magazine,' and in the letter of Dr. Gully; I had also been present
when others of even a more powerful kind were done, and which
were ably, described by Dr. Blank, at page 161 of the 1st volume
of the 'Spiritual Magazine.' I had several times seen, both in
London and Paris, direct writing by invisible power, on paper
placed beyond mortal contact, and I was well convinced also of the
alleged power of mediums to float in the air, by having had one
come down on my, chest, as well as having on other occasions had
hold of his hand, whilst he was floating about in the room. I did
not, therefore, on this evening care to disturb myself and others by
taking those precautions which would have been necessary

252             MR. WILKINSON'S ACCOUNT.

if I were the President of the Royal Society, and were about to
make a conclusive report to that illustrious body of inquirers into
physics. I did not doubt, but I sat, and saw, and heard, and felt, and
made notes. There were eight of us, all well known to me, and
some of them known wherever the English language is spoken. We
were in the drawing-room of a house in Cornwall Terrace,
Regent's Park, and we sat round a large loo table, and commenced
talking. Curiously enough, one having said that Professor Faraday
was coming on the following Monday to a seance, and speculating
as to his guardian spirit not allowing him to be easily convinced,
there were at once very loud knocks on the table in affirmation of
that proposition. I was sitting next to my wife on her right hand,
and immediately afterwards I felt my left leg gently touched, in a
position where it was impossible for Mr. Home to have reached it.
Then there began a gentle but deep vibration of the table, chairs,
and floor, till all the room was shaking violently, during which the
table rose about ten inches, the trembling continuing all the time.
The table began to rise on the opposite side to where Mr. Home
was sitting, and it was clearly out of his power to have so raised it.
Mr. Home's chair was quietly moved back, away from the table,
about three feet, and whilst there the dresses of my wife and of the
lady next to her were both pulled, and so strongly that I could see
them dragging down. I also felt my wife's dress whilst being so
pulled, and there was a powerful force expended in the act
resisting my hand. At this time Mr. Home was fully six feet off,
and both from distance, and from his being in full view, I could
see

                 MR. WILKINSON'S ACCOUNT.                          253

that it was done by no force of his. Mr. Home now held the
accordion in his right hand beside his chair, and it at once began to
play. He held it by, the bottom, the keys being on the top, and they
were therefore out of his reach. It was impossible that he could
touch them. I carefully examined the instrument, opening the slide
beneath the keys, and I found it to be a common instrument, with
only the usual mechanism of the keys. There was nothing inside it.
I looked steadily at it, and at the hand and fingers with which he
held it. There it was, being pulled up and down, and discoursing
sweet sounds, whilst his hand was stationary, and his fingers
motionless. I could see above and beneath the instrument, but there
was no visible cause for its motion, nor for the opening and
shutting of the keys which caused the music. When it ceased, my
wife asked if it could not be played in her hand, and immediately
the instrument emitted three sounds, which we took to mean that it
would have much pleasure in trying. It was accordingly given to
her, and whilst she was holding it, she said she felt one of her
fingers being touched. Immediately afterwards the table was raised
about a foot steadily from the floor. As there was no sound from
the accordion in her hands, she returned it to Mr. Home, but it was
taken from his hand immediately, and given back to her, and
whilst in her right hand it began to play. She felt it distinctly, lifted
up and drawn forcibly down, and she did not and could not touch
the keys, which, however, must necessarily have been touched and
opened to make the sounds. In Mr. Home's hands a beautiful tune
was now played, during which we heard what has been so often
described,

254             MR. WILKINSON'S ACCOUNT.

the full notes gradually decreasing till they died away into the
thinnest streaks of sound. By three quickly repeated notes it was
promised that the instruments should play the tune of the other
evening, representing 'The Two Lives,' the one in this world, the
other in that which follows. The first, or this world's life, was
represented by discords grating painfully on the ear, and which I
thought did but scant justice to a world which, though capable of
improvement, still has some rich harmonies within its depths. In
mercy to our ears, the first life did not last long, and was then
succeeded by the second, which was made up of beautiful soft
angel music, such as I had never heard. It played for several
minutes, swelling into rich sounds, of which the sweetness was
enchanting to the ear, and gradually changed into the dear old tune
of 'Home, sweet Home.'

   What more appropriate and happy view of the second life could
be given in musical sounds than this of its being home; and what a
sweet sermon on the relative values of the two lives! I believe it
was received more solemnly, and yet more thankfully by all who
were present, from our knowing the sickness 'even unto death' of
one of the party, the youngest and the happiest in her bright
longings for this second life. It would be almost blasphemy to ask
in her presence what is the good of Spiritualism. Such a question
would not occur to a good man, and could not be asked by a wise
one. The mere man of science who measures human souls by
mathematics, would be out of place in such a scene, and had I not
been too happily engaged with my own thoughts, I should have
felt glad that we

                 MR. WILKINSON'S ACCOUNT.                        255

were troubled with none such. I did not during this last
performance scrutinize the instrument further than to see that it
was held, bottom upwards, in Mr. Home's right hand, his other
hand being upon the table, as were the hands of all the other
persons present, and I am not aware of any natural means by
which an accordion can be played under such conditions. I do not
doubt for another reason, however, having once had an accordion
play in my own hands, when I know that I did not do it. I also
know that Lord Lyndhurst, and many other public men whom I
could name, have had a similar experience.

   "But now the table rises again a, clear foot from the floor, and
there stands, not quietly, but strongly undulating, still so that I was
able to make the following note on my paper resting on the table,
whilst it was at its full height above the ground:—'Table rose a
foot. Count 10. I wrote this whilst up and undulating.' It then
gently descended to the floor again. We now changed places
according to directions, and a gentleman became my right hand
neighbour, who, in a minute after, said that he saw a hand which
he believed to be his son's. I did not see it, nor did I see three
fingers which my wife shortly after saw; but in answer to a
question, I had three taps on my knee as from a hand, still with no
such distinctness as to make me sure what it was. At this time,
several at once said they saw a light cloudy appearance dart across
the room, but, being behind me, I saw nothing of it.

  "In one corner of the room, near where we were sitting, was a
shrine with several Indian idols of bronze. Suddenly, there was a
commotion amongst them, and

256             MR. WILKINSON'S ACCOUNT.

a crash, and a large one was thrown down, and brought with some
violence and noise under the table. There it appeared as if it was in
the hands of some vigorous power, and presently we found a
jingling of some metallic substance against it, which afterwards
proved to be a metal ornamental canopy, which had been
unscrewed from the back of the idol, and with which questions
were now answered by knocking them together. In like manner,
loud knocks were made in answer to questions, by rattling the idol
against the floor. A remark was made as to the want of respect thus
indicated, and at once a number of jubilant raps were produced by
again knocking the two parts of the idol together. Two or three
times the idol appeared, pushing up inside of the table cloth, and
twice it made its appearance naked above the table, and gently
reached the ground again. Some flowers were brought from the
shrine, and placed in the hand of each person present. Our present
consisted of a rose and several pinks. I felt the rose placed in my
hand under the table, all other hands being visible and on the table.

   "Several times during the evening we all perceived a cool air
pervading the table, and which it was impossible not to notice. The
accordion was now placed on the floor, and all hands on the table,
when it was heard to sound clearly several times, but no tune was
played. It then tried to get from the floor to the table, but was not
able to accomplish the whole journey, and fell gently back to the
floor. The table was now again raised clear from the ground, both
my feet being on its pediment, and pressing heavily downwards
the whole time. The resistance and upward steady movement

                MR. WILKINSON'S ACCOUNT.                        257

of the table were strangely curious, as was its careful quiet
descent, my feet still pressing on it, and yet it reached the ground
without noise. There was now a general rattle among the idols, and
several very loud knocks, and then came an end of a very
interesting evening, during which I have seen and heard what was
sufficient to convince me that those are wrong who deny the
possibility of the phenomena. How they are to be accounted for is
another matter, which maybe discussed with many honest!
differences of opinion; but that they exist is not a matter of doubt,
but of certainty. There are some well-meaning persons who say
that they are done by the devil; but I saw no signs on this evening
of any wickedness, either in the work, or in the persons who
looked on. For myself, I took up much the same attitude as I
should do at a scientific lecture, illustrated with experiments and
diagrams, and I perceived no special influence but that of a strong
desire to observe the facts.

   "As to the facts being impossible, because they do not square
with the ideas of spirit and of matter which are current in the
Royal Society, that is not my affair, for I did not make either the
facts, or the opinions which find them so inconvenient. I do but
state that which I have seen, and if I have done so clearly, that is
my only wish. Facts will always take care of themselves, and those
are the most wise to whom they administer no reproof. There is
another reason why I hope to have enlarged the circle of observers,
by my description of this evening's phenomena. It is impossible for
many that they should see what I have seen, and so far as they can
believe my testimony, the necessity

258                MR. HOWITT'S LETTER.

for their personal seeing is avoided. Many things must be taken on
the evidence of others. 'Non cuivis contingit adire Corinthum.' It
does not happen to every one to go to Corinth, and so they who
can't go themselves, must take the account of those who have been
there. A certain few of a peculiar turn of mind, common to all
ages, cannot accept the testimony of others, and they axe best left
alone, till am opportunity offers of convincing them by a mode
suitable to their peculiar weakness. It is not yet fashionable to
believe in these impossible things, and as some one must begin
and put up with the necessary ridicule, I willingly submit my name
for as much as can be made to stick to it.

                           "W. M. WILKINSON. Hampstead."

  Mr. William Howitt, who has made such deep researches into
this subject, and has in his great work now ready for the press,
brought together the testimonies, ancient and modern, to the
supernatural in all ages, was present on several occasions to
observe and investigate the phenomena, and in an eloquent and
forcible letter which he wrote to Mr. Barkas of Newcastle, he
gives an account of some part of what he witnessed.

  "I wish some of your negatives could have seen what I and Mrs.
Howitt, and several others saw at the house of a lady in Regent's
Park, about three months ago, and the like of which some of our
most distinguished nobility have seen there repeatedly of late.
There were, besides us, Mr. and Mrs. Home, and a Russian

                    MR. HOWITT'S LETTER.                        259

Count Steinbock, and several others. We had beautiful music
played on the accordion when held in one hand by Mr. Home, who
cannot play a note, and the same when held by a lady. We had the
clearest and most prompt communications on different subjects
through the alphabet, and flowers were taken from a bouquet on a
chiffonier at a distance, and brought and handed to each of us.
Mrs. Howitt had a sprig of geranium handed to her by an invisible
hand, which we have planted, and it is growing; so that it is no
delusion, no fairy money turned into dross or leaves. I saw a spirit
hand as distinctly as I ever saw my own. I touched one several
times, once when it was handing me the flower. My wife's silk
dress was pulled so strongly that she thought it would tear out the
gathers, and was rustled so loudly, that it was not only heard by all
of us, but might have been heard in another room. My wife's
handkerchief was taken from her knee, and brought and whisked
against my hand at the opposite side of the table; I thought, with
the intention of my taking it, but the spirit would not allow that,
but withdrew it a little, then whisked my hand with it anew, and
then flung it into the middle of the room. The dress and the
handkerchief were perfectly visible during these operations, but
the motive power was invisible.

  "Then the spirits went to a shrine of bronze idols, belonging to
the lady of the house, who bought them in India. Some of these are
very heavy. They pitched them down on the floor, and with such
violence that the clash might have been heard all over the house.
The larger of these idols—perhaps all—of

260                 MR. HOWITT'S LETTER.

that I am not certain—unscrew, and the screws work exactly the
opposite way to our screws; but the spirits unscrewed them, and
pummelled their heads lustily on the floor, saying, through the
alphabet, "You must all do your best to destroy idolatry, both in
India and in England, where it prevails in numerous ways. Idolatry
of rank, idolatry of wealth, idolatry of self, idolatry of mere
intellect and learning," &c., &c. The different parts were thrown
under the table, that you might tread them under foot, and two
parts of the idol Mahadeo, of heavy bronze, were placed on the
table by a visible hand. The head of the idol felt to me to weigh
four or five pounds.

    "Mr. Home was lifted about a foot from the ground, but did not
float, as he frequently does, in the strongest light. The table, a very
heavy loo table, was also several times lifted a foot or more from
the ground, and we were invited to look under it and see that there
was no visible cause. To us, who have seen so much of these
things, and to whom they are as familiar as the sight of a bird
flying, and far more familiar than the present comet, this was not
necessary.

  "A few evenings afterwards a lady desiring that the 'Last Rose
of Summer' might be played by a spirit on the accordion, the wish
was complied with, but in so wretched a style that the company
begged that it might be discontinued. This was done; but soon
after, evidently, by another spirit, the accordion was carried and
suspended over the lady's head, and there, without any visible
support or action on the instrument, the air was played through
most admirably, in the view and hearing of all."

                          CHAPTER XI.

                      A DIARY AND LETTER.

   NEARLY the whole range of the phenomena occurred during our
residence with our friend Mrs. P—— in the Regent's Park, and she
has been a frequent visitor at other seances, and has kept a diary of
every evening, which she has kindly placed at my disposal. I
propose therefore to make extracts from it of some of the more
striking phenomena, both of this and of subsequent dates.

             Short Extracts from a Diary, 1860-61-62.

  December 15, 1860.—My mental questions were answered by
raps upon my dress. I put my right hand suddenly upon my lap,
and tried to take hold of whatever it was that was touching my
dress, but could seize nothing. Mr. Home desired me to put a
handkerchief over my hand. I did so, and immediately on putting it
down, a hand grasped mine, and I suddenly withdrew it.
Determined to conquer the nervous feelings that overcame me,
again I put my hand down, and it was taken by another hand, and
kisses were imprinted on it from the tips of the fingers all over the
palm.

262                 A DIARY AND LETTER.

An accordion, held in Mr. Home's right hand, played the most
exquisite music, swelling forth in full harmonious tones, and dying
away in notes of tenderness, and of exquisite and unearthly music.
His left hand was all the time on the table.

   A number of manifestations took place, and to mental questions
I received intelligent answers, and I returned home from this my
first seance with Mr. Home, convinced of the truth of our being
permitted to hold intercourse with those who have passed to the
spirit-land.

  December 24th.—The accordion played in Mr. Home's hand,
then five raps asked for the alphabet, and "Christmas Hymn" was
spelled out; again five raps, and "less earthly light;" we lowered
the flame of the four gas jets that were burning over the table, and
"The Manger, the Life, and the passing away," was spelled out.
The accordion played a sweet air appropriate to childhood. "The
Life" was represented by the most harmonious strains intermingled
with discords at times, as if it were thorny and painful, and the
passing away died on the air with exquisite tenderness.

  January 29th.—A seance of eight persons. We had amused
ourselves during the time with the article, "Spirit-rapping made
easy," in the magazine 'Once a Week,' which we left on the
chiffonier. I saw something pass from the side of the room with
great velocity, which vanished under the table. A curious noise
was heard like the crumpling of paper, a spirit hand arose,
appeared, and placed in the medium's hand a sheet of 'Once a
Week,' crumpled up and torn. The

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                          263

   spirits were at work destroying the magazine—they rubbed it
strongly over Mr. Home's shoe, and then placed his foot upon it.
The spirits gave each person a bit of the mangled magazine, and
the remainder was raised up by a large spirit hand, and placed on a
vacant chair, which by invisible power had a short time before
been moved from a distance to the table. The table was violently
moved up to the centre window, before which stood a piece of the
bough of the northern poplar which had been sent from the
Chateau de C——, and which was a part of that, from the fall of
which Mr. Home so miraculously escaped. The height of the
bough was three feet eight inches, and the circumference three
feet. Luminous hands were now and then visible, the table rose
gently, and tipped many times against the bough; the spirits threw
bits of the torn magazine about it, and placed one piece under it. I
asked in Hindostanee, "Are you making Mr. Novra do pooja to the
branch?" To which they loudly rapped "Yes." The gas lights from
the streets were streaming in, the spirits closed the shutters, and we
heard a, curious tearing noise, a spirit hand came across my hands,
and placed upon them a bit of the bark torn from the poplar, the
noise recommenced, and to every one of the circle a bit was given.
Invisible power opened the shutters, the trunk of the tree rocked
and waved backwards and forwards, and after a time it was lifted
up by invisible power and laid upon the table. At this time, "Oft in
the stilly night" was played by the accordion which lay on the
floor, untouched by mortal hands. Mr. Home's arms were raised,
and he walked to the end of the room, where

264                  A DIARY AND LETTER.

he was lifted off the ground, and raised until his feet were on a
level with the top of the chiffonier, between four and five feet
from the ground. I distinctly saw his body carried along erect in
the air, it then returned to its former place, where it remained some
time—at length it floated forward in the air, passed behind the gas
chandelier which was suspended in the centre of the apartment,
and he descended gently upon the floor, close to the chair in which
a lady was sitting. She said that when she saw him, he was about
four feet from the ground. When he had descended his arms were
paralized, but in a, short time they returned to their natural state.

   March 13th.—The trunk of the free that stood in the window
was shaken, the roll of drums was heard on the table, and it was
lifted as before. The tree shook again, and the accordion which
was on the ground, played untouched by mortal hand. Mr. Home
took it afterwards in his right hand, and held it upside down—it
was played upon in the most masterly style, the harmony was
beautiful. A small chess table from a distance, came up of its own
accord, and pushing up to the edge of the loo table, rose and stood
upright upon it. Luminous hands often appeared. A beautiful little
hand arose between the trunk of the tree and the curtain, the
fingers distinctly plain; it rose higher, until it shewed the arm up to
the shoulder, and the little fingers bending over the top of the tree,
played with the broken points of the wood, the upright splinters,
and then after we had seen it for some time it vanished. Mr. Home
was pushed back in his chair a foot or so, and a luminous head
came up from his right side,

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                       265

stopped in front of his knees, and then coming towards me, as I sat
on his left hand, it disappeared.

   March 19th.—En seance five persons at Mr. Home's. He fell
immediately into the trance, and after a time he awoke. I had in my
pocket a musket ball, which in battle had broken the leg of a
beloved relative. My dress was pulled, and a spirit hand rapped
several times on my knee—it was his spirit. I took the bullet in
my, right hand, and put my handkerchief over it, spirit fingers
turned the handkerchief over the bullet, and took it away. Soon
after, my dress was again pulled, and the hand put the bullet which
had been tied up in a handkerchief into my hand. Keeping
perfectly quiet, I said, "Beloved spirit, will you kiss my hand?"
and immediately my fingers were kissed four times. The spirit told
me that the bullet now possessed talismanic power, not in cases of
sickness, but in those of accidents. Natural flowers were taken off
the table, and given to each person present. Mr. Home was now
led to the end of the room, which was very dark; he was raised
from the ground, a beautiful star was visible, and also one like a
small comet. He said a star was on his forehead, and one on each
hand; we saw the three very bright, and many others glancing
about. He was, fixed against the wall. The luminous appearance
was so distinct as to render the papering on the wall perfectly
distinct; and then he floated along the room and was placed on his
knees on the sofa; again he was carried up, and the star on his
forehead shewed where he was—as he floated along the room, it
floated above his head, and when he descended the star was
quenched. Whilst he was at the

266                  A DIARY AND LETTER.

table, a spirit hand raised the accordion from the floor above the
table, and when he was borne into the air, the accordion floated
above his head, playing beautifully all the time, and crossed from
one end of the room to the other.
  March 28th.—En seance nine persons at Mr. Home's house. I
had a gilt whistle in my hand, Mr. Home took it in his left hand,
and put it under the table-cloth; in his right hand was the
accordion. "Oh!" he exclaimed, "it is so strange—what are they
doing with the whistle? the spirit has turned it round in my hand,
and I feel a mouth against my fingers!" The whistle was
immediately sounded several times. This was quite a new
manifestation. The spirit then took the whistle from him, the
accordion began to play, and the air was accompanied by the
whistle, which I then heard drop upon the floor.
  March 31st.—En seance seven persons. I put down my hand,
and held it motionless, it was kissed by two spirits, and when the
table-cloth was lifted off the bracelet, I felt fingers trying to pull it
off my arm, but it would not pass over my hand, then the fingers
turned the bracelet round until they got hold of the clasp which it
appeared they found difficult to unfasten. At length having
succeeded in so doing, they carried the bracelet away. Shortly
afterwards a hand arose near a gentleman opposite, and threw the
bracelet gently on the centre of the table.
  June 2nd.—A seance of five persons. As twilight came on, a
pleasant dimness fell over the room, and a lady said, "Is the light
the spirits love, like the odylic?" to which raps answered, "More
refined."

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                       267

The spirits moved the table with violence up to the window, near
the Hindoo shrine, and the accordion (no human hand touching it),
played in the most charming manner, exquisitely and with great
power. There was much noise at the Hindoo shrine, the image of
Vishnu and the Holy Bull were brought and put on the top of the
table, then a large hand, which appeared dark, being between us
and the light, put up the accordion entirely above the top of the
table, a second hand on the other side, took it down again, another
hand took a bell off the table and rang it. Mr. Home was raised
from his chair erect into the air, and descended on a foot-stool.
Then he was drawn to the other end of the room, and raised in the
air until his hand was on the top of the door; thence he floated
horizontally forward, and descended. I saw a bright star constantly
flashing forth, the raps died away in the distance, and the seance
ended.

  June 3rd.—A seance of nine persons. I placed a large bouquet of
natural flowers on the shoulder of the great marble idol Ganesh.
The accordion in Mr. Home's right hand playing most beautifully,
harmonized the circle, and the spirit hands touched almost every
one present. A rustling sound was heard about the idol, and
something passed under the table. The spirits rapped, "They, are
not so beautiful as those you will find with us," and immediately
the bouquet was placed in Mrs. Home's hands. Mr. Home, untying
the bouquet, returned the flowers to Mrs. Home, who asked the
spirit to give them a talismanic power, and take one to each of us
The first flower, a rosebud, was carried to a lady, and the spirits
rapped, "From

268                 A DIARY AND LETTER.

one who is a mortal, but will ere long be with us—emblem of
Sacha." This announcement drew tears from us all; we were
deeply affected, and Mr. Home sank back overcome with emotion.
A narcissus was given to me, and a flower to every one present,
also some for those who were absent, but who were loved by Mrs.
Home. She spoke for a length of time consolations for those whom
she was about to quit; her voice was very weak, and I lost the
greater part of what she said. She shook hands with us all, a
farewell we wept, but not a word was uttered.

   June 5th.—A seance of four persons. Mr. Home immediately
went into the trance, and after many communications said, "If you
could only see the mass of spirits near Sacha! A veiled female is
near her—when Sacha goes to the spirit-land, there she will be, her
veil off, she will place it on Sacha's brow, heavy, with its own
stars, shimmering, shimmering down. Beautiful features, long
flowing hair, her hands crossed thus—looks upward—upward—no
sorrow, no pain! prayer is carried up by loving hands and placed
before God's holy throne—they bear His blessings down to earth.
A staff is placed in their hands, a cloud to shade the heart from the
sunbeams—by the side is suspended the bread of life—the Hope
star high in the heavens to lead them from earth, and to trust only
in God."

  June 11th.—En seance seven persons. The spirits played
beautiful music, and brought to us sprigs which they tore off a
sweet-scented verbena which was in the room. They brought the
Deir, a brass idol holding a mirror, from the shrine, and put it
under

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                         269

the table. Mr. Home saw a spirit at the shrine; then they rapped,
"Faith in God, and the change of world will be most glorious, all
other ——" (the idols which they had placed under the table were
rattled violently) "Gods" were rapped out; again they rapped the
idols violently) and beat them against one another with great noise
and force, and spelled "must;" they raised the great idol Mahadeo,
and put it on the table. It is the large brass idol overshadowed by
the expanded hood of the cobra di capella. Then they rapped "be
brought." They took the idol off the table, and pitched it down
violently with a clang and noise, then rapped "down low before
him." In this manner they elucidated the words they rapped out,
"Faith in God and the change of world will be most glorious; all
other Gods must be brought down low before Him."

   June 12th.—A verbena plant in a flower-pot stood by the shrine.
A hand touched Mrs. Home, and the verbena plant, with the little
sticks that supported it, having been broken off at the roots, was
thrown by the spirits upon the table. Then they rapped, "we regret,
but in taking the flower we have also taken the earth with it." They
shook Mrs. Home's dress violently, earth was thrown on Mr.
Home's shoulder, and over it on the table. He saw a spirit hand
which was full of earth, and then the remainder which had come
out of the flower-pot in a mass, was placed in his hand; not a bit of
the living flower remained in it. The spirits rapped—"Life-
giving—and the casket that remains only fit to be broken."
Immediately they, broke the empty flower-pot to pieces, as it lay
on the

270                 A DIARY AND LETTER.

ground by the window, emblematic of drawing the soul from its
earthly tenement.

  June 13th.—Mr. Home went into the trance, and said, There are
more spirits around Sacha, and the veiled spirit is coming nearer
and nearer." Mysterious sounds which we had before heard in the
chamber above were repeated. When asked, How Jo you feel when
you go into the trance?" be said, At first a heaviness in my feet
comes on, I feel as if fainting away on the brink of a precipice—
there is a moment of suffering, and then all is agreeable."

   June 22nd.—En seance seven persons. A spirit hand arose and
came to Mrs. Home; it moved about; she was anxious touch it; a
long finger pointed to and motioned her to be quiet. A hand and
arm were distinctly seen, and a spirit hand closed the shutters.
Flowers were given to some, and were placed on the heads of
other persons. My head was twice touched, and twice an arm
waved over the table; three times an open hand was strongly
pressed on my forehead. A spring-bell from the shutters, used as
an alarum, was rung above our heads, and we saw the hand which
held it. Mr. Home went into the trance, and said, "Where the eye
ought to be are placed two crosses; the Christian faith will put the
eye out. I do not understand what they mean, the spirit is doing it!
Hark! hark! don't write." I ceased writing; we listened, and heard a
noise like scratching on the shrine. Mr. Home woke from the
trance, and the seance ended. On going to the shrine, we saw on
the forehead of the great white marble image of Ganesh, two
crosses made in pencil by the spirits, just over the

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                         271

centre triple eye of the idol, which denotes its having all-seeing
power. This was the noise alluded to by Mr. Home in the trance.

  June 24.—Seven persons en seance A scientific gentleman, who
had written to disprove spiritual manifestations, was to have joined
the party; however, he requested to have a programme! which he
said is due to him as a scientific man, and to his position! It being
impossible to give a programme he declined join the seance.

   June 25th.—En seance eight persons. The accordion playing of
itself, was raised above the table; then it was shown a second time.
The spirits rapped to a lady whose child had passed away—"She
only went to God, she did not die." At the word God the most
peculiar sounds were made, as if to impress us with solemnity.

   June 27.—A seance of eight persons. Numerous manifestations
took place. Flowers were given, the accordion played, and an
American cane chair, which was at the other side of the room, was
moved by unseen power up to the table. A hand touched our
foreheads, and an arm waved in the air over the table several
times. Mr. Home was drawn back in his chair, and an arm, the
hand holding the alarum-bell, waved over the table; it rang in the
air, and by my shoulder, which it touched, and then fell to the
ground. The accordion, now in the air, untouched by mortal hand,
played beautifully as it floated round the table, and touched each
person present.

  June 28.—A seance of eight persons. Mr. Home was raised from
his chair, and carried up a little in an

272                  A DIARY AND LETTER.

erect posture, and then put down again. Music was heard in the air,
and then strange sounds—we marvelled what it might be. "Is it a
spirit?" "Yes." Then the spirit spoke many times, but the words
were unintelligible. Mrs. Home was afraid, and begged them not to
speak; and Mr. Home said, "It is their difficulty to make the
material sounds of speech." It reminded me of Bournemouth,
where in Mr. Home's room I had heard music, the chirping of a
bird, and spirit voices very distinctly.

   June 30.—A seance of three persons. The table trembled and
tipped so much, we were surprised the decanters did not fall off.
Then it was shaken so violently that froth was produced, and the
wine in the decanters splashed up their long necks, whilst the
water was scarcely affected. The spirits rapped out their dislike to
wine. The table was made excessively heavy; four of us stood up
and tried to lift it with all our power; it would not stir, neither
could we turn it round. Soon after, it was lifted by the spirits a foot
or more from the ground, with all the things upon it, and then it
gently descended. One person could I now lift it, and it was
rendered heavy several times.

  July 3rd.—En seance seven persons. The table was shaken, and
rose and undulated in the air, whilst I counted sixty-two aloud. Mr.
Home was lifted up a little in his chair, and went into the trance.
His arms were then raised, and he ascended about a foot from the
ground, descended, and rose again a couple of feet. He leaned over
until be touched Mrs. Home, and then he was carried up, his body
being bent forward in a circular form, until his head was above the

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                         273

centre pane in the large window; he ascended some feet, and came
down again. It was quite light in the window, and we were close to
it. He then went to the end of the room into the darkness and we
could not see him ascend, but three bright stars were shown which
denoted where he was. He descended, returned to the table quite
stiffened, awoke soon afterwards, and came out of the trance.

   July 7th.—We, four persons, were sitting at the centre window
in the front drawing-room, talking together, when the spirits began
to rap on the floor. Mr. Home brought up a small table, and we had
many manifestations, in the midst of which a sofa-table at the end
of the room, on which was a large lamp and two flower-pots
containing fine lemon-scented verbenas. One of them rolled up,
untouched by any one and placed itself between Mr. and Mrs.
Home. It was a fine summer evening, and the room was perfectly
light. Mr. Home fell back in his chair, and went into the deep sleep
for some time; then he walked about the room, led apparently by a
spirit, a very large bright star shone on his forehead, several
clustered on his hair, and on the tips of his fingers. He made passes
over the verbena plant, but did not touch it. Immediately the air
was filled with the scent which he wafted to each of us, and it
remained most powerfully on his hands. Making more passes, still
in the trance, he said, "Thus we extract the essence from the
flower; in the same manner the soul is taken from the body; to-
morrow you will see the lower leaves are withered, and the plant
will die in a few days." Which fact occurred as he had said, yet no
apparent cause could

274                 A DIARY AND LETTER.

   be assigned why it should have died. We then went into the
dining-room below; and after refreshments our guests quitted,
leaving only, Mr. Home, who was seated in an easy chair by the
fire-side, Mrs. Home sleeping on the sofa, and I sitting by the table
reading by lamp-light. Suddenly loud raps were heard on the large
heavy dinner-table; it trembled, rose, and balanced in the air. Mr.
Home was led about the room, the shutters were closed, I put out
the gas-lights, and we were in darkness. A spirit touched my
fingers as they lay on the table, voices were heard in the air, and
Mr. Home said, "The spirits are trying to talk." "Yes," then a voice
said, "we are trying to come." I heard two voices of very different
tone, and asked, "Who are you, dear spirit?" The name was given
and repeated several times. Mr. Home was led about the room,
showing stars on his forehead and fingers as he held his hands up.
A cross of stars was seen by him and Mrs. Home. I only saw the
cross-bar of stars, not the uprights. He was led up to the shutters,
and he opened the lower part; immediately spirit power closed the
lower and opened the upper part. Mr. Home was now led to the
further end of the room, and passed in front of a very large
mirror—a sea of glass. I saw a form leading him, over the head of
which was thrown a tinted robe flowing to the ground, marking the
shape of the head and shoulders. He followed close upon it; I saw
them both in the mirror, his features, face, and hair, perfectly
distinct, but the features of the form that led him were not visible
beneath the dark blue tinted robe that covered them. They passed
from before the glass, and then we all saw

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                         275

a female figure with a white veil thrown over her head, which fell
to the ground; at the same time, but rather higher, was the form of
a man in oriental costume. The startling vision faded away, and the
great mirror remained with only the light from the window, which
streamed in upon it.

   July 12th.—En seance six persons. Stars appeared above Mrs.
Home's head, and a light was seen, with fingers passing over it as
it floated above our heads. It was the VEILED SPIRIT. I saw the
hand which held the veil, which was spangled with stars, and the
fingers moved distinctly as it floated just in front of us. A star was
seen on Mr. Home, and flowers were given. Mrs. Home's mother
made the sign of the cross on her brow, and then on Mr. Home's.
Two fingers touched my forehead, and one all wet made the sign
of the cross. The tearing of paper was now heard, and soon after a
spirit hand took hold of my left hand as it lay on the table, and put
a piece of paper into it. Other pieces of paper were torn off, and
then a pencil was thrown to the other end of the room. A bell was
rung in the air, the accordion floating above our heads played the
most joyful and martial music, and Mrs. Home saw her spirit-
father. "God bless you all, good night," was now rapped. On
looking at the paper that had been put into my hand, I found the
initials of a beloved spirit, beautifully written in pencil, a fac-
simile of his writing when on earth. A paper had been given to
Mrs. Home by her father, and on it was a cross surmounted by a
crown, to show us that we must bear the cross to wear the crown.

  February 18, 1862.—A seance of six persons. After

276                 A DIARY AND LETTER.

various manifestations, Mr. Home went into the trance, and
addressing a person present said, "You ask what good are such
trivial manifestations, such as rapping, table-moving, &c.? God is
a better judge than we are what is fitted for humanity, immense
results may spring from trivial things. The steam from a kettle is a
small thing, but look at the locomotive! The electric spark from the
back of a cat is a small thing, but see the wonders of electricity!
The raps are small things, but their results will lead you to the
Spirit World and to eternity! Why should great results spring from
such small causes? Christ was born in a manger, he was not born a
King. When you tell me why he was born in a manger, I will tell
you why these manifestations, so trivial, so undignified as they
appear to you, have been appointed to convince the world of the
truth of spiritualism."

  The foregoing extracts will be read with interest by those
persons who were present, and perhaps by a larger circle. I give no
names, but merely the facts as they occurred, because it is
impossible for any one to give credit to such marvels, until by
investigation they are forced to believe the truth.
                                                            F. C. P.

  In this diary there are several remarkable manifestations, and
amongst them that of the presence of the veiled spirit, who
thenceforth was frequently seen by my wife and by me, as will be
read in the beautiful memoir of my wife, written by that most
estimable type of womanhood, Mrs. Mary Howitt. The veil of

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                          277

that spirit kept gradually being raised through the successive
stages of my dear wife's painful illness, and became almost an
index of the insidious advances of her disease.

   There is one phenomenon, however, which has happened to me
only on the occasion described in the diary. I allude to the
wonderful case of the verbena plant, and the drawing of its scent,
and of its very life out of it, by a few passes of my hand, wafting
its whole perfume in the faces of the sitters, and leaving the tree to
die for want of the vital principle which had been thus extracted
from it. I have heard before of experiments tried in mesmerism
upon plants with some apparent results, but never of any so
marked as this, of the verbena. It is not wise to judge of isolated
cases, but probably there may occur, or may be found, other
instances of a similar kind, which may throw light upon the power
of the human will, over the lower forms of life.

  I am sorry that in so many instances I am obliged to conceal the
names of my friends who have witnessed wonderful things; but if
the reader is disposed to complain of this, let him remember the
reason, and take the greater part of the blame on himself. No
sooner is the name of some honest and courageous person given in
obedience to the call for testimony, than it becomes a target for all
the ridicule, jests, and abuse of the unscrupulous, the sceptical, the
orthodox, and the scientific; in fact, of all who are not wise enough
to think, and observe, and weigh, and judge, before they decide.
There is small encouragement for men, and

278                 A DIARY AND LETTER.

still less for ladies, to come forward, and stand in front of all this
obloquy. If an example be needed of the truth of this, if it be not an
obvious fact already in this uncharitable day, let my adventurous
friends watch the extent to which I shall be abused, and called bad
names, and given to the devil, for simply and truthfully writing in
this little book a few of the incidents of my life, with the
production of which I have had nothing to do. It has been my good
fortune never to have cared much for bad opinions of me, which
have been formed in utter and acknowledged ignorance; and my
silence hitherto when the most gross and foolish statements have
been made to my prejudice, and when a word from me would have
corrected them, is a sufficient proof of my indifference to such
attacks. I am sorry, however, for the want of kindness and the folly
which so many exhibit, for their own sakes, more than for my own.
I do not expect that they will behave differently now in regard to
what they see in my book, for in the present state of their minds,
the truth cannot be received. The facts become to them impossible,
while to me, and to many of my friends who have been in the habit
of seeing them, and watching them, and studying them and their
consequences for so many years, their strangeness even has well
nigh disappeared. We ought certainly to make some allowance for
those ignorant persons who sit quietly at home, saying that such
things are impossible, without having ever taken the trouble to try
to witness them, or to get together even the first elements for
forming a judgment upon them. These are not so unjust and
dishonest as that other class, of which Sir David Brewster is the
type, who, in

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                        279

the interests of what they consider their position in the scientific
world, have no scruple in telling falsehoods, and in denying what
they have seen, and in deceiving still further the former class of
merely ignorant persons.

  I hope, therefore, that both I and my friends may be in some
measure excused for giving their narratives without their names. If
I were at liberty to make them public, they would add greatly to
the value of the narrative, and the public would have the
opportunity of being greatly surprised at finding out who are the
persons who have investigated the subject, and vouch for these
remarkable facts. In society they are well known to many; and,
perhaps, nothing is more strange than the entire belief with which
these facts are spoken of and received in large mixed companies,
when compared with the expression of entire disbelief with which
they are accompanied in nearly all notices in the press. Of those
who will openly condemn this narrative in their journals, hardly
one does not reckon amongst his intimate and valued friends, or
relatives, or co-contributors, several who are with good reason
entire believers. It would be curious to contrast the language he
holds to such persons with that he uses in describing my book to
the ignorant masses, who, he meanly knows expect such abuse at
his hands and will be pleased to hear it. If it were necessary, I
could give some names which would amply justify what I have
said of these poor leaders of the blind.

  The testimony which I will now give is that of a lady, whose
word and powers of observation are entitled to the most
unreserved acceptance, and I am sorry that

280                 A DIARY AND LETTER.

I can only give her initial, and call her Mrs. S——. She had
become a widow not long before I had the pleasure of making her
acquaintance.

   "I first attended a seance at Mr. Home's in the summer of 1861,
when I was in very deep affliction. I had never seen anything of
Spiritualism before, but had heard a good deal of it from a dear old
friend who introduced me to Mr. Home. My own experiences that
night were far more wonderful than anything I had ever heard or
read of, and were to me most convincing. After many raps,
movements of the table, &c., my handkerchief was drawn from my
hand, the knocks given for the alphabet, and the words I shed no
more tears' were spelled out, and my handkerchief came up of
itself at the opposite side of the table, raised itself half a yard
above the table, moved gently across, and settled itself on the table
in front of me; this I saw without a possibility of mistake or doubt.
After this, Mr. Home fell into a trance, and described my dear
husband most accurately, said how noble he was in mind and
body, and how he should have loved him had he known him in
life, and then said, "But who is that Mary standing by his side?
What a noble woman, and how she loves him, and how happy they
are together, and how they both love you; you were his star in life.
But what was that misery about his watch? you forgot to wind his
watch and how miserable it made you." Now this was a fact
known to no living being but myself. I had wound the watch the
night I lost my husband, and resolved never to let it go down
again; but more than a month afterwards, when I returned to our
old home, I forgot to wind it one night,

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                        281

and my agony was great when I discovered it in the morning, but I
never mentioned it even to my husband's sister, who was in the
house with me. A great deal more took place at the seance
interesting both to myself and others.

  "A month later I attended a second seance some remarkable
things were told by Mr. Home, who was in a state of trance, to a
lady present of her departed friend. He then went to the opposite
end of the room, and she remarked to me, in a low voice, 'How
very wonderful, he has been dead these thirty years,' when Mr.
Home, whom I thought much too distant to hear, called out, in a
loud thrilling voice, 'Do not say dead; he is not dead, but gone
before nothing kills but sin, sin kills through the devil, but those
who live in Christ will never die.' Mr. Home came soon afterwards
to me, and said that my dear husband and his mother (the Mary
spoken of before) were behind my chair, and that both longed to
comfort me. He gave me the following message:—'My own
Adelaide, all your prayers are heard your pure thoughts seen, your
patience and loving hope. We are not, nor shall we be separated,
we are one in CHRIST.'

  "He then went on to say that I had had a conversation with my
husband eight months before, and that he blessed me for that
conversation now; that we were sitting in our drawing-room at
home, he in his arm-chair and I in mine, with the little round table
between us, that I had just been reading a chapter in the New
Testament, and that on that night the angel of the Lord had laid his
hand upon my husband's brow, and he had faded from that time. I
remember perfectly the conversation

282                 A DIARY AND LETTER.

alluded to, and it was a very remarkable one. I had been reading
prayers to the servants, and we were sitting in the manner
described, and talked for more than an hour before going to bed.
These are facts for which I can vouch, and though my name is not
given here, Mr. Home will give it to any one wishing to be
convinced. To me the comfort has been unspeakable; but did I
believe Spiritualism to be sinful or forbidden by our Lord,
NOTHING would induce me to have anything to say to it, but I
believe the reverse is the case. I have felt more at peace, more
perfect trust—utter childlike trust—in my God and Saviour, than I
have ever done before. Mr. Home told me that my dear husband
was always with me when I prayed, and I feel that he is so,
through Christ."

  We spent July, August, and September, 1861, at Folkestone. My
power had left me, but my wife continued to see spirits daily. We
went to Brighton, where we remained till the month of December.
Late in the evening of one day in November, my wife being in bed,
I was in the drawing—room with a friend, when a strange chill air
seemed to surround us, and creaking noises were heard. In fact, a
feeling of great discomfort came upon us both, when we heard my
wife knocking on the floor, this being her signal of requiring my
presence. I ran up stairs, and she said, "Daniel, do not leave me;
there is a spirit-presence in my room which is strange and
unpleasant to me. I feel as if something had occurred, or was about
to happen." I remained with her, but we no longer felt or heard
anything of the kind. In the morning on the breakfast-

                    A DIARY AND LETTER.                         283

table was a letter from a much loved friend, announcing the
departure of a son under most painful circumstances. It was
evident that it was his spirit who had been with us during the
previous evening.

  We came back to town in December; and in January, 1862, the
power returned in me, but far from strongly. On one occasion
whilst we were seated, the strange trembling so often noticed was
felt in the table, and almost simultaneously, with it I heard the
nursery-bell ring. I heard the servant go upstairs, the nursery being
on the third floor, and soon she came with a message from the
nurse requesting my presence. I went, and found the child sitting
in his bed, and a look of alarm on his face. He said to me, "Oh,
papa, I don't like to have my bed rocking." I thought that he might
have a headache, or some slight indisposition, which might have
caused a giddiness, but he said he was very, well. I remained a
short time with him, and then joined my friends in the drawing-
room. In about half an hour the trembling was repeated, and again
the nursery-bell rang. I had to go to him, and I found that the
rocking had been more violent than before, and he begged me to
lay down with him till he got to sleep. I did so, and in about ten
minutes he was fast asleep. The spirits then told us that they had
"accidentally caused his bed to shake."

  Another instance of this trembling being felt outside the room
has occurred within ten days previous to my writing this. A deaf
and dumb maid living in a house where I was, and knowing
nothing either of my presence, or of spiritual manifestations, said
to the young lady, her mistress, on her going upstairs to her,

284                 A DIARY AND LETTER.

"How you must have been dancing, all of you, for the whole house
has been shaking so that I have been made quite dizzy." We were
upon the ground floor, and the principal manifestation that evening
was the strong vibration of the room. She was upon the third floor,
and the house is a large well-built one in one of the best parts of
Kensington.

                         CHAPTER XII.

                         IN MEMORIAM.

  ON the 20th of February, 1862, we left England for the Chateau
Laroche, near Perigueux, the residence in the south of France of
my brother-in-law. I need not to go through again the scenes of
those last days on earth of the dear one whom it has pleased God
to take away, in the spring time of her life, to the bright morning
land. It is well with her there, and she is only more than ever my
hope, and my beaming guiding-star. My good guardian angel,
watching over her dear child, and me, her husband—separated, but
not lost—in spirit more than ever present. In God's loving mercy
we shall meet again, and find our lasting habitation in the eternal
inner world.

  Let me have the pleasure of adding the sweet tribute to her
memory of Mrs. Howitt, which gives such few facts as may be
made public of one who amongst her friends required no written
words to be embalmed in their hearts' best memories. To those
who knew her not, these words will serve to show the effect of
spiritual communion during the long stages of disease, and the
placid contemplation of the passing onward,

286                     IN MEMORIAM.

by one to whom the bright spirit-world has become a calm reality,
from her frequent intercourse with the good angels who had gone
before.

                          In Memoriam.

  "Madame Alexandrina Home, the wife of Mr. Daniel Dunglas,
Home, passed from earth on the 3rd July last, at the Chateau
Laroche, Dordogne, France, the residence of her sister, the
Countess Luboff Koucheleff Besborodka, in the twenty-second
year of her age.

  "Mrs. Home was the youngest daughter of the General Count de
Kroll, of Russia, and she was the god-daughter of the late Emperor
Nicholas. She was educated at the Institute of St. Catherine at the
same time as the present Countess de Morny, of Paris. Mr. Home,
who had been at several of the Courts of Europe, where he was
received with much distinction, and where the marvellous
phenomena which occur in his presence excited deep attention,
was at Rome in the spring of 1858 for the benefit of his health, and
there first saw the lady who became his wife on the 1st of August
of that year. The marriage took place at St. Petersburgh, and was
celebrated in the presence of M. Alexandre Dumas, who went
from Paris on purpose to be present, and to officiate as godfather
to Mr. Home, according to the custom of the Romish Church. The
Emperor Alexander also was represented there by two of his aides-
de-camp whom he sent as groomsmen, and the Emperor presented
to Mr. Horne on the happy occasion a magnificent diamond ring of
great value. On the birth of the only child of the marriage, a son,

                         IN MEMORIAM.                           287

the Emperor evinced his continued interest in Mr. and Mrs. Home
by presenting to them as a memento of his friendship a ring of
emeralds and diamonds. Mr. and Mrs. Home thus commenced
their married life with all the outward accessories of station and
wealth, together with hosts of friends, as a matter of course, whilst
the measure of their happiness was completed by that calm
domestic bliss, which is the purest source of earthly enjoyment,
and to which her kindly and tender nature contributed its full
share. They could not but be happy, for their affection was pure as
it was sincere, and when their union was blessed by the birth of
their little son, there was no more to hope for, but to bring him up
worthily to be a partaker in their happiness.

   "In the midst, however, of these bright human hopes and
anticipations, the decree went forth that her days were numbered.
About eighteen months before her departure, the physician who
was called in on the occasion of some trifling illness, as it was
supposed, detected, to the surprise and grief of all who loved her,
such undoubted signs of consumption in her constitution that in all
human probability her life could not be of long duration. Such
tidings to a young and happy woman, surrounded by everything
that can make outward existence attractive, would, in ordinary
circumstances, have come as the direst calamity; but it was not so
in the case of Mrs. Home. Though at that time only in her twenty-
first year, she received the announcement with entire calmness.
God's will be done, was the cheerful law of her life, and He who
had hitherto made that life so rich would not fail, she knew, to
continue His love and mercy to her in that higher life

288                      IN MEMORIAM.

to which He was calling her. Nothing but the deepest religious
conviction of the Supreme Wisdom and Love can bring the human
soul into a state of submissive obedience to His otherwise
apparently severe and mysterious decrees. Let us now see how the
Divine Father had led and schooled His young disciple into that
highest, that profoundest of all knowledge, the firm possession of
which makes obedience and submission easy, and keeps the soul
calm and even joyful under the most startling and adverse
circumstances. We shall then in part, if not fully understand
whence came the strange, and apparently almost unnatural,
willingness to depart from the earthly life amidst its most
attractive circumstances. She was a deeply-believing Spiritualist.
God's love had made known to her the reality of the spiritual
world; she had been permitted to solve the great, mysterious, and
perplexing riddle of the Hereafter, and so loyal was she to the
knowledge which had thus been given her, that she was ready to
attest it in life or in death. Like all experienced Spiritualists she
knew that the outward life, be its term longer or shorter, is but a
school in which God wills to train the immortal being to a higher
knowledge—is but a pilgrimage, or passage by which He is
willing to conduct it to another and a still happier home. She knew
that in that other state of existence, though unclothed by the body,
and apparently separated from the beloved on earth, she might yet
be permitted to watch over and love them as their guardian angel,
and to be in the close companionship of those who had gone
before—of those living and glorified spirits who should lead her to
the throne of grace and love ineffable. If

                         IN MEMORIAM.                            289

it be the highest heroism to meet death with unflinching courage,
this amiable, gentle, young woman, this child of affluence and
fortune, displayed an almost unequalled degree of this noble
quality of mind, and so doing, proved how strong and all-
sustaining in life's extremity is the faith of the Christian
Spiritualist.

   "The first startling intelligence that her disease was mortal came
to a mind so prepared with wholly abated force. The sting was
already taken from death; nor through the whole after-trials and
sufferings of her physical frame did she lose her equanimity or
firm confidence in the future. This calmness, indeed, became the
most striking feature of her long and painful illness. It was so
profound and marked as to be almost phenomenal, and was noticed
as such by the eminent physicians who attended her in London,
and subsequently in France, as well as by the Bishop of Perigueux,
who frequently visited her during the latter part of her earthly life.
The last sacraments were administered to her by the Bishop, who
wept like a child, and who remarked that 'though he had been
present at many a death-bed for Heaven, he had never seen one
equal to hers.'

   "Whilst residing in London the remarkable spiritual gifts and
manifestations exhibited through Mr. Home, and the many
attractive qualities of his young and lovely wife had naturally
gathered around them a large circle of friends to whom the
singular exhibition of her calmness, her meekness, her playful,
winning ways, even in the midst of suffering, and the joyfulness
with which she anticipated her removal, were, if possible, a greater
anomaly, and almost, for

290                     IN MEMORIAM.

the time, cast into the shade the wonderful gifts and powers of her
husband. If Addison called to his death-bed his infidel son-in-law
that, witnessing his composure, he might learn with how much
calmness a Christian could die, so here disbelievers in Spiritualism
looking on this gifted young woman, saw with wonder not only
how calmly, but how joyously the Christian Spiritualist could face
death. Another equally anomalous feature to the Protestant
Christian was not to find in her the self-depreciation of the guilt-
awakened sinner; not to hear on her lips the usual phraseology of
the dying but suffering saint; no mention made of the atonement;
of the works of grace on her soul, of the sufferings of a crucified
Saviour for her sake. Nevertheless, with the simplicity of a little
child, who accepted the Divine love as his natural gift, she loved
the Saviour and rejoiced in Him, responding to His unspeakable
goodness with the whole allegiance of her soul, but Gethsemane
and the bloody hill of the crucifixion were not present to her mind;
the agony and woe had no place in her experience. She was, it
must be remembered, the embodiment of her own Greek church;
of that church in which she was educated, the most ancient faith of
which has ever recognized the Saviour less as the Crucified than
the Arisen, the triumphant over suffering, sin, and death, as the
Victor not the Victim, as the Lord who said to his chosen ones,
'Rejoice that your names are written in heaven!' Such, it appears to
me, who frequently saw her during this portion of her short stay on
earth, was the fact which made her relationship to the Saviour so
joyous, whilst her own single-heartedness left her free from all
established

                         IN MEMORIAM.                           291

phraseology or any wish to produce effect, and these happily
combined with her actual knowledge of spiritual existence,
strengthened that remarkable state of calmness and cheerfulness
with which she waited the close of her outward life. Her Saviour
had indeed risen for her, and with the unquestioning, unreasoning
faith of a loving, obedient child-like nature, she was not only
willing to go when He called her, but cheerfully to give up all at
His bidding, knowing that a more enlarged, a more glorious sphere
of Usefulness and angel ministration would be unfolded to Her
through His love, and that thus she should be enabled more
tenderly and more effectually to watch over and become a blessing
to the beloved ones whom she left behind.

   "During that short but interesting time of her declining health in
London, her remarkable unselfishness became another endearing
characteristic to all her friends. She made, even amidst her
increasing sufferings, constant exertions to see them, and seances
were held frequently at the house where she and her husband were
then residing, in which she took a glad part. On these occasions
many wonderful and touchingly beautiful incidents occurred, and
few, if any, who thus met her, but retain with tender and
affectionate regard some tender flower or fragrant spray—an
emblem of herself—which was presented to her by spirit-hands, as
a little memento for each.

  "In the earlier stages of her disease her spiritual perception
began to open, and she commenced, and throughout her illness
continued to see and converse with the denizens of the spiritual
world. Her most

292                      IN MEMORIAM.

frequent visitants were her mother and her father, and the mother
of her husband. From them she received the most loving messages
of endearment, and the most cheering words of welcome to her
spirit home. She was also constantly attended by a veiled female
spirit, whom she did not know, but whose very presence gave her
great comfort, though she never spoke, nor raised her veil. Mr.
Home was told that this kind guardian spirit would continue veiled
until the last, when the veil would be thrown over her own new-
born spirit, to keep her from the sight of the tears and mourning
around the bed where her body would be lying. Through the six
months previous to her passing away, the veil was slowly and
gradually gathered from the feet of the guardian spirit towards the
head, until two days before her release, when for the last time she
saw the spirit with the veil gathered in the form of a crown about
her head, but with one part, as a festoon, still concealing her face.

  "On one occasion several persons, who were in the room with
Mrs. Home, saw the hand and arm of the spirit to the shoulder, the
appearance being that of a luminous body, most beautifully perfect
in form, and covered as if with a veil of light.

  "The eminent composer, M. Magnus, of Paris, came to the
Chateau Laroche to visit Mrs. Home during the last three weeks of
her earthly stay, and almost daily she asked him to play for her,
and whilst lying placidly listening to his music, her face assumed
an almost beautiful expression whilst she kept time to the music
with her hands. On one occasion she said,

                         IN MEMORIAM.                            293
when he had finished playing, 'Those strains are very beautiful, but
I shall soon hear more beautiful still.'
  "Frequently also, during, the first three months and the last two
months of her illness, not only she, but all those about her, heard
delicious strains of spirit music, sounding like a perfect harmony
of vocal sounds. During the last month, also, the words were most
distinctly heard, and were recognized as the chants for the dying
used in the Russian Church.
  "She departed on Thursday, the 3rd of July, and on the Saturday
morning following, her little boy, of three years old, said to his
nurse on awakening, 'I have seen mamma, and she is quite well
now. She is with God, and she told me that my uncle Gregoire, and
my aunt Luba, are my godfather and godmother, and that they
would be very good to me, and I must love them.'
   "At her funeral, the service at which was performed by the
vicar-general of the diocese, four of the men-servants of her sister
asked each to lead a horse of the hearse to the burial-ground,
saying that they could not allow hired persons to be near the dear
body of her who had ever had a kind word and a loving look for
all. The peasantry, instead of, as is customary, throwing earth upon
the coffin, first covered it with flowers—fittest for her last
garment, and fittest for the expression of their love.
   "Such is a brief memorial of a short but lovely, life on earth. But
short as it was, rarely has the oldest and most experienced
orthodox Christian attained to a higher degree of religious
consciousness, clearness and trust in God, than did this young and
attractive

294                     IN MEMORIAM.

woman, by those very means and teachings which the religious
world as yet so much ignores and questions.
  "Blessed, however, be God the Saviour for every fresh
revelation and manifestation of his Divine life, and for every
renewed teaching of his Holy Spirit.
                                             "MARY HOWITT."
  To another esteemed friend, Mrs. S. C. Hall, also well-known
for her true woman's heart, and for her power of expressing the
best feelings of the soul, I am indebted for her written impressions
of my, dear wife, and in which she embraces a most interesting
account of her observations of the phenomena:
  "It pleased God to remove from this life, only a few months
since, a much beloved lady, who during her brief residence among
us, entwined herself closely round the hearts of her and her
husband's many friends—I speak of one, dear to us as "Sacha," the
wife of Mr. Daniel Home.
   "Educated as befitted a Russian lady of rank, she was still more
richly endowed by grace, feeling, a peculiar beauty, which I may
term loveliness, and a sweet simplicity of nature, that rendered her
transparent and pure as crystal; she was also gifted with a rare
appreciation of the beautiful. Her interest in, and admiration of
whatever was excellent in art, was the result of innate perception,
not often met with where observation has not been matured by
age; with a refinement on the natural quickness of her sex—she
felt while others reasoned—indeed, all her perceptions were vivid,
and she was entirely feminine.

                         IN MEMORIAM.                           295

  "When first I knew her, she was radiant with life and joy—a
playful girl numbering just twenty years, and yet in the full tide of
her sweet joy—loving her husband, her child, her friends, and
feeling keenly how much she was beloved. If something touched
her quick sympathies, her eyes in a moment grew deep and dark,
her sweet lips quivered, and the girl became at once the deep-
hearted, tender, earnest, woman. Wise too she was, and in her
wildest moods something would come of wisdom, a sentence or
even a single word, so full and suggestive.

   "Soon, however, it became certain to us, that this sweet happy
life was not to remain here, and to none was this so evident as to
herself; not for a moment did she doubt that she had received her
warning for the 'better land.' She would talk with her husband, and
with all of us, her friends, of her passing away, believing—nay,
knowing—that she would be permitted still to watch over her
child, to companion her husband, to communicate with her friends;
and this in calm, unconstrained cheerfulness, surrounded by the
happy realities of a loving life, and loving, as he deserved, her
devoted husband. It was almost impossible to hear the full sweet
tones of her voice, to feel the affectionate pressure of her little
hands, observe the life-full expression of her face, and realise her
approaching change, when the mortal shall have put on
immortality.

  "How bitterly hard it is to feel, however we may repeat the
words, 'Thy will be done!' As the spring advanced each time I saw
her, I perceived some change, and yet the 'change' could not be
defined, it

296                     IN MEMORIAM.

was more in her spirit than her person. Suffering, wearied the
young fragile form, and she longed to be away, she desired
freedom from the body's pain, from the perpetual endurance of
restlessnesss—he craved to be out of the body that she might be in
the spirit. She talked about this change as invalids talk of change
of air, and with hope in her beaming face. I confess that I do not
comprehend this phase of mind—I look forward with joy to meet
those I have loved and lost from earth, and I look to the time when
those I leave behind will, trusting in the same Mediator, bend
before the dear Redeemer, and join in His presence, "the spirits of
just men made perfect," so that we all shall be one in Christ—but
this young creature's certainty that she should return and watch
over her husband, child, and all she held in her expanding heart,
was to me incomprehensible, it was as if she thought that after
death heaven would descend with her to earth. Her faith in her
future happiness was fine; but death, like life, was to her a poem,
and all her thoughts and actions were poetic—with all her
suffering, hers was the poetry of daily life. She enjoyed beyond
description a seance with those she loved. One of her pleasures
was tying up little bouquets of flowers with one of her long dark
hairs, flinging a bouquet under or on the table, or into the room,
and expressing a wish that a spirit would give it to one or other of
her friends. This was invariably done, and I preserve these flowers
as tokens of her sweet love, and shall do so while I live. These
little tender acts of kindness were mingled with promises of
coming to us, when she should have no mortal body—suffer no
pain. She never

                        IN MEMORIAM.                           297

doubted that this would be permitted, and she loved to dwell upon
the delight it would be to her to be with us. There was in her no
taint or tone of sadness. I never saw a more joyful, a more
perpetual belief in the soul's immortality. We could not avoid
observing at times an occasional abstraction, her eyes—
illuminated by a bright light—wandering round the room, her
whole face smiling as if recognizing some spirit friend. Daily—
daily was the end, as regarded her earthly tenement advancing, and
still nearer came the angels!
  "At times, her patience under the accumulated sufferings she
was doomed to endure was marvellous, and when at last she
longed to anticipate our summer, so tardy that year in arriving; and
when I bade her adieu, she pressed her tiny hand into mine, "Feel
it—feel it well," she said in her pretty English, no longer broken
but accented—"feel it, for when I come to you, you must
remember it." Some months passed, and then at last came the
news, early in last July, she was called home.
  "I had several times the full conviction (as I have at this
moment) that she was with me, but I have no medium power, and
beyond the cool breeze that passes across my hand or brow, 'the air
of the angel's wing,' I receive no sign of such presence—nor do I
need it.
  Mr. Home returned to England, and after our first meeting (those
who loved her could not call it 'sad,' for he was assured of her
happiness) we arranged an evening seance in the drawing-room,
which was lit as usual: only five persons present—five who had
known and loved Sacha!
  "Before what the world calls death, she had asked

298                       IN MEMORIAM.

her husband to give me a little lace cap, the embroider by her own
hands, and I had asked him for a braid of her hair; he brought both,
tied in one of her white handkerchiefs, and placed them on the
table. More than the usual manifestations came that night, not only
the table but our chairs, and the very room shook, and the 'raps'
were everywhere around us. A lady, whose consolation through
spiritualism has been indeed blessed, received several messages in
answer to her thoughts; and a very eminent sculptor, whose
engagements on public works are unceasing, had been rising
before day to finish a bust of Sacha, which he desired to present to
her husband—this fact was not even known in his own
household—he received a message thus: 'Thanks for your early
morning labour, I have been often near you.' While the message
was 'rapped' out, he felt her 'little hand' repeatedly on his, in loving
confirmation of her thanks. This was the first time he had ever felt
the touch of the 'spirit hand,' and it affected him deeply. Mr. Home
then placed the embroidery and the hair under the table. 'Sacha,' he
said, 'wishes to give them to you herself.' Presently my dress was
pulled. I put down my hand, and the cap was not only placed in it,
but my fingers closed over it, by her hand, I could not be mistaken,
I knew that hand so well! My dress was again pulled, and I laid my
hand in my lap, then I felt her hand more distinctly, it was placed
entirely in mine, and after a pressure, left me the lock of hair!

  "Again the alphabet was demanded, and the passage spelt out,
'Give me the handkerchief, I want to give it to Mrs. S——. Oh, I
thank her for her beautiful

                         IN MEMORIAM.                           299

flowers,' (flowers she was in the habit of sending her during her
illness). Mr. Home threw the handkerchief that had contained the
hair and embroidery down. It was rolled up and knotted, and given
into Mrs. S——'s hand. There was much more that evening, the
revealings were all continued evidence of spiritual power, and
spirit-presence, such as come to us with healing messages on their
wings, making us thankful that to us Spiritualism has been the
hand-maid of Christianity.

   "BUT DEAR SACHA is far from being the only one of my beloved
friends, departed, or rather removed, from whom I have received
sweet, and consoling, and comforting messages. One whom I love
and reverence beyond all who axe gone before, has given me by
unmistakeable proof, the blessed certainty of the interest she is
permitted to take in our spiritual welfare, and has, by her precepts,
and apt quotations of holy writ, strengthened our armour of faith,
and if it be possible, brightened the hope of the glory that shall be
revealed hereafter. Is not this comforting? I do not prolong this
brief record of happy memories, but I could do so. SPIRITUALISM
has been to me a blessing, for which I cannot be enough thankful,
less for my own sake, than for the sake of others, who are very
dear to me; for though it brought me more sunshine, it has given
me no new light. I testify here of spiritualism, as it is known and
believed by me and mine; I say KNOWN, for nearly five years we
have had abundant proofs of its reality. I will briefly say how this
is. I thank God that I never had a doubt as to the divine truths of
Christianity, neither did I receive

300                      IN MEMORIAM.

them as cold facts. My dear mother was of pure Huguenot descent,
and would, at any period of her life, have gone calmly to the stake
sooner than have even seemed to abate one jot of her belief in the
Existence, Mission, and Miracles of CHRIST-GOD. I drank at the
fountain of this faith from my, earliest years, and every night the
accustomed 'chapter' was read, prayed over and discussed, thus
religious faith grew to be my enjoyment, and my triumph, as well
as my hope and trust. Moreover, she held the belief that the spirits
of those we knew, loved, and reverenced, were permitted to watch
over us, and it might be to communicate with us, but how such
communication was to take place, was a mystery as much to the
parent as the child. She believed that our holiest thoughts and
actions were suggested to us, under Divine permission, by
ministering angels; and that perseverance in prayer would protect
us from the evil influences that were ever on the watch to whisper,
or even to inculcate, what was contrary to God's law.

  "This was, and is pure Spiritualism—pure Christian
Spiritualism!—yet having believed this all my life long, believing
also that the supernatural was often permitted as one of the
missionaries of Christianity, I laughed at what was called 'Table-
turning.' I had never seen spiritual manifestations, but that did not
hinder my laughing at the idea of a spirit giving a message by raps
on a table; all my belief in the 'Cloud of Witnesses' did not prevent
my catching at what seemed the absurdity of such a means of
communication, and instead of investigating, I laughed. I did
worse, I became angry. I said I had believed all my life in
supernatural

                        IN MEMORIAM.                           301

presences, I believed that, if necessary, CHRIST-GOD would give
one of His 'Cloud of Witnesses' permission to communicate with
me, but what had that to do with raps? I never called to mind that
at this moment the world is filled with 'Thomases,' who will not (if
they can avoid it) believe except on the testimony of their senses.
Because I believed in Gospel truths, I thought that others ought to
believe as I did, from the testimony which had sufficed to me and
mine. I did not want to see the Saviour's wounds, I believed in
them, that was enough for me. I did not think of those 'stiff-necked
and stubborn,' who require, as Thomas did, a 'sign;' and we must
remember (which I did not) that the MASTER did not refuse him
that sign—no, He called him to examine those marks of His
suffering. HE not only permitted the, unbeliever to examine for
himself, but He called upon him to do so.

   "At length, we were prevailed on to meet a young lady medium,
one in all respects above suspicion; we were a mixed party of
twelve or fourteen at that dinner-table: and while questioning
myself how it was possible that educated and intelligent men could
receive as testimony of spiritual presence the 'raps' and 'tilts,'
which though I could not account for, I did not believe in, my
attention was awakened by the young lady's saying that a spirit
was present, who desired to communicate with me. She described
a presence which I recognised, and then gave me a message, a
portion of which could only be intelligible to us two—the spirit
who gave it, and I who received it. This was so positive and
conclusive to me, that believing as I always did that such a power
existed, I was forced to believe

302                      IN MEMORIAM.

that there was truth in mediumship, and that here was the means
used for communicating from the spirits of those gone before to
those who still lingered in the flesh.

   "This was the confirmation of a blessed reality to me, but to
others, particularly to one other at that table, it was thrice blessed;
his past had been clouded with doubts as to the existence of spirit-
life, he had refused to believe what he could not understand; his
lamp of reason, trimmed with ever so much care, only made the
darkness, so to say, more visible. Faith was to him a dead letter.
His heart ached to believe, but, like Thomas, he wanted 'a sign.'
The first 'sign' was given him that night, and since then directed
invariably to THE BOOK which leads to life eternal, he goes on his
way rejoicing.

   "Only those who have stumbled amid the doubts and
uncertainties of a sadly unsatisfying materialism, can comprehend
the inspiration which the assurance of future existence, amended,
enlightened, purified, gives. I am frequently asked, what is the use
of Spiritualism? My answer invariably is, that I believe it is
permitted to check the growth of materialism. No one, however
sceptical, can receive messages from the spirit-world, knowing
their truth, and disbelieve in spirit-life, in a hereafter, in
immortality! This is the key-stone to a belief in the Holy
Scriptures. Scores, hundreds, thousands, at this day say as I did,
'Why don't people believe? They have Moses and the prophets.' I
believed on Bible testimony. Yes, but those thousands do not
believe in Bible testimony; they ask for a sign. Will they not seek
'the sign,' and investigate its truth?

                         IN MEMORIAM.                           303

Would not they give all they possess for a 'sign' proving
immortality? Do they not desire intercourse which, sanctified by
prayer, will (I have often seen it done) direct them to particular
passages in Holy Writ, which for the first time they
comprehended, and which became sanctified to them? And again,
there are many who receive Spiritualism as a fact; well-minded,
timid persons, who fear that Spiritualism is dangerous. I have seen
quite enough to convince me that carnal-minded people bring their
evil angels with them into many a circle; and they suggest what is
evil more palpably than in those silent whispers that lead as surely
astray. 'By their fruits ye shall know them.' We know that 'lying
spirits' endeavour to distil their poison into the purest hearts; and
be sure they are on the watch around the circle assembled for
manifestations, and can only be 'sent behind' by faithful prayer; but
every Christian knows that he is perpetually beset by such like.

  "Spiritualism, as we know it, commences each seance with
prayer; and usually (though not invariably) has reason to finish
with praise. I would not join a circle where this was neglected. I
could name many who have been lifted out of the slough of
materialism by, in the first instance, seeing the marvellous
manifestations that arise from Mr. Home's mediumship, and the
mediumship of the young lady I have already mentioned. Ridicule
on the one side, and asseverations on the other, cannot alter facts.
There must be a coin to create a counterfeit, and, doubtless,
charlatanism has found its way into 'circles,' whence it has been
driven as soon as discovered.

304                       IN MEMORIAM.

   "MEDIUMSHIP is a mystery we cannot fathom, nor understand
why the power should be delegated to one more than to another.
We have the highest authority for the belief that there are
'diversities of gifts' all from 'the same spirit;' and amongst them is
specified, 'To some the discerning of spirits.' Why should one have
'the gift of healing,' and not that of 'divers kind of tongues,' or 'the
seeing of spirits.' That is one of those marvels we shall
comprehend when we no longer see through a glass darkly. I can
only add, with no large amount of humility, that 'mediumship' is
not the only thing I do not understand.

  "But I must cease here. I do not attempt to give any further
description of the 'manifestations' I have witnessed, the wonders I
have seen, and examined, and questioned, and after my
examinations and questionings, could not doubt their being
permitted for the ONE purpose, which I again repeat, is the mission
of high and holy Spiritualism.

  "I do not feel called upon to write in defence of Spiritualism, nor
to quote from the volume of facts by which that defence is to be
sustained, and its truth proved. I have no talent for argument or
controversy; there are others who have, and are willing, as well as
able, to be its defenders. I believe it to be sanctioned by GOD, and
that therefore it must be for a good purpose; and I content myself,
as I must content those who may read what I have written, with
expressing my conviction that Spiritualism is TRUTH ."

                         CHAPTER XIII.

                          CONCLUSION.

  I CAME to England from Perigueux, and have been since
engaged, as much as my time and my health would permit, in
having seances, at which most of the manifestations recorded in
the previous pages of my work have been repeated. I have been
several times lifted a short distance from the ground, but not so
high as to float above the heads of the persons in the room. Many
persons have seen and been convinced of the occurrence of what
they previously deemed impossible, and have had their faith in
immortality renewed and strengthened when all other means had
failed in making them believe. On the 20th January, 1863, I went
to Paris for a short visit to my friend, Count de K——, and there
also the same phenomena have occurred in the presence of great
numbers of persons. I have also been frequently received by their
Majesties at the Tuileries, and by the Imperial Princes and the
nobility of France, who have shewn a great interest in
investigating the manifestations; but enough has been given of the
facts to enable the reader to form an opinion of them, and there is
no need to go into further

306                      CONCLUSION.

details. I have already told the main incidents, and must now leave
them to be judged and analyzed by the various classes of persons
who may devote their thoughts to the subject.
  It would be hard if I were held answerable for facts which occur
in connection with my physical organization, and towards which I
am, in mind and intent, wholly passive, even if there were any
harm in them. As there is no harm in them beyond their disturbing
certain prepossessions, on the contrary, some likelihood of good;
and as they are independent of all moral action on my feet; I trust
that with the candid and enlightened I shall be held, as I am,
innocent.
   It will have been observed that they began with me when I was
an infant in my cradle, and that they have since, with few
exceptions, formed a part of my daily life. Their range includes
nearly all the phenomena which are known under the incorrect
name of Modern Spiritualism. I say the name is incorrect, because
there is not one of them which is new, and which may not be
traced in every age of which we have any record preserved to us.
The great difference, however, is, that during the last two centuries
a great change has come over the belief of the world, and by a kind
of re-action, men have reversed the belief which previously existed
as to the supernatural. Up to two centuries ago, it was not
considered a point of wisdom to disbelieve in such manifestations
and actings from the inner world, but on the contrary, such
disbelief was reprehended as unscriptural and wrong.
  I am, however, fortunately relieved from the necessity of
shewing at great length the prevalence of spiritual

                             CONCLUSION.                                307

action and phenomena in the past ages of the world, by the
publication of the elaborate and almost exhaustive work of Mr. W.
Howitt,* to which I refer my readers, in the full confidence that in
his pages they will find not only the facts but the arguments
necessary to shew that the spiritual has been ever present, and that
nothing has occurred to me but what has been frequently observed
before. I trust that this work will be extensively read, in order that
much of the present ignorance on the subject may be dispelled, and
that the minds of men may be led to inquire more deeply into this
great subject.
  As a brief summary of the same subject, I may likewise point to
an article in the Appendix which has been framed by a friend from
a series of historical notes, gathered by a literary gentleman who
has, with great kindness, placed them at my friend's disposal.
  It will be readily admitted that such facts as those I have
described, are calculated, to throw great light upon the hitherto
neglected science of pneumatology; and that it is in the direction
pointed out by such facts, that further search is to be made into the
hidden questions of the soul, and its relations with the body and
external things. For such a study, no facts, however small or
apparently trivial, can be dispensed with.
Of those which are of a physical kind, such as the moving of
furniture, the raps, the raising into the
———
  * "The History of the Supernatural in all Ages and Nations, in all Churches,
Christian and Pagan, demonstrating a Universal Faith." By William Howitt,
Author of "Colonization and Christianity." London, Longman and Co.

308                       CONCLUSION.

air, or levitation, and similar classes of phenomena, they are to be
investigated, and their uses ascertained by the man of science and
the philosopher. At present such persons have fixed a priori that
such things have never occurred, and are impossible and absurd,
and for this very reason, if for no other, it will be admitted that
they are of the highest use in order to correct such notions of the
relations between spiritual forces and natural things. There is no
study which could be of such value to philosophers, as that of facts
now known to thousands, but which their present philosophy
deems impossible. For their philosophy must be radically defective
when that which they say is impossible, is nevertheless of daily
occurrence. The physical side, therefore, of these phenomena is to
be studied by students of experimental science in order to enlarge
their views of material forces, and if this can be effected, as it has
been in so many instances, by the movement of tables, and by the
rapping sounds, and by the raising of bodies into the air, without
touch or contact, they will no longer complain of the triviality of
such phenomena. Indeed, already so little are they trivial or
unimportant, that the noted men of science, such as the Faradays
and Brewsters, have gone out of their way to inveigh against their
possibility, and to bestow the name of credulous dupes upon those
who have publicly stated what they have seen and heard. The very
denial of these things by these men, and by the mass of the public,
shows that they are not trivial to them, but that they are really of
the utmost importance. For why are they denied by the men of
science, but that they contradict all

                          CONCLUSION.                           309

their previous knowledge of the laws of nature, upsetting "the
philosophy of a lifetime," and are therefore impossible to them,
until they enlarge the present boundaries of their knowledge, and
find out those higher laws under which these become not only
facts, but possible facts.

   There is of course no religious revelation, properly so called, in
such phenomena, any more than there is in the phenomena of
gravitation, electricity, or magnetism, but that has not latterly been
a reason why such laws should be repudiated. At the institution of
the present Royal Society, there was a great outcry on the part of
the religious persons of that day, against the formation of such a
society, on the ground that it was blasphemous and wicked to
attempt to inquire into what were called God's mysteries; and it
was said that men already had their bibles, and knew enough, and
ought not to seek to know more. Such is not the general opinion
now-a-days, and the time is not far distant, I hope, when the
manner in which this subject has been received, will in the same
way be brought forward to prove the same great truth, that all
knowledge is to be pursued, and that we need not fear that we shall
ever have too much of it. God is able to preserve His own
mysteries, and whatever is possible for us, it is our right and duty
to search into and fathom, and to bring forward as a part of the
general stock of human intelligence. I anticipate, therefore, that
when the real men of science find these facts not to be impossible,
they will by their aid, be led into a knowledge of higher laws,
which at present they conceal from themselves; and that a greater
discovery

310                       CONCLUSION.

awaits their research than that which has adorned the name of
Newton, who did not find it a trivial fact when an apple fell before
his eyes.
  As to the other great division of these phenomena, into such as
are of a mental kind, and betoken intelligence, a much larger
question is raised.
  The former class of manifestations we could only commend to
the scientific investigator; but so soon as we are assured of the fact
of manifestations directed by intelligence, we are put upon an
inquiry of another kind. We are not aware of any other being but
man, who is endowed with the kind and amount of intelligence
which is disclosed in many of the manifestations, and we are at
once brought to the inevitable conclusion that such intelligence is
exhibited by human beings, either in the body, or out of the body.
Neither the od force, nor electricity, nor magnetism, nor any of the
imponderable forces, has ever yet been detected in betraying
intelligence, or in carrying on a conversation between themselves,
or in taking part in one with others, and though they are largely
engaged in their proper offices throughout nature, and in that
epitome of it which is contained in a man, yet there is nothing
human nor intelligent about them in the true sense of the words.
   We feel instinctively, therefore, when we meet with this
intelligence, that we are dealing with a man either embodied or
disembodied. The wonders of clairvoyance and internal perception
(if we are to consider these as faculties inherent in the living,
independent of spiritual aid,) may account for some of the
phenomena; but there are others which my reader will not

                          CONCLUSION.                             311

have failed to note, which infallibly point to the intelligence being
that of disembodied human beings. The intelligence declares itself
to be a human being, and gives information known to it alone. It
says that it is a spirit, and in the spiritual world. It is seen as a
spirit, and recognised as that of one loved on earth. It says that its
office is to be our guardian, and helper, and comforter. It tells us of
things that have passed, of things that are happening in distant
parts, of things that are to come. Can this be ourselves, who
unknowingly counterfeit such a presentment, and tell this false
intelligence to ourselves? No such quality or power has hitherto
been recognized or known to exist in the mind of man. No such
quality has been recognized or known to exist in the od force, nor
in electricity, nor in magnetism, as the ability to tell either truth or
falsehood. Whence is it then? Is the question so entirely a new one
as to the existence of spirits and their power to communicate with
man, as that we can ignore it or deny its possibility? Are we
inevitably thrown upon finding some natural hypothesis to account
for such facts? and are we as Christians, to say like Sir David
Brewster, that "Spirit is the last thing I'll give in to." I thank God
that I have been taught otherwise, and I refer to the bible, and to
the spiritual books, and authorities, and beliefs of all ages and of
all churches, in support of my belief. Let us then say at once that
there are spirits and a spirit world, and see what difficulties are
thrown in their way by the men of science, who deny them all
power of communicating with this world.

  It would indeed be a very difficult matter to conceive

312                      CONCLUSION.

by what possible means a spirit could satisfy some minds of its
actual presence. "Suppose," says the Rev. Charles Beecher, "a
departed spirit, the wife of Oberlin, for example, were permitted to
attempt to converse with her husband; not to establish a new
revelation, not to display divine power, but merely to exercise
such potentiality as might pertain to a disembodied spirit, for her
own and her husband's edification and satisfaction. How could she
do it in the face of the apneumatic theories. She speaks to him,
moves his furniture, touches his dress, his person;—all automatic
action of some brain en rapport with that locality. She sings, plays
the guitar or piano, takes a pencil and writes, and he sees the
pencil in free space tracing his wife's autograph—automatic still.
She shows him a cloudy hand, nay a luminous form, and smiles
and speaks as when in life—that is an optical illusion, or
hallucination, or a particle exhaled from her body has impinged on
his sensitive brain, and created a subjective vision. She
communicates facts past, present, and future, beyond the scope of
his knowledge;—that might be clairvoyance or cerebral sensing.
Alas, then, what could she do more? She must retire baffled, and
complaining that he had become so scientific that all
communication with him was impossible."

  It is, therefore, very difficult to influence some minds by any
proof that could be brought forward, for want 4 their having any
point which such proof can penetrate; but assuredly such proofs as
I have given in my book, of the existence of spirits, and of their
ability to communicate with us, are of the kind most likely to be
useful to them.

                          CONCLUSION.                            313

  It is to be observed also, that such persons, to be consistent,
must, and too many of them do, apply the same argument to all
analogous facts in the past, as well as to those occurring at this
day. On this all-important point the Rev. W. Beecher says truly,
"Whatever physiological law accounts for these phenomena in all
ages, will in the end inevitably carry itself through the whole bible,
where it deals with the phenomena of soul and body as mutually
related, acting and re-acting. A large portion of the bible, its
prophecies, ecstacies, visions, trances, theophanies, angelophanies,
are more or less tinged with odic characteristics. The physiology,
the anthropology of the bible is highly odic, and must be studied as
such. As such it will be found to harmonize with the general
principles of human experience in such matters in all ages. If a
theory be adopted everywhere else but in the bible, excluding
spiritual intervention in toto, and accounting for everything
physically, then will the covers of the bible prove but pasteboard
barriers. Such a theory will sweep its way through the bible and its
authority, and its inspiration will be annihilated. On the other
hand, if the theory of spiritual intervention be accepted in the
bible, it cannot be shut up there, but must sweep its way through
the wide domain of 'popular superstitions,' as they are called,
separating the element of truth on which those superstitions are
based, and asserting its own authoritative supremacy."

  It is on such grounds as these amongst many others, that I have
found as a fact that these manifestations have a religious tendency,
and bearing on the subject of religion of the most important kind, I
do not claim

314                      CONCLUSION.

for them the character of anew revelation, but that they are a
recurrence in our day of some of the phenomena of a very old one;
and that it is not a small matter to be able to convince many who
stand in need of such knowledge and conviction, of the
immortality of the soul, of its immediate and continued existence
in the spiritual world, and of its power of communion and
communication with us who are left, behind. These are not new
doctrines, but old facts, and whatever spirits may tell us, we must
judge of, as we judge the other affairs of life, by its own intrinsic
evidence, and not rely on the infallibility of what comes from the
other side merely because of its spiritual origin. For instance,
suppose that if any one of the sceptics of the day should go to
swell the numbers of the spiritual world, and should come to me in
vision, or through any of the numerous modes which I have
narrated in the previous pages, and should tell me that there are no
spiritual laws, and no spiritual world, and no spiritual beings, and
that the many phenomena I have experienced throughout my life
did not occur to me, and that such never occurred to others, and
were in fact impossible, I should not believe what he said, merely
because of its spiritual origin, for the reason that it would be
opposed to the experience and knowledge of myself, and of many
others in the present and former ages of the world. I should, as I
do, on the contrary, recognize in the very fact of his being able to
come and give me this false information, matter of the utmost
importance to religious truth, directed to a point which of all
others in this materialistic age, the most requires assurance and
confirmation.

                        CONCLUSION.                         315

  The fact, therefore, of any intelligence whether true or false,
coming from the inner world, is one from which conclusions must
be deduced, the value of which it is impossible to over estimate.
The real and intimate communion of saints may be difficult to
realize, on account of our own state being too low for such holy
communion, but we need not abandon to scepticism the whole
spiritual world, and deny the possibility of one of the most
glorious tenets of Christendom.




                           T H E E N D.
