
 WHAT IS
SPIRITISM?


                      WHAT IS
          SPIRITISM?
   INTRODUCTION TO KNOWING THE INVISIBLE
     WORLD, THAT IS, THE WORLD OF SPIRITS

                                 Containing
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE SPIRITIST DOCTRINE AND A RESPONSE TO SOME OF THE
                      MAIN OBJECTIONS AGAINST IT




                                      by
                          Allan Kardec

       AUTHOR OF THE SPIRITS’ BOOK AND OF THE MEDIUMS’ BOOK

                      Without Charity there is no Salvation




          Translated by Darrel W. Kimble, Marcia M. Saiz and Ily Reis

Copyright © 2010 by
INTERNATIONAL SPIRITIST COUNCIL
SGAN Q. 909 – Conjunto F
70790-090 – Brasilia (DF) – Brazil
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical,
photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor
may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise be copied for public or
private use without prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN 978-85-7945-026-6
Original French Title:
QU’EST-CE QUE LE SPIRITISME ?
(Paris, 1859)
Translated by Darrel W. Kimble, Marcia M. Saiz and Ily Reis
Cover design by: Luciano Carneiro Holanda
Layout: Rones José Silvano de Lima
Edition of
INTERNATIONAL SPIRITIST COUNCIL
SGAN Q. 909 - Conjunto F
70790-090 - Brasilia (DF) - Brazil
www.edicei.com
edicei@edicei.com
55 61 3038 8400
Sales: + 55 61 3038 8425
Authorized edition by International Spiritist Council
Second Edition 10/2011




                 INTERNATIONAL DATA FOR CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION (ICP)

 K27g     Kardec, Allan, 1804-1869.
        What is Spiritism? : introduction to knowing the invisible world, that is, the world
        of spirits / by Allan Kardec; [translated by Darrel W. Kimble, Marcia M. Saiz and
        Ily Reis]. – Brasilia, DF (Brazil): International Spiritist Council, 2011.
            220 p.; 21 cm
            Translated from: Qu’est-ce que le spiritisme ?

            ISBN 978-85-7945-026-6
            1. Spiritism. I. International Spiritist Council. II. Title.
 					CDD: 133.9
 					CDU: 133.7

                                 Contents

Biography of Allan Kardec.................................................... 7
What is Spiritism?............................................................... 47


                                   CHAPTER I

A Brief Discussion of Spiritism........................................... 49
     First Dialogue – The Critic..................................................... 51
     Second Dialogue – The Skeptic............................................... 65
          Spiritism and Spiritualism................................................. 66
          Dissenting Opinions.......................................................... 68
          Simulated Spirit Phenomena.............................................. 70
          The Powerlessness of Detractors........................................... 71
          The Extraordinary and the Supernatural............................ 74
          The Opposition of Science.................................................. 75
          Erroneous Explanations of the Phenomena.......................... 82
          Disbelievers Cannot See in order to be Convinced ............... 85
          Spirits’ Good or Ill Will to Convince................................... 87
          The Origin of Modern Spiritist Ideas.................................. 88
          Means of Communication.................................................. 92
          Mediums for Hire............................................................. 97
          Mediums and Sorcerers.................................................... 102
          Diversity among Spirits.................................................... 104
          The Practical Usefulness of Manifestations........................ 108
          Insanity, Suicide, Obsession.............................................. 110
          Forgetfulness of the Past................................................... 113

         Elements of Conviction.................................................... 116
         Society for the Continuation of the Spiritist Works of
         Allan Kardec, 7 de Lille Street.......................................... 119
         The Prohibition against Spiritism..................................... 120
     Third Dialogue – The Priest ................................................. 123


                                    CHAPTER II

Elementary Notions of Spiritism....................................... 153
     Preliminary Remarks............................................................. 153
     Concerning Spirits................................................................ 155
     Communications with the Invisible World............................ 159
     The Providential Aim of Spirit Manifestations...................... 170
     Concerning Mediums........................................................... 171
     Dangers Mediums Might Encounter..................................... 176
     Characteristics of Mediums................................................... 179
     Charlatanism........................................................................ 183
     The Identity of Spirits........................................................... 184
     Contradictions...................................................................... 186
     The Consequences of Spiritism............................................. 187


                                   CHAPTER III

The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist
Doctrine............................................................................ 195
     The Plurality of Worlds......................................................... 195
     The Soul............................................................................... 196
     Human Beings during their Life on Earth............................. 199
     Human Beings after Death.................................................... 209

          BIOGRAPHY OF ALLAN KARDEC1

          Ladies and Gentlemen,

       Many persons who are interested in Spiritism often express the
regret of having only a very imperfect understanding of the biography
of Allan Kardec, and of not knowing where to find information
regarding the one whom we call Master. Therefore, it is to honor
Allan Kardec and celebrate his memory that we find ourselves
gathered here today, since one and the same sentiment of veneration
and recognition stirs all our hearts with regards to the Founder of the
Spiritist philosophy. In an attempt to respond to such a legitimate
desire, please allow me to talk to you for a few moments about that
beloved Master, whose works are universally known and appreciated,
and whose inner life and industrious existence may only be imagined.
       If it were easy for all the conscientious investigators to
acknowledge the great significance and scope of Allan Kardec’s work by
carefully reading his productions, then due to the absence even today
of means for doing so, very few could enter the private life of the man
and follow him step by step in the performance of his task, so grand,

1
    In keeping with the Portuguese version published by the Brazilian Spiritist Federation,
    and translated by Guillon Ribeiro, we have included this short biography of Allan Kardec
    by Henri Sausse. It is an abridgement of a lengthier version (available in French at www.
    spiritisme.net/ouvrages/kardec.htm) and was read by the author at a gathering of Spiritists
    in Lyon for the March 31, 1896 observance of the 27th anniversary of Kardec’s passing. – Tr.



                                               7

                             Biography of Allan Kardec


so glorious and so well-accomplished. Not only is Kardec’s biography
little-known, it has yet to be written at all. Envy and jealousy have
sown the most obvious errors, the grossest and most impudent slander
about it. Therefore, I shall make every effort to show you, in the truest
light, the Great Initiator, whose disciples we are proud to be.
        You all know that our city can be honored aright for having
witnessed within its walls the birth of that fearless and methodical
thinker, that wise, clear-sighted and profound philosopher, that
tireless worker, whose labor shook the religious edifice of the Old
World and established the new foundations that would serve as
the basis for the evolution and renewal of our decaying society,
impelling it toward a saner and loftier ideal, toward intellectual
advancement and sound morals.
        It was in Lyon, on October 3, 1804 that a child was born
into an old Lyon family by the name of Rivail - he, who would
later bear the illustrious name of Allan Kardec, and who would
earn so much acclaim and our deepest affection and recognition.
        In this regard, here is a positive and official document:
“October 12 of the year XIII2, birth certificate of Denizard Hippolyte-
Leon Rivail. Yesterday at 7:00 p.m., the son of Jean-Baptiste Antoine
Rivail, magistrate and judge, and Jeannne Duhamel, his wife, residents
of Lyon, 76 Sala Street3 was born. The child’s sex was recognized
as male. Major witnesses: “Syriaque-Frederic Dittmar, director of
the mineral water establishment on Sala Street, and Jean-François
Targe of the same Sala Street, at the request of the physician, Pierre
Radamel, 78 Saint-Dominique Street. After reading it, the witnesses
signed it, as did the Mayor of the South Zone.”
        President of the Court,
                                                     (Signed): Mathiou

2
    1813 – Tr.
3
     The house in which Allan Kardec was born disappeared during the enlargement and
    reconstruction of Sala Street from 1840 to 1852, following the floods of 1840.



                                          8

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


       At birth, the future founder of Spiritism received a dear
and respected name, and an entire past of virtue, honor and
probity. Due to their talent, knowledge and scrupulous probity,
many of his forebears had distinguished themselves in law and
magistracy. One might think that the young Rivail would
also have dreamed of being granted the honor and glory of
his family in the same capacity. Such was not to be, however,
because from the beginning of his youth he felt attracted to the
sciences and philosophy.
       Rivail Denizard did his initial studies in Lyon, and then
completed his schooling in Yvderdun (Switzerland) with the
famous professor Pestalozzi, of whom he would soon become one
of the most eminent disciples, as well as an intelligent and dedicated
collaborator. He applied himself wholeheartedly to spreading the
educational system that exerted such a great influence on the
reformation of education in France and Germany.
       Quite often, when Pestalozzi was called away here and there
by governments to found institutes similar to the one in Yverdun,
he entrusted Denizard Rivail with the job of replacing him in
the management of his school. His disciple-turned-master had,
above all and with the most legitimate right, the ability required
to handle the job that had been entrusted to him. He received
his bachelor’s in letters and sciences, and then a doctorate in
medicine after having completed all his medical studies and
having brilliantly defended his dissertation. A renowned linguist,
he had in-depth knowledge of and was fluent in German and
English. He also knew Dutch and could easily express himself
in that language. Denizard Rivail was a tall, handsome young
man with distinct manners. He was kind and obliging, and in
private he displayed jovial good humor. When it was time for
his mandatory military service, he obtained an exemption and
two years later went to Paris to found an establishment at 35


                                  9

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


Sevres Street similar to that of Yverdun. For this undertaking, he
associated himself with one of his uncles, his mother’s brother,
to be his financier.
       In Paris, Denizard Rivail frequented the world of letters and
teaching, and in doing so he met Miss Amelie Boudet, a teacher.
She was petite but well proportioned, kind and gracious, well-off
(due to her parents), an only child, intelligent and lively. Her smile
and character led her to be noticed by Mr. Rivail. And under this
affable man’s frank and communicative cheerfulness, she perceived
the learned and profound thinker who combined great dignity
and propriety. The civil records inform us that: “Amelie-Gabrielle
Boudet, daughter of Julien-Luis Boudet, proprietor and notary
public, and Julie-Louise Seigneat de Lacombe, was born in Thiais
(Seine) on November 23, 1795.” Miss Boudet was thus nine years
older than Mr. Rivail, but she looked ten years younger. On February
6, 1832, the marriage contract was signed in Paris on Sevres Street by
Hippolyte-Leon-Denizard Rivail, director of the Technical Institute
(Pestalozzi Method), son of Jean-Baptiste Antoine and Mrs. Jeanne
Duhamel, residents of Chateau-du-Loir, and Amelie-Gabrielle
Boudet, daughter of Julien-Louis and Mrs. Julie-Louise Seigneat de
Lacombe, residents of 35 Sevres Street in Paris.
       Rivail’s partner had a passion for gambling and he ruined
his nephew by losing huge sums at Spa and at Aix-la-Chapelle.
Rivail petitioned for the liquidation of the Institute, and each was
given his share of 45,000 francs. This amount was entrusted by
Mr. and Mrs. Rivail to one of their close friends, a businessman,
who was involved in bad business. He went bankrupt and left
nothing to his creditors. Far from becoming discouraged by this
double setback, Rivail courageously threw himself into his work.
He managed to do the accounting for three places, which provided
him with around 7,000 francs per year. In the evening, when his
day was finished, this tireless worker wrote books on grammar and


                                  10

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


arithmetic, in addition to volumes on higher pedagogical studies.
He translated works from English and German, and prepared all
the courses for Levy-Alvares, which was frequented by both sexes
from the suburb of Saint-Germain. Furthermore, in his home
on Sevres Street, he organized free courses in chemistry, physics,
astronomy and comparative anatomy, which were highly attended
from 1835 to 1840. He was a member of several learned societies
– most notably the Royal Academy of Arras – and in 1831 he was
awarded for the presentation of his noteworthy essay: What system
of education is most in harmony with the needs of the time?
       Among his numerous works, the following are cited
in chronological order: Plan proposé pour l’amélioration de
l’instruction publique (Plan Proposed for the Improvement of
Public Education), 1828; in 1829 according to the Pestalozzi
method, he published for use by teachers and wives Cours pratique
et théorique d’arithmétique (Practical and Theoretical Course on
Arithmetic); in 1831 he published Grammaire française classique
(Classical French Grammar); in 1846 Manuel des examens pour
les brevets de capacité (Examination Manual for receiving the
Aptitude Diploma), which entailed rational solutions to questions
and problems in arithmetic and geometry; in 1848 he published
Catéchisme grammatical de la langue française (Grammatical
Catechism of the French Language); finally, in 1849 we find Mr.
Rivail teaching at Lycée Polymathique, filling chairs in physiology,
astronomy, chemistry and physics. In a highly significant work, he
summed up his courses and later published: Dictées normales de
examens de l’Hôtel de Ville et de la Sorbonne (Standard Dictations
for the examination of the Hotel de Ville and the Sorbonne) and
Dictées spéciales sur les difficultés orthographiques (Special Dictations
on Orthographic Difficulties). These various works were adopted
by the University of France and were sold profusely; thus, Rivail
managed a modest income, thanks to them and his tireless work.


                                   11

                      Biography of Allan Kardec


As one may tell from this very brief exposition, Denizard Rivail was
wonderfully prepared for the hard task he would have to perform
and render successful. His name was recognized and respected,
and his works justly appreciated long before he immortalized the
name Allan Kardec.
       Pursuing his teaching career, Rivail was able to live happily,
honorably and peacefully, having rebuilt his fortune through
persevering work and the brilliant success that crowned his
efforts. However, his mission would call him to a more onerous
task, to a greater work, and as we will many times demonstrate,
he always showed that he was capable of the glorious mission
that had been reserved for him. His natural propensities and
aspirations might have led him to mysticism, but his education,
correct judgment and methodical observation kept him sheltered
from nonsensical enthusiasm and unjustified negations. It was in
1854 that Mr. Rivail first heard about “turning tables” from the
magnetizer Mr. Fortier, with whom he maintained a relationship
due to their studies on magnetism. Mr. Fortier said to him one
day, “There is something quite extraordinary about this; not only
is the table made to turn by magnetization, but it is also made
to communicate. If it is asked something, it responds.” “That,”
retorted Mr. Rivail, “is another matter. I will believe it when
I see it and when it has been proven to me that a table has a
brain for thinking, nerves for feeling and that it can become a
somnambulist. Until then, allow me to regard it as nothing more
than a fairytale to make me feel sleepy.”
       Such was Rivail’s state of mind in the beginning, and thus
we will see him many times, not denying something parti pris,
but asking for proof and wanting to see and observe in order to
believe. Such must be our conduct regarding a subject as attractive
as manifestations from the Beyond. Up to this point, we have only
been concerned with talking about Mr. Rivail, professor emeritus,


                                 12

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


pedagogical author of renown. However, from 1854 to 1856, a new
horizon was opening to this profound thinker, this astute observer.
During that time of his life, the name of Rivail was overshadowed
to give way to that of Allan Kardec, whose fame would be taken to
all corners of the globe, which every echo would repeat, and which
all our hearts would treasure.
        Here is how Kardec revealed his doubts, his hesitations
and also his first initiation: “Thus, I found myself faced with
an inexplicable fact that seemed contrary to the laws of nature
and which my reason rejected. I still had not seen or observed
anything; the experiments done in the presence of honorable and
worthy individuals of faith did convince me that a purely physical
effect was possible, but the idea of a talking table still had not even
entered my mind. The following year – toward the beginning of
1855 – I met Mr. Carlotti, a friend for twenty-five years, who
talked about these phenomena for more than an hour with the
same enthusiasm he put into all new ideas. Mr. Carlotti was
Corsican by birth and possessed of an ardent and energetic nature.
I had always perceived in him the qualities that characterize a great
and beautiful soul, but I distrusted his enthusiasm. He was the
first to speak to me about the intervention of spirits, but he only
added to my doubts. “Someday, you will be one of us,” he said. “I
will not say no,” I responded. “We shall see.”
        “Some time later, during May of 1855, I was in the home
of the somnambulist Mrs. Roger with Mr. Fortier, her magnetizer.
There, I met Mr. Patier and Mrs. Plainemaison, who spoke to me
about the phenomena just as Mr. Carlotti had, but in a different
tone. Mr. Patier was a civil servant of certain age, a highly educated
man with a serious, cool and composed nature. His deliberate
speech was devoid of any enthusiasm and made a lively impression
on me; and when he invited me to witness some experiments that
would be performed in Mrs. Plainemaison’s home on 18 Grange-


                                  13

                               Biography of Allan Kardec


Bateliere, I readily accepted. The engagement was set for the next
Tuesday4 at 8:00 p.m. It was there that for the first time I witnessed
the phenomenon of the turning tables, which jumped and moved
about in such a way that doubting the matter was not possible.
       “I also saw a few very imperfect attempts at mediumistic
writing on a slate with the help of a basket. I was far from
changing my mind, but there had to be some sort of cause
behind such an incident nonetheless. Behind those apparent
futilities and the type of game that the phenomena were used for,
I glimpsed something more serious, perhaps revealing of a new
law, and I promised myself I would delve into it. The opportunity
presented itself and I was able to observe the phenomenon more
closely than I had been able to before. During one of Mrs.
Plainemaison’s soirees, I made the acquaintance of the Baudin
family, who lived on Rochechouart Street at the time. Mr. Baudin
invited me to witness some weekly sessions at his home, which
I attended diligently from that time onward. It was there that
I made my first serious studies in Spiritism, still less due to the
revelations than to the observations. I applied the experimental
method to this new science as I had always done before then;
I never formulated preconceived theories; I observed closely,
comparing and deducing the consequences; I sought to go back
to the causes from the effects through deduction, through the
logical chain of facts, and did not accept an explanation as valid
unless it could resolve all the difficulties of the issue. That is
how I had always proceeded with my previous endeavors since
I was fifteen or sixteen years old. From the very start, I grasped
the gravity of the exploration I was going to undertake. I saw in
these phenomena the key to the very obscure and controversial
problem of humanity’s past and future, the solution that I had
sought for my entire life. It was, in a word, a complete revolution
4
    The date was left blank in the manuscript. – Pub.



                                              14

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


in my ideas and beliefs; hence, I had to act circumspectly and not
lightly; I had to be positivistic and not idealistic to keep from
allowing myself to become deluded.
       “One of the first results of my observations was that spirits,
being nothing more than human souls, were endowed with neither
supreme knowledge nor supreme wisdom, that their knowledge was
limited to the degree of their evolution, and that their opinions had
value only as personal opinions. I recognized this truth at the start,
and it enabled me to avoid the grave mistake of believing that spirits
were infallible, and it also kept me from formulating premature
theories based on the opinion of only one or a few of them. The
mere fact that one could engage in communication with spirits –
no matter what they might say – proved the existence of an unseen
world surrounding us. This was a crucial point, an immense field ripe
for exploration, the key to a multitude of inexplicable phenomena.
The second, no-less important point was in understanding the state
of that world and its customs – if I may so express myself. I soon
observed that, due to its personal position and knowledge, each
spirit disclosed an aspect of that world precisely as one would come
to understand the state of a country by questioning the inhabitants
of all classes and conditions. Each one would be able to teach us
something, but none of them by themselves would be able to teach
us everything. It would the observer’s responsibility to formulate the
whole with the help of documents gathered from different places
and collected, coordinated and compared with one another. Thus,
I acted with the spirits as I would with persons: for me, they were,
from the least to the highest, a means of gathering information and
not predestined revelators.”
       To this information, which is contained in Kardec’s Posthumous
Works, we must add that, from the start, Mr. Rivail – far from being
enthusiastic about those manifestations and absorbed by his other
concerns – was at the point of abandoning them. He might have


                                  15

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


actually done so if not for the pressing solicitations of Mr. Carlotti, Mr.
Rene Taillandier (member of the Science Academy), Mr. Tiedeman-
Manthese, the Sardous (father and son) and Mr. Didier (publisher),
who for five years had followed the study of the phenomena and had
gathered fifty notebooks containing many communications, which they
had not been able to put in order. Since they knew about Rivail’s
immense and rare aptitude for synthesizing, these gentlemen gave
him the notebooks, asking him to take cognizance of them and to
put them in order. This task would be arduous and would require
much time due to the gaps and obscurities in the communications,
so the learned encyclopedist turned down such a tiresome and time-
consuming task due to his other responsibilities.
       One night, his protector spirit, Z, through a medium,
gave him an altogether personal communication, in which it
stated, among other things, that it had known him in a previous
existence, when, at the time of the Druids, they had lived together
in Gall. At that time he was called Allan Kardec, and since they
had been such great friends, this spirit had promised to help him
in the highly important task to which he had been called, and
which he would readily see through to the end. Consequently, Mr.
Rivail threw himself into the work. He took the notebooks and
carefully annotated them. After a close reading, he eliminated the
repetitions and put each dictation and each session report in its
proper order. He highlighted the gaps to fill, the obscurities to
clarify, and prepared the questions needed to achieve this result.
       “Until then,” said Mr. Rivail, “the sessions in Mr. Baudin’s
home had no definite purpose. I therefore proposed to resolve the
problems that interested me from the viewpoints of philosophy,
psychology and the nature of the invisible world. I came to each
session with a series of prepared questions that were methodically
proposed. They were responded to with precision, depth and
logic. From that time on, the meetings took on a much different


                                    16

                      Biography of Allan Kardec


character, and among the observers there were serious individuals
who took a lively interest in the work. If I happened to miss, the
sessions became erratic, since the majority was not interested in
futile questions. In the beginning, I had only my own instruction
in mind; later, when I saw that everything was forming a whole
and was taking on the proportions of a doctrine, I got the idea
to publish the work for widespread instruction. These were the
same questions, successively developed and completed, which
comprised the foundation for The Spirits’ Book.”
       In 1856 Mr. Rivail often attended Spiritist meetings held on
Tiquetonne Street in the home of Mr. Roustan with Miss Japhet,
who was a somnambulist and who as a medium received highly
interesting communications with the help of a beaked basket.
Through this medium, Mr. Rivail examined the communications
that were received and put in order beforehand. This work took
place at first during ordinary sessions, but at the Spirits’ request,
and so that more care could be dedicated to them and more
attention given to examining them, it was continued during private
sessions. “I was not happy with such verification the Spirits had
recommended to me,” says Allan Kardec. “Having been placed by
the circumstances in rapport with other mediums, every time the
occasion arose, I took advantage of it to propose a few questions
that seemed thorny. It was thus that more than ten mediums
cooperated in that work. And it was from the comparison and
joining of all these responses, which were coordinated, classified
and many times reorganized in the silence of meditation, that I
formed the first edition of The Spirits’ Book, which appeared on
April 18, 1857.”
       This book was in large format with two columns per page:
one for the questions and the other for the responses. At the time
it was published, the author was quite puzzled at how to sign it:
as Denizard-Hippolyte-Leon Rivail or under a pseudonym. Since


                                 17

                                Biography of Allan Kardec


his name was very well-known in the scientific world due to his
previous works, which could cause confusion and even harm the
success of the undertaking, he adopted the latter and signed it
using the name Allan Kardec, which, according to what his Guide
had revealed, was what he had been called during the time of the
Druids. The work achieved such success that the first edition was
soon sold out. Kardec re-edited it in 18585 under the current
format. It was reviewed, corrected and expanded considerably.
       On March 25, 1856, Allan Kardec was in his office in order
to consult the communications and prepare The Spirits’ Book,
when he heard repeated raps in the walls. He tried but failed to
discover their cause and then went back to work. His wife came
in at around 10:00 a.m. and heard the same noises. They both
looked but failed to determine the source. At the time, Mr. and
Mrs. Kardec lived at 8 Martyrs St. in the back of the second
floor. Kardec wrote, “Since the following day there were sessions
at Mr. Baudin’s home, I told him what had happened and asked
if he could explain it.”
       Question: You have heard the incident that I have just
mentioned. Could you tell me what caused the raps, which so insistently
made themselves heard?
       Answer: It was your familiar spirit.
       Question: What was his purpose for knocking in this way?
       Answer: He wanted to communicate with you.
       Question: Can you tell me what he wanted?
       Answer: You can ask him yourself; he is right here.
       Question: My familiar spirit, whoever you may be, I thank you
for having visited me. Would you be so kind as to tell me who you are?
       Answer: For you I shall call myself Truth, and for a quarter
of an hour every month, I will be here at your disposal.”

5
    The second edition appeared in April 1860, the third in August 1860, the forth in February
    1861 – three editions in less than one year - auth.



                                              18

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


       Question: Yesterday, when you rapped while I was working,
did you have something in particular to tell me?
       Answer: I wanted to tell you about the work you were doing.
What you were writing was disagreeable to me and I wanted to
make you stop.”
       REMARK: What I was writing was related precisely to the
studies I was making concerning spirits and their manifestations.
       Question: Did you disapprove of the chapter I was writing or
the work as a whole?
       Answer: About yesterday’s chapter: you be the judge; re-read it this
evening. You will recognize your errors and you will correct them.”
       Question: Actually, I myself was not very satisfied with that
chapter and I have already reworked it. Isn’t it better now?
       Answer: It is better, but still not very good. Read the third to
the thirtieth line and you will find a serious error.”
       Question: I tore up what I did yesterday!
       Answer: The tearing does not prevent the error from
remaining. Re-read it and you will see.”
       Question: Is the name Truth, which you have taken, an
allusion to the truth I am seeking?
       Answer: Perhaps; at least it is a guide that will protect and
help you.”
       Question: May I evoke you in my home?
       Answer: Yes, so that I may assist you through thought. But
as for written responses in you home, it is too soon for you to be
able to receive them.”
       Question: Could you come more often than once per month?
       Answer: Yes, but I can only promise once per month until
further notice.”
       Question: Have you indwelled some personage known on earth?
       Answer: I have told you that for you I am Truth; this name for
you means discretion. You do not need to know more than that.”


                                    19

                                Biography of Allan Kardec


       Upon returning home, Allan Kardec rushed to re-read what he
had written and found the serious error that he had committed. The
one-month interval set for each communication from the Spirit Truth
was rarely observed. He manifested frequently to Kardec, but not at
his home, where for almost a whole year he was unable to receive
communications through any medium; every time he hoped to
receive one, he was prevented by some unforeseen cause opposing it.
       It was on April 30, 1856 in the home of Mr. Roustan and
through the medium Miss Japhet that Allan Kardec received the
first revelation about the Mission he was to fulfill. Such notice
was rather vague at first, but was clarified on June 12, 1856 by
the medium Miss Aline C. On May 6, 1857, Mrs. Cardone,
by inspecting Kardec’s hand lines6 confirmed the two previous
communications, which she did not know about. Finally, on April
12, 1860, in Mr. Dehan’s home and through the medium Mr.
Crozet, that mission was once again confirmed in a spontaneous
communication obtained in Kardec’s absence. The same applied
regarding his pseudonym. Several communications in different
places reaffirmed and corroborated the first communication
regarding it. Urged on by events and documentation he had in
his possession, and due to the success of The Spirits’ Book, Kardec
came up with a plan to create a Spiritist journal. He approached
Mr. Tiedeman to ask for his financial support, but the latter
decided not to take part in this undertaking. On November 15,
1857, through the mediumship of Miss E. Dufaux, Kardec asked

6
     “I had the opportunity to meet Mrs. Cardonne during Mr. Roustan’s sessions. Someone
    told me – I think it was Mr. Carlotti – that she had the remarkable talent of reading palms.
    I had never believed that the lines on the palm had any meaning whatsoever, but I had
    always thought that, for certain persons gifted with a sort of second sight, it could be a
    way to establish a relationship that enabled them, just like somnambulists, to say things
    that were sometimes true. In such a case, the signs of the palm would be nothing more
    than a pretext, a way to focus the attention, to develop lucidity, similar to cards, coffee
    grounds and so-called magic mirrors for other persons who enjoy the faculty of second
    sight. The experiment once again confirmed the correctness of that opinion.” (Allan
    Kardec, Posthumous Works, pt. 2, “The Spiritual Tiara”) – Tr.



                                               20

                      Biography of Allan Kardec


his Guides what he should do. He was told to carry out his idea
and not worry about anything.
       He stated, “I hurried to write the first issue, which appeared
on January 1, 1858, without my having told anyone. I did not
have even one subscriber or financial partner. Thus, I published
it entirely at my own risk. I did not regret it, because its success
surpassed my expectations. From January 1 onward, the issues were
published without interruption, and as the Spirit had foreseen, the
journal became a powerful aid for me. I realized later that I was
lucky not to have found a financial partner because I enjoyed more
freedom, whereas an interested outsider would have intended to
impose his ideas and will on me and could have hindered my
progress. By myself, I did not have to answer to anybody no matter
how onerous the work was.”
       This duty continued to increase in the amount of work and
responsibility, and involved constant struggles against obstacles,
attacks and perils of all sorts. Nonetheless, to the degree that
the work became more intense and the struggle more acute, this
energetic worker rose to the challenge, a fact that never came
as a surprise. For eleven years, via Revue Spirite (which, as we
have just seen, had started out so modestly), he confronted all
storms, all competitions, and was spared no jealousy, as he himself
affirmed, and as he had been forewarned about when his mission
was revealed. That communication and Kardec’s thoughts show
us in an unflattering light the situation at the time, but they also
highlight the great worth of Spiritism’s founder and his merit for
having known how to overcome it all.
       Medium, Miss Aline C., June 12, 1856:
       Question: What are the causes that can make me fail? The
insufficiency of my aptitudes?
       Answer: No. But missions of reformers are full of obstacles
and dangers; yours is difficult – let me warn you – for it involves


                                 21

                      Biography of Allan Kardec


the stirring up and transformation of the whole world. Do not
think it will be enough to publish one book, two books, ten books,
while remaining undisturbed in your home. No, you must get
involved in the conflict. Terrible hatred will be aroused against
you; implacable enemies will plot your ruin; you will be exposed to
slander and betrayal, even from those who seem to be most devoted
to you; your best teachings will be attacked and twisted; you will
succumb more than once to the weight of fatigue; in other words,
you will have to bear an almost constant struggle, sacrificing your
rest, your peace, your health and even your life, for you will not
live very long. So then, more than one missionary retreats when,
instead of a flowered pathway, he finds his steps lined only with
thorns, sharp stones and serpents. For such missions, intelligence
is not enough. Before anything else, to please God, one needs
humility, modesty and unselfishness, for he strikes the proud and
presumptuous. In order to struggle against the human element,
one must have courage, perseverance and unshakable firmness.
One must also be prudent and tactful in order to deal with things
appropriately and not to compromise their success with untimely
measures and words. Finally, one must be devoted, self-denying
and ready for any kind of sacrifice. You can see that your mission
will depend on the conditions that you yourself set.”
                                                    The spirit Truth
       COMMENT (by Kardec): I am writing this on January 1,
1867, ten and a half years after that communication was given to
me, and I can affirm that everything has happened as it said at every
point, for I have experienced all the vicissitudes predicted by it. I
have been the target of the hatred of implacable enemies, of insult,
slander, envy and jealousy. Infamous libels have been published
against me; my best teachings have been twisted. I have been
betrayed by those in whom I had placed my trust and have been
paid with ingratitude by those to whom I rendered service. The


                                 22

                      Biography of Allan Kardec


Parisian Society has been a continual focus of intrigue conspired
by those who said they were on my side, and who, pretending to
be amiable in my presence, stabbed me in the back. It has been
said that those who adopted my position were bribed by me with
money that I collected from Spiritism. I have not known what rest
is; more than once I succumbed due to excessive work; my health
has changed and my life compromised. Nevertheless, thanks to the
protection and assistance from the good Spirits, who have ceaselessly
given me manifest proofs of their solicitude, I am happy to realize
that I have not experienced one single instant of breakdown or
discouragement, and that I have unswervingly pursued my duty
with the same ardor, without worrying about the evil of which I
was the target. According to the Spirit Truth’s communication, I
was to expect all this and everything has occurred.

                                ***

       When we read about all his struggles, all the turpitudes of
which Allan Kardec was the target, how elevated he becomes in our
sight and how his brilliant triumph acquires merit and splendor!
What became of those envious persons, those little minds who
sought to prevent his progress? Most of their names are unknown
or no longer awaken any remembrance. Oblivion has overtaken
them and has forever buried them in darkness, whereas Allan
Kardec, the intrepid combatant, the daring pioneer, will pass on
to posterity with his halo of glory so rightly won.
       The Parisian Society for Spiritist Studies was founded on
April 1, 1858. Until then, meetings had been held in Kardec’s home
on Matyrs Street, with Miss. E. Dufaux as the main medium. The
room started out with fifteen to twenty people, but soon there were
more than thirty. Thus, this location became overcrowded, and
not wanting to burden Kardec with all the duties, a few assistants


                                 23

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


proposed forming a Spiritist society and rented another place for
holding the meetings. However, in order to meet, they had to obtain
the recognition and authorization of the Police. Mr. Dufaux, who
knew the Chief of Police personally, was in charge of taking the
necessary measures, and thanks to the Interior Minister, General
X., who was favorable toward new ideas, the authorization was
obtained in only fifteen days, whereas if the normal route had been
taken, it would have required months with no guarantee of success.
The Society was then legally formed and meetings were held every
Tuesday in the place that had been rented in the Palais-Royal, Valois
Mall. Meetings continued to be held there for one year, from April
1, 1858 to April 1, 1859. When it could remain there no longer,
the society gathered every Friday in one of the rooms at the Douix
Restaurant in the Palais-Royal Montpensier Mall from April 1,
1859 to April 1, 1860, at which time the Society moved into its
own headquarters on 59 Sainte-Anne. After having given account of
the conditions in which the Society was formed and the task he had
to fulfill, Kardec explained (Revue Spírite, 1859, p. 169):
       “In pursuit of my duties, which I must say were quite laborious,
I used all the diligence and dedication of which I was capable. From
the administrative point of view, I worked to maintain strict order at
the meetings and to impress them with a serious character, without
which the assembly’s reputation would have soon vanished. Now
that my job is over and the impulse has been provided, I should
inform you of my decision to renounce in the future any kind of
position in the Society – even that of director of its studies. I do
not aspire to any titles except that of a simple charter member,
with which I will always feel happy and honored. My reason for
this is in the multiplicity of my tasks, which increase everyday
through the extension of my relationships, because besides those
you know about, I am preparing other, more considerable projects,
which require long and laborious study and which will demand no


                                  24

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


less than ten years. In addition, the duties of the Society will not
cease to take a lot of time, whether in preparing or coordinating
and putting everything in order. They require assiduity, which
often interferes with my personal duties, thus rendering my almost
exclusive initiative indispensable in the tasks assigned to me. That is
the reason, gentlemen, of which I had so often spoken, frequently
deploring the fact that our eminently enlightened members have
deprived us of their light. For a long time, I have nurtured the desire
to resign my duties: I have expressed it very explicitly on several
occasions, whether here or in private with my colleagues, especially
with Mr. Ledoyen. I would have done it much earlier if I had not
feared causing a disturbance in the Society. If I had resigned in the
middle of the year, it might have been regarded as desertion, and I
could not give such pleasure to our adversaries. Therefore, I saw my
duties through to the end; now, however, those reasons no longer
apply, and I have hurried to tell you about my decision in order not
to hinder the choice you will make. It is only right that all have their
share in the duties and honors.”
       We must hasten to add that Kardec’s resignation was not
accepted and he was reelected unanimously except for one blank
vote. In the light of this affirmation of affinity, he gave in and
retained his duties.
       In September of 1860, Kardec took a promotional trip to
our area, and it was then that reference was made to the Parisian
Society for Spiritist Studies:
       “Mr. Allan Kardec has given a report on the results of his
recent trip in the interests of Spiritism, and is happy about the
cordial welcome he received everywhere, especially in Sens, Macon,
Lyon and Saint-Etienne. Wherever he stayed, he observed the
Doctrine’s remarkable progress; however, what is especially worthy
of note is that nowhere did he see it being used as entertainment;
on the contrary, everywhere it was taken very seriously; everywhere


                                  25

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


its scope and consequences for the future were understood. Of
course, there are many adversaries, of whom the most obstinate are
the self-interested, but scoffers have decreased considerably; seeing
that their sarcasm does not put the mockers on their side, and
that they help more than hinder the progress of the new beliefs,
they have begun to understand that they gain nothing with their
behavior and that it is a waste of energy; hence, they keep quiet.
One highly characteristic phrase seems to be the order of the day
everywhere, which is: “Spiritism is in the air”; that by itself depicts
the current state of affairs. The most noteworthy results occurred
in Lyon, where there are numerous Spiritists of all social classes,
and the blue-collar class is composed of hundreds. The Spiritist
Doctrine has had the healthiest influence on the laborers from the
point of view of order, morality and religious ideas. In sum, the
spread of Spiritism continues with the most heartening speed.”
       Following his trip, Kardec made a magisterial speech at a
banquet held on September 19, 1860. We will quote a few passages
appropriate for our purposes, we who worthily aspire to replace
these workers of the first hour:
       “The first thing that impressed me was the number of
followers. I knew perfectly well that Lyon had a huge number, but I
was far from imagining that there were so many. There are hundreds,
and in a short time – I hope – we will not be able to count them.
       “However, if Lyon stands out because of its numbers, it does
no less so in terms of quality, which is even worthier. Nowhere did
I encounter anything but sincere Spiritists, who understood the
Doctrine from its true point of view. There are three categories of
followers, gentlemen. First, there are those who limit themselves to
believing in the reality of the manifestations and who before anything
else seek out the phenomena; for them, Spiritism is simply a series
of more or less interesting phenomena. Second, there are those who
see something in Spiritism besides the phenomena, who understand


                                  26

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


its philosophical scope and admire the morality that derives from it;
however, they do not put Spiritism into practice. For them Christian
charity is a pretty maxim, but nothing more. Third, there are those
who are not content with simply admiring its morality; they practice
it and accept its consequences. They are well convinced that earthly
existence is a passing trial, and they make every effort to take advantage
of these short moments to progress on the path of evolution that the
Spirits have traced out for them by doing their utmost to do good and
to restrain their evil tendencies. Being in a relationship with them is
always safe because their convictions keep them from every thought
of evil. On every occasion, charity is the rule of their conduct. These are
true Spiritists, or better, Christian Spiritists.
        “Well then, gentlemen, I am happy to tell you that in Lyon
I did not find one follower from the first category; nowhere did I
see Spiritism regarded as a mere curiosity or with frivolous motives.
Everywhere, the purposes and intentions were serious, and believing
what I was told, there are several from the third category. Therefore,
we must pay homage to the Lyon Spiritists for having generously
entered upon the evolutionary path, without which Spiritism would
have no purpose! Their example will not be futile; it will have its
consequences. And it was no wonder that the Spirits responded
to me the other day through one of your most devoted mediums,
albeit the least known, when I expressed my surprise, ‘Why do you
marvel at it? Lyon has always been a city of martyrs; faith is alive there;
it shall furnish apostles for Spiritism. If Paris is the head, Lyon will be
the heart.’” Kardec’s opinion concerning the Lyon Spiritists of his
time is a great honor for us, but it must also be a rule of conduct. All
Spiritists in their turn must make every effort to deserve such praise,
by taking our master’s lessons to heart, and, especially, conforming
their behavior to them. Noblesse oblige, states an adage. Let us all
remember this and keep Spiritism’s banner flying high and firmly.
However, Kardec was not content with simply throwing flowers


                                    27

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


at our co-workers. More than that, he provided them with wise
counsels, upon which we must in turn meditate.
        “Since the teaching comes from the Spirits, the various
groups, as well as individuals, find themselves under the influence
of certain spirits who preside over their work, or who guide them
morally. If these spirits are not found to be in agreement, the issue
is to know which one deserves the greatest trust. It will obviously
be the one whose theory does not provoke any serious objection;
in other words, the one who at every point provides the greatest
proof of being of a high order. If everything it teaches is good
and rational, it matters little what name the spirit has assumed. In
this regard, the matter of identity is entirely secondary. If, under
a respectable name, the teaching fails in its essential qualities, we
may immediately conclude that it is an apocryphal name and that
it is an impostor or frivolous spirit. General Rule: the name is never
a guarantee; the sole true guarantee that it is a high order spirit is
its thought and the way it expresses itself. Any deceiving spirit can
imitate anything except true wisdom and true sentiment.
        “It oftentimes happens that, in order to make individuals adopt
various utopias, some spirits exhibit a false wisdom and think they can
impose it by choosing from their arsenal of technical words anything
that might delude the gullible. And they have an even surer method:
they put on the appearance of virtue, and with the aid of great words
such as charity, fraternity and humility they hope to promulgate the
grossest absurdities; and that is exactly what happens whenever we
are not on our guard. Hence, we must avoid allowing ourselves to
be seduced by appearances both on the part of spirits and human
beings. I must confess that that is one of the greatest difficulties, but
I have never said that Spiritism is an easy science. It has its stumbling
blocks that can only be avoided through experience. In order to
avoid this trap, we must above all run from blind enthusiasm and
from the pride that leads certain mediums to believe themselves to be


                                   28

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


the sole interpreters of the truth. Everything must be coolly examined,
maturely weighed and tested. And if we distrust our own judgment –
which is often quite prudent to do – we must resort to other persons
according to the proverb, ‘Four eyes are better than two.’ Only false
self-love or an obsession could make a notoriously wrong idea persist,
one which anyone’s common sense would reject.” Those are the
wise and practical counsels given by the one who others wanted to
be taken as an enthusiast, a mystic or a visionary, and this rule of
conduct, established from the start, has not yet proven invalid either
by observation or by the phenomena themselves. It has always been
the safest and wisest route, the only one that should be followed by
those who want to concern themselves with Spiritism.
        At that time, Kardec was working on The Mediums’ Book,
which appeared during the first two weeks of January, 1861,
published by Mr. Didier & Cia., Booksellers and Publishers.
The master explains its reason for being in Revue Spirite in the
following terms: “We sought in this work – the fruit of much
experience and hard study – to clarify all the issues attached to
the practice of spirit manifestations. According to the Spirits, it
contains the theoretical explanation for the various phenomena
and the conditions in which they may be produced. However, the
part dealing with the development and practice of mediumship
was especially the object of full, special attention on our part.
Experimental Spiritism is surrounded with many more difficulties
than is generally believed, and the obstacles that may be encountered
are numerous. This is what produces so much deception on the
part of those who concern themselves with it without having the
necessary experience or understanding. Our aim was to caution
investigators against such pitfalls, which are not always exempt
from inconveniences for whomever might want to imprudently
venture forth into this new realm. We could not ignore such a
crucial point, and we treated it with care equal to its importance.”


                                  29

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


       The Mediums’ Book is still the handbook for all who want to
delve into the practice of experimental Spiritism. Nothing better or
more complete has yet appeared on the subject. It is still the surest
guide for us to be able to safely explore the realm of mediumship.

                                  ***

       In 1861, Allan Kardec took another Spiritist trip to Sens,
Macon and Lyon, and saw that Spiritism in our city had reached
its maturity.
       “Actually, I did not count just hundreds of Spiritists as I had
done a year before. I counted thousands; rather, I could hardly
determine their numbers, and I calculate that if things progress as
they have, then within a year or two there will be more than thirty
thousand. In Lyon, Spiritism has acquired followers from all social
classes, but it is especially in the blue-collar class that it has spread
most quickly. This is nothing to marvel at: the working class is the
one that suffers most and it will turn to the side that offers it the
greatest consolation. If those who rail against Spiritism were to
offer workers from this class as much, they would look to them.
But on the contrary, our opponents want to take away precisely
what would help such people bear their burden of misery. But this
approach has been the surest way to lose their sympathy and to
cause them to swell our ranks. What we have seen with our own
eyes is so characteristic and contains such a great teaching that we
believe we should devote most of our report to these workers. Last
year there was only one meeting center, that of the Brotteaux’s,
headed by the shop foreman Dijoux and his wife. Thereafter, other
centers were organized in different parts of the city: Guillotiere,
Perrache, Croix-Rousse, Vaise, Saint-Just, etc., not including a
large number of private meetings. Previously, there were only two
or three neophyte mediums; today, there are mediums at all the


                                   30

                      Biography of Allan Kardec


centers and many are of the highest quality. In one group alone we
saw five writing at the same time. We also saw a young man who
was a seeing medium and we can attest to the fact that this faculty
was developed to the highest degree. Of course, we highly desire
for the number of followers to grow, but what is more valuable
than quantity is quality. Now let us emphatically state: nowhere
did we see Spiritist meetings that were more edifying than those
of the Lyon working class regarding order, concentration and
attention paid to the instructions of their spirit guides. There
were men, seniors, women, young people, even children, whose
respectful attitude contrasted with their age. Not once did a single
child for one moment disturb the silence during our often-drawn
out meetings. They seemed almost as enthusiastic as their parents
in hearing what we had to say. But that is not all: the number
of moral metamorphoses among the working class is almost as
large as the number of followers: nasty habits reformed, passions
subdues, hatreds pacified, homes turned peaceful; in other words,
the most authentic Christian virtues had developed; all because of
their unshakable trust in spirit communications, and in the future
that they had not believed in previously. It is a joy for them to
receive these communications, from which they derive comfort in
the face of adversity. Many of them come from more than three
miles away in any kind of weather – winter or summer – braving
everything in order not to miss a session. Theirs is not an ordinary
faith, but one based on a profound, rational conviction that is in
no way blind.”
       On account of this trip, the members of the large Lyon
Spiritist family were gathered again under Kardec’s presidency for
another banquet. On September 19, 1860, there had been only
30 guests in attendance; on September 19, 1861, there were 160,
“representing the various groups, who all regarded themselves as
members of one big family, and among whom there was not a


                                 31

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


shadow of jealousy or rivalry, which, (said the master) incidentally,
we have the great satisfaction to report. Most of those in attendance
were blue-collar workers and everyone noticed the perfect order
that reigned at every moment. That was so because true Spiritists
are satisfied with joys of the heart and not those of noisy pleasures.”
       On October 14 of the same year, we find Allan Kardec in
Bordeaux, where, as in all the cities through which he passed, he
sowed the Good News and caused faith in the future to germinate.
       Besides Kardec’s trips and duties, the year 1861 will remain
memorable in the annals of Spiritism for an incident that was so
monstrous as to seem almost beyond belief. I am referring to the
book burning in Barcelona that resulted in three hundred Spiritist
books being burned by the fire of inquisitors. Mr. Maurice Lachatre
was at that time the bookseller in Barcelona. As he had a relationship
with Kardec and agreed with his ideas, he asked Kardec to send
him a certain number of Spiritist books so that he could sell them
and advertise the new philosophy. Approximately three hundred
books were shipped under ordinary conditions, with a packing slip
attached to the boxes. When they arrived in Spain, the customs fees
were charged to the addressee and collected by agents of the Spanish
government. However, the boxes were not delivered. The Bishop of
Barcelona judged the books to be pernicious to the Catholic faith,
and had the shipment confiscated by the Holy Office. Since the
church did not want to deliver the books to the addressee, Kardec
asked for them to be returned; however, his request was ignored
and the Bishop, who, raising himself to the status of an enforcer in
France, based his refusal on the following response: “The Catholic
Church is universal, and since these books are contrary to the
Catholic faith, the government cannot consent to allowing them to
pervert the morality and religion of other countries.”
       Not only were the books not returned, but the Spanish treasury
kept the customs duties. Kardec could have pursued a diplomatic


                                  32

                               Biography of Allan Kardec


action to obligate the Spanish government to return the books. The
Spirits, however, dissuaded him, saying that it was preferable for the
spread of Spiritism to let all this ignominy follow its course.
        Reenacting the history and fires of the medieval era, the
Bishop of Barcelona had the incriminated books burned in the
public square at the hand of the executioner. Following is a passage
from the historical document containing the statements of the
infamous cleric:
        “On October 9, 1861, at 10:30 a.m., in the public square of
the city of Barcelona, in the area in which criminals condemned
to the ultimate punishment are executed, and by order of the
Bishop of this city, three hundred books and brochures concerning
Spiritism were burned, to wit:
        “Revue Spirite” [Spiritist Review]7, edited by Allan Kardec;
        “Revue Spiritualiste” [Spiritualist Review] edited by Pierart;
        “Le Livre des Esprits” (The Spirits’ Book) by Allan Kardec;
        “Le Livre des Médiums” (The Mediums’ Book), by Allan Kardec;
        “Qu’est-ce que le Spiritisme?” (What is Spiritism?) by Allan Kardec;
        “Fragment de Sonate” [Sonata Fragment], dictated by Mozart’s
spirit;
        “Lettre d’un catholique sur le Spiritisme” [Letter by a Catholic
concerning Spiritism]” by Doctor Grand;
        “L’Histoire de Jeanne d’Arc”[The Story of Joan of Arc], dictated
by her to Miss Ermance Dufaux;
        “La Réalité des Esprits Démontrée par l’Écriture Directe” [The
Reality of Spirits Demonstrated by Direct Writing], by the Baron of
Guldenstubbe.
        Witnesses to the book burning:
        “A priest dressed in sacramental attire holding a cross in one
hand and a torch in the other;

7
    Titles in brackets are the works which have not yet been translated into English by the
    International Spiritist Council – Tr.



                                            33

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


       “A notary public in charge of drawing up the verbal
proceedings for the book burning;
       “The notary public’s scrivener;
       “A top-level customs administrator;
       “Three mozos (servants) of the customs office in charge of
stoking the fire;
       “A customs agent representing the owner of the books
condemned by the Bishop;
       “An incalculable crowd gathered on the promenade and
covered the forecourt on which the fire burned.
       “After the fire had consumed the three hundred Spiritist
volumes and brochures, the priest and his assistants withdrew
in the midst of jeers and curses from many observers, who were
shouting: ‘Down with the Inquisition!’ Next, several persons
approached the fire to gather up the ashes.”
       It would be diminishing the horror of this act if we accompanied
it with a narrative of the commentaries. We will only aver that as a
result of this burning, Spiritism experienced an unexpected growth
throughout Spain, and just as the Spirits had predicted, it won over
an incalculable number of followers. Thus, like Allan Kardec, we
can only rejoice at the great advertisement of this hateful act on
behalf of Spiritism. By the way, however, concerning the advertising
that we ourselves must do on behalf of our philosophy, we must
never forget the master’s advice (Revue Spirite, 1863, p. 367):
       “Spiritism is meant for those who do not believe or who have
doubts; not to those who have faith and for whom their faith is
sufficient. It tells no one to renounce his or her beliefs in order to
adopt ours; this is consonant with the principles of tolerance and
freedom of conscience that it professes. For this reason, we cannot
approve of attempts by certain individuals to convert the clergy
to our ideas, no matter what spiritual community they belong to.
Hence, we will repeat to all Spiritists: Use kindness to welcome


                                  34

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


persons of goodwill; offer the light only to those who are seeking it,
for you will not be very successful with those who already believe; do
not impose (your) faith on anyone, especially regarding the clergy
as opposed to the laity, for you will be sowing barren fields; make
the light evident so that it may be seen by those who want to see it;
show the fruit of the tree and give it to the ones who are hungry and
not to those who say they are sated.” This advice, like all of Kardec’s
recommendations, is clear, simple and especially practical. It will
behoove us to remember it and opportunely heed it.

                                 ***

       The year 1862 was fertile for doing the work of spreading
Spiritism. On January 15, a small, excellent advertising brochure
appeared, entitled: Spiritism in its Simplest Expression. “The aim of
this publication,” said Kardec, “is to present a highly summarized
outline, a history of Spiritism and a sufficient enough idea of the
Spirits’ doctrine to enable its moral and philosophical purpose to be
understood. Through the clarity and simplicity of its style, we have
sought to place it within reach of all levels of intelligence. We are
counting on the devotion of all true Spiritists to help disseminate
it.” This appeal was heard, for the short brochure spread far and
wide, and many people credited this excellent work for their being
able to understand the purpose and scope of Spiritism.
       On January 1, 1862, after receiving expressions of gratitude
and respect from Lyon Spiritists through nearly 200 people’s
signatures, Allan Kardec sent the following response to all Spiritists
in France and abroad:
       “My dear brothers and friends of Lyon:
       “Your expressions of gratitude, which you were so kind
to send to me on New Year’s Day, gave me great satisfaction; it
shows that you have kept a good memory of me. However, what


                                  35

                      Biography of Allan Kardec


brought me even greater pleasure regarding your spontaneous
act was in finding so many signatures representing nearly every
group since it is a sign of the harmony reigning among them.
I am happy to see that you have perfectly understood the aim
of this organization, whose results you can already appreciate,
for by now it should be obvious to you that a single society
would be almost impossible. My good friends, I am thankful
for your wishes; these are the ones to which God listens. You
can rest assured that he hears you every day, providing me with
extraordinary satisfaction in the establishing of a new doctrine,
and in seeing the one to which I have devoted myself grow and
prosper during my lifetime with marvelous speed. I regard it
as a great favor from heaven to be a witness to the good that
it has already produced. This fact, of which I receive the most
touching testimonies daily, has paid me back with interest for
all my hardships, all my weariness. I ask God for one favor only:
that he may give me the necessary physical strength to complete
my task, which is still far from being fulfilled. But whatever
happens, I will always have great consolation in the fact that the
seed of these new ideas, now spread everywhere, is imperishable.
I have been happier than many others who have only worked
for the future, while I myself have been allowed to see the first
fruits. If I have one thing to regret, it is that the scantiness of
my personal resources has not allowed me to carry out the plans
that I conceived for an even faster advance. However, if God
in his wisdom has decided its course to be otherwise, I will
bequeath my plans to our successors, who undoubtedly will be
more fortunate. In spite of the scarcity of material resources,
the movement has surpassed all expectations; believe me, my
brothers, your example in the process will not have been without
influence. Thus, please accept our congratulations for the way in
which you have come to understand and practice the Doctrine.


                                 36

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


       “At the point to which things have arrived today, and having
in mind the forward progress of Spiritism across the obstacles
that have been sown along its way, one can state that the main
problems have been overcome; it has won its place and is seated on
bases that from now on will challenge the efforts of its adversaries.
People wonder how a doctrine that makes us happier and better
could have enemies; that is natural: the establishment of better
things always shocks people’s interests at first. Has not the same
thing happened with all the inventions and discoveries that
have revolutionized industry? Have not those that nowadays are
regarded as beneficial and without which we could no longer live
had their stubborn enemies? Is not every law that restrains abuse
opposed by those who live by such abuse? How could you expect
a doctrine that leads to the kingdom of effective charity not to be
fought against by all those who live in selfishness? And you know
how innumerable they are on the earth! At first, they tried to kill
it with scorn; nowadays, they can see that this weapon is powerless
and that under the fire of sarcasm, it has unhesitatingly proceeded
on its way. Do not believe that they have conceded defeat, however;
no, material interest is tenacious. Since they realize that it is a
power that they must face from now on, they have begun to direct
more serious assaults against it, but these will only serve to better
attest to their own weaknesses. Some will attack it directly with
words and deeds, and will even persecute its followers, whom they
will make every effort to dishearten through harassment, whereas
others will secretly and disguisedly try to undermine it. Do not
think that the fight has ended. I have been advised that they will
make a supreme effort. Do not be afraid, however. The banner of
victory is in the motto proclaimed by all true Spiritists: Without
charity there is no salvation. Hoist it high, for it is the Medusa’s head
for selfish individuals. The tactic that has been used by Spiritism’s
enemies up till now, but which they are about to employ with


                                   37

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


renewed ardor, is to try to divide Spiritists by creating divergent
theories and arousing distrust and jealousy amongst them. Do
not fall into their trap. You can be sure that whoever looks for a
means – whatever it may be – to disrupt good harmony cannot
have good intentions. That is why I recommend that you use the
utmost circumspection when you form your groups, not only for
your own peace-of-mind but also in the interest of your endeavors.
        “The nature of Spiritist work requires composure and
concentration and the latter is impossible if one is preoccupied with
arguments and with displays of malevolent sentiments. There will be
no malevolent sentiments where there is fraternity, but there can be
no fraternity where there is selfishness, ambition and pride. Among
the proud, who are susceptible to being offended by everything,
the ambitious, who feel mortified if they are not in charge, and the
selfish, who think of no one but themselves, schism is not far off,
and with it, dissolution. That is exactly what our enemies want, and
it is precisely what they are trying to create. If a group wants to be
orderly, tranquil and stable, the sentiment of fraternity must reign.
Any group or society that forms without having effective charity as
its foundation will have no vitality, whereas those that are founded
according to the true spirit of the Doctrine will see their members as
being of the same family, albeit not living under the same roof. Any
rivalry among them would be nonsense; it could not exist where
true charity reigns, for charity cannot be understood in two different
ways. Hence, recognize true Spiritists in the charity of their thoughts,
words and deeds, and know that those who nourish sentiments of
animosity, rancor, hatred, envy or jealousy in their souls in fact lie to
themselves and only pretend to understand and practice Spiritism.
Selfishness and pride kill individual societies just as they kill cultures
and society in general…”
        All such just and practical advice would deserve being quoted,
but we must limit ourselves due to the time at our disposal. At the


                                   38

                      Biography of Allan Kardec


request of the Spiritists in Lyon and Bordeaux, Allan Kardec took
a long advertising excursion in September and October, sowing
the Good News everywhere, and offering advice only to those who
asked for it. The invitation from the Lyon groups was signed by
five hundred individuals. A special publication reported on this
excursion of more than six weeks, during which the master presided
over more than fifty meetings in twenty cities, where he was always
warmly received and felt fortunate to observe the huge progress of
Spiritism. Regarding Kardec’s trips, since certain hostile influences
had spread the rumor that the trips were taken at the expense of
the Parisian Society for Spiritist Studies, from whose budget he
withdrew beforehand all his expenses for correspondence and
maintenance, the master thus refuted this falsity:
        “A lot of people, especially in the province, thought that
the costs for these trips were covered by the Parisian Society. We
had to undo that error when the opportunity arose; to those who
still share this belief, we will remind them of what we affirmed
on another occasion (Revue Spirite, June, 1862, p. 167), that is,
the Society limits itself to covering only its current expenses and
possesses no reserves. For it to be able to accumulate capital, it
would have to aim at numbers, and that is what it does not do, nor
does it want to, because its purpose is not speculation; numbers
add nothing to the importance of its work. The Society’s influence
is completely moral and that is the characteristic of its meetings,
which give outsiders the idea of a grave and serious gathering.
That is its most powerful means of advertising. Thus, it could
not provide for such expenses. The expenses for the trip, like all
those which our relationships entail for Spiritism, were taken
from our personal resources and savings, supplemented with
profit from our books, without which it would be impossible for
us to meet all the expenses that are the consequence of the work
we have undertaken. This is stated without vanity and solely to


                                 39

                                Biography of Allan Kardec


pay homage to the truth, and is for the edification of those who
believe that we amass capital.”
        In 1862 Kardec also published a Refutation of the Criticisms
against Spiritism, from the point of view of materialism, science
and religion.8
        In April of 1864, he published The Imitation of the Gospel
according to Spiritism, which explained the moral maxims of
Christ, their application and their harmonization with Spiritism.
The work’s title was later modified and today is simply The Gospel
according to Spiritism.
        Taking advantage of some vacation time, Kardec took a trip
in September of 1864 to Antwerp and Brussels. In explaining to
the Belgian Spiritists his modus operandi with Spiritist groups and
societies, he told them what he had already said in Lyon in 1861:
“Thus, it is better to have one hundred groups of ten to twenty
adherents in a city, and where no group assumes supremacy over
the others, than to have just a single society where everyone meets.
This division in no way harms the unity of the members, since
they are all under the same banner and all have the same goal as
their purpose.” Large societies have their reason for being, from an
advertising point of view, but as for serious and continuous study,
it is preferable for there to be close groups.
        On August 1, 1865 Kardec published a new work: Heaven
and Hell or Divine Justice according to Spiritism, which contained
several examples of the situations of spirits both in the spirit world
and on the earth, along with the reasons for such situations.
        The remarkable success of Spiritism and its almost unbelievable
growth created innumerable enemies, and as it grew, Kardec’s task grew
also. The Master had an iron will and a extraordinary fighting spirit;
8
    Actually, in the book Voyage Spirite (Ledoyen, Paris, 1862), Kardec says that he gave up on
    the idea of publishing the booklet that he had announced one year earlier (Revue Spirite,
    Dec. 1861) and which would have been entitled Réfutation des critiques contre le Spiritisme
    au point de vue matérialiste, scientifique et religieux. – Publisher’s note.



                                              40

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


he was a tireless worker; he was on his feet in all seasons from 4:30
a.m. on, responding to everything: the vehement polemics directed
both against Spiritism and himself, the numerous letters addressed to
him; he attended to directing Revue Spirite and the Parisian Society
for Spiritist Studies, organizing Spiritism and preparing its works.
This physical and mental excess exhausted his body and the Spirits
repeatedly had to reprimand him in order to make him spare his
health. However, he knew that he would not last more than ten more
years: several communications had warned him of that time limit and
told him that he would only conclude his task in a new existence,
which would follow the short interval of his coming discarnation.
That is why he did not want to waste any opportunity to give Spiritism
everything he could in strength and vitality.
       In 1867 he took a short trip to Bordeaux, Tours and Orleans;
then he once again went to work to publish Genesis, Miracles and
Prophecies according to Spiritism in January of 1868. This is one of
his most important works because it is a synthesis of the first four
already-published volumes from a scientific point of view.
       Next, Kardec occupied himself with a plan to organize
Spiritism, by which he hoped to add more energy and action to
the philosophy of which he was the apostle, seeking to develop its
practical aspect and to enable it to produce its fruits. The constant
object of his preoccupations was to know who would replace him,
because he felt that his discarnation was at hand. The constitution
he was preparing had precisely the purpose of providing for the
future needs of the Spiritist Doctrine.
       During the early years of Spiritism and from the income from
his pedagogical works, Allan Kardec had bought 2,666 square meters
of land on Segur Avenue behind Avenue of the Invalides. Because this
purchase had exhausted his resources, he took out a 50,000 franc loan
with Credit Foncier in order to build six small houses with a garden
on the land. He nourished the sweet hope of retiring to one of them


                                  41

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


on Vila Segur, and after his death, it would become a rest home for
indigent defenders of Spiritism to retire at in old age.
       In 1869 the Spiritist Society was reconstituted and became
an anonymous society with capital of 40,000 francs, divided into
forty shares of 1,000 francs to be used for the bookstore, Revue
Spirite, and the works of Allan Kardec. This new society was to
commence on April 1 at 7 Lille St. Kardec, whose lease on Sainte-
Anne was about to expire, planned to move to Vila Segur in order
to work more actively on the books he still had to write, and whose
layout and documentation had already been put in order. Thus, he
was fully ready to change residences when on March 31 the heart
disease that had silently undermined him put an end to his robust
constitution, and like a lightning bolt, took him from the affection
of his disciples. This was a great loss to Spiritism, which saw its
founder and most powerful propagator disappear, and it threw all
those who had known and loved him into profound consternation.
       “Hippolyte-Leon-Denizard Rivail – Allan Kardec – died in
Paris at 59 Sainte-Anne, 2nd District and mairie de la Banque, on
March 31, 1869 at 65 years of age after succumbing to an aneurism.”
       The grievous news was received with unanimous sentiments
and a huge crowd accompanied the mortal remains of the one who
had been Allan Kardec – the one who shone like a burning meteorite
at the dawn of Spiritism – to their final resting place at Pere-Lachaise.
       Four eulogies were proffered at the mouth of the Master’s
tomb: the first by Mr. Levent on behalf of the Parisian Spiritist
Society; the second by Mr. Camille Flammarion, who not only
sketched an outline of Allan Kardec’s character and the role that
his works performed in the contemporary movement, but also, and
especially, an examination of the situation of the physical sciences
from the point of view of the invisible world, the unknown natural
forces, and the existence of the soul and its indestructibility. Next,
Mr. Alexandre Delanne spoke on behalf of Spiritists from out-of-


                                   42

                      Biography of Allan Kardec


town centers, and, finally, Mr. E. Muller, on behalf of Kardec’s
family and friends, said the last goodbyes to the dearly departed.
       Mrs. Kardec was 74 years old at the time of her husband’s
passing. She lived until 1883, when on January 21 she passed away
at the age of 89 without any direct heirs.
       It would be a mistake for anyone to believe that judging
from the nature of his works, Allan Kardec must have always
been a cold and austere person. That was not the case. After
having discussed the most difficult points of psychology and
transcendental metaphysics, this serious philosopher would
show his cheerful side and would go to great lengths to entertain
his frequent guests at Vila Segur. He was always dignified and
sober in his manners and knew how to season them with our
old Gallic salt through fiery flashes of wit and affable kindness.
He loved to laugh with that frank, slow and communicative
melodious laugh, and had a particular talent in enabling others
to share in his good humor.
       All the newspapers of the time concerned themselves with the
death of Allan Kardec, and they tried to surmise its consequences.
Following is what Mr. Pages de Noyez wrote in the Journal de Paris
of April 3, 1869:
       “He, who for so long occupied the scientific and religious
world under the pseudonym Allan Kardec, was called Rivail and
died at the age of 65. We saw him lying on a simple mattress
in the middle of the session room in which he had presided for
so many years. We saw him with the peaceful look expressed by
those to whom death has come as no surprise, those who are at
peace for having lived an honest life filled with work and who
display a reflection of purity that their soul has stamped on
their abandoned body.
        “Resigned through faith in a better life and through the
conviction of the immortality of the soul, many disciples have cast


                                 43

                       Biography of Allan Kardec


a last glance to those discolored lips, which, only the day before,
spoke the language of the earth. But they have already received the
consolation of life beyond the grave: Allan Kardec’s spirit came to
tell them what his state of confusion had been, his first impressions,
and who, from among his predecessors in the after life, had come
to help his soul detach itself from matter. If ‘style makes the man’
then those who knew Allan Kardec in life cannot help being moved
by the authenticity of that spirit communication.
         “Allan Kardec’s death is noteworthy due to a strange
coincidence. The Society founded by that great popularizer of
Spiritism had simply disappeared. The place had been abandoned
and all the furniture removed. Nothing remained of a past that
was to be reborn on new foundations. At the end of the last
session, the president said his goodbyes; his mission completed,
he withdrew from the daily struggle in order to devote himself
entirely to studying spiritualist philosophy. Others, who are
younger – intrepid individuals – would continue his work and
strong in their virility, impose the truth by their conviction.
       “Why refer to the details of his death? Why does the
way the instrument broke matter? Why devote a line to those
fragments from here onward immersed in the immense vortex
of molecules? Allan Kardec died at the proper time. With him
ended the prolog to a living religion, which, radiating outward
everyday, will soon have illumined all humankind. No one
better than Kardec could have fulfilled the work of spreading
Spiritism, and for which it was necessary to sacrifice long vigils
that nourished the spirit, to have the patience that educates with
the passing of time, and the self-denial that confronts the folly
of the present in order to see nothing except the radiance of the
future. With his works, Allan Kardec has founded the dogma
foretold by the most ancient societies. His name, appreciated as
that of a moral man, has long been popularized by those who


                                  44

                        Biography of Allan Kardec


believe and those who fear. It is difficult to practice the good
without shocking established interests. Spiritism destroys many
abuses and uplifts many sorrowful consciences, giving them the
certainty of the proof and consolation of the future.
         “Spiritists today mourn the friend who has left them because
our understanding, which is material, so to speak, cannot submit
itself to the idea of transition; however, once the first tribute to this
inferiority of our organism is paid, we lift our head and cross over into
that invisible world which we feel exists beyond the grave, and we
reach out our hand to the friend who is no longer with us, convinced
that his spirit will always watch over us. The president of the Parisian
Spiritist Society is dead, but the number of followers grows day by
day, and the courageous ones, those who through their respect for
the master held themselves back, will not hesitate to assert themselves
for the good of the great cause. This death, which the common folk
have regarded with indifference, is nevertheless a great event for
humankind. It is no longer the tomb of a man; it is the tombstone
filling that immense emptiness that materialism had carved out at our
feet and upon which Spiritism has scattered flowers of hope.”
        One point that does not attract our attention, but which
should be pointed out, is the true Christian charity of Allan
Kardec. One could say that his left hand never knew the good his
right hand was doing, and that this one never knew the bites made
at the other by those for whom gratitude is an excessively heavy
burden. Anonymous letters, insults, betrayals and systematic
defamations - nothing was spared this intrepid fighter, this great
and heroic soul who has fully entered immortality.
        Allan Kardec’s mortal remains rest in Pere-Lachaise in Paris
under the modest headstone set up by the piety of his disciples.
It is at this place that, since 1869, followers who have faithfully
guarded the memory of the Master and who have preciously kept
him in their hearts gather every year.


                                   45

                             Biography of Allan Kardec


      And since we are reunited by an analogous sentiment, let us
repeat out loud, ladies and gentlemen:
      Blessed be Allan Kardec!

                                                                     Henri Sausse.




* (footnote) – Abridged version of Henry Sausse’s speech presented on March 31, 1896,
  when Lyon Spiritists celebrated Allan Kardec’s 27th discarnation anniversary. Full text
  Biographie d’ Allan Kardec, Henri Sausse.



                                           46

                WHAT IS SPIRITISM?

                           Prologue

        Persons who have only a superficial understanding of
Spiritism will, of course, be led to ask certain questions about
it, and a thorough study would certainly provide the answers.
However, these individuals often lack the time and frequently
the willpower to undertake an ongoing study. Before doing so,
they will at least want to know what they are dealing with and
if it is worthwhile to concern themselves with it. Therefore, it
seemed to us that it would be useful to provide in a concise form
the answers to some of the fundamental questions that are asked
of us every day. For the reader, this will comprise a preliminary
initiation, and for us, it will save us from constantly having to
repeat the same things.
        The first chapter uses dialogue form to answer the most
common objections of those who are unaware of the Doctrine’s
primary fundamentals, as well as to refute the main arguments of
its opponents. This format seemed the most suitable because it
does not involve the dryness of the dogmatic form.
        The second chapter is devoted to a succinct exposition of
the science’s practical and experimental aspects, to which, in the
absence of a complete study, novice observers should direct their

                               47

                             What is Spiritism?


attention with full knowledge of the facts. In a way, this chapter
forms a summary of The Mediums’ Book. Most often, objections
arise from preconceived, wrong ideas concerning something one
does not understand. To rectify such ideas means to anticipate the
objections: such is the goal of this little section.
        The third chapter may be regarded as a summary of The
Spirits’ Book, which contains the Spiritist Doctrine’s solution
to a number of problems of great psychological, moral and
philosophical interest, problems posed daily and for which no
philosophy has yet provided any satisfactory solution. If we try
to solve them using some other theory and without the key that
Spiritism furnishes, we will realize that Spiritism’s answers are still
the most logical and those that better satisfy reason.
        This summary is useful not only for beginners who will be
able to draw the essential notions of Spiritism from it in a short
amount of time and without much effort, but also for its adherents
because it will furnish them the means to respond to the main
objections that will never cease to be raised, and because they will
find here at a glance and under a concise form the principles that
they must never lose sight of.
        In order to respond summarily here and now to the question
formulated in the title of this short work, we will state that:
        Spiritism is simultaneously a science of observation and a
philosophical doctrine. As a practical science, it consists in the relations
that can be established with spirits. As a philosophy, it entails all the
moral consequences that result from such relations.
        Hence, it may be defined as follows:
        Spiritism is a science that deals with the nature, origin and
destiny of spirits, and their relation with the corporeal world.




                                    48

      Chapter I
            M
A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


                 First dialogue
                          The critic
      A Visitor – I must tell you, sir, that my reason refuses to
accept the reality of the strange phenomena attributed to spirits,
which I am convinced exist only in the imagination. However, one
would have to bow down before the evidence and that is what I
will do if presented with uncontestable proof. Hence, not wanting
to impose, I have come to ask for your kind permission to watch
just one or two experiments in order to be convinced if possible.
      Allan Kardec – Well, if your reason refuses to accept what
we consider to be established facts, it is because you believe it to
be superior to the reason of all other persons who do not share
your opinion. I have no doubts about your worthiness, nor
would I claim that my own intelligence is greater than yours.
So, let’s accept the fact that I am in the wrong – since your
reason says that I am – and therefore there is nothing more to
be said on the matter.
      Visitor – Nevertheless, I am widely recognized as an
opponent of your ideas, and if you were to convince me, it would
be a miracle eminently favorable to your cause.
      A.K. – I’m sorry, sir, but I don’t have the gift of performing
miracles. Do you really think that one or two sessions would be
enough to convince you? That indeed would be a tour de force.
It took more than a year of study for me to become convinced,
which goes to show that if I now am, it was not done thoughtlessly.
Besides, I don’t offer public sessions and it seems that you may

                                51

                               Chapter I


be mistaken about the purpose of our meetings, since we do not
perform experiments in order to satisfy people’s curiosity.
       Visitor – So you do not try to win converts?
       A.K. – Why would I want to win you over as convert if you
do not want to become one? I can’t make anyone believe. When
I meet individuals who sincerely desire to learn, and who give me
the honor of asking for explanations, it is my pleasure and duty
to respond to them within the limits of my knowledge. However,
as for opponents who, like yourself, are set in their ways, I do
not make any effort to dissuade them because I can find plenty
of persons who are willing to be convinced. I don’t have to waste
my time on those who are not. Conviction will inevitably come
sooner or later, and the most disbelieving will be swept along by
the current. For now, a few more or a few less adherents will not
tip the scales. That is why you will never see me worrying about
attracting to our ideas those who, like yourself, have such good
reasons to keep their distance from them.
       Visitor – Nevertheless, there could be more interest in
convincing me than you might think. Would you allow me to
explain myself honestly and promise me that you won’t be
offended? These are my thoughts on the matter itself and not the
person I’m addressing. I can respect the person without having to
share his opinion.
       A.K. – Spiritism has taught me to place little value on the
petty susceptibilities of self-esteem, and not to feel offended by
mere words. If your statements overstep the limits of civility and
propriety, I will conclude that you are an impolite person, that’s
all. As for myself, I prefer to leave others in their errors instead of
sharing in them. So, from that alone you can see that Spiritism is
good for something.
       As I have already stated, I have no intention of making you
share my opinion. I respect yours if it is sincere, just as I want you


                                  52

                       A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


to respect mine. Because you treat Spiritism as a hollow dream,
you must have said to yourself on your way here: “I’m going
to see a lunatic.” Admit it frankly, I won’t be upset. That all
Spiritists are crazy is an established thing. Fine, then! Since you
regard this as a mental illness, I would feel guilty in transmitting
it to you, and I’m surprised that with such a thought in mind
you would seek to acquire a conviction that would place you
amongst lunatics. If you were persuaded beforehand that you
cannot be convinced, your effort is futile since its only objective
is curiosity. So I ask of you, let’s be brief, because I don’t have
time to waste on pointless conversations.
        Visitor – But a person can be mistaken and deluded without
being crazy because of it.
        A.K. – To put it plainly, you are saying, like so many others,
that Spiritism is a fad whose time will pass. But you must agree
that a fad, which has taken only a few years to win millions of
adherents in every country, which includes learned individuals of
every order amongst its followers, and which is spreading especially
amongst the educated classes, is a peculiar mania that is worthy of
a little examination.
        Visitor – True, I do have my own ideas on the matter;
however, they are not so unyielding that I wouldn’t be willing to
sacrifice them to the evidence. That is why I said that you might
have a certain interest in convincing me. I must confess that I plan
to publish a book, in which I propose to demonstrate ex professo9
what I regard as an error. The book would have a far-reaching
impact and deal a blow to the Spirits, but if I were to be convinced
otherwise, I won’t publish it.
        A.K. – I would feel awful if I were to deprive you of the
profits from a book that must be so far-reaching. Besides, I have
no interest in keeping you from publishing it; on the contrary,
9
    Expressly. – Tr.



                                     53

                                         Chapter I


I hope it will be well-received, because it will serve to publicize
and advertise us. When something is attacked, attention is drawn
to it; there are a lot of people who like to see its pros and cons,
and criticism makes it known to those who hadn’t even thought
about it. That is why often, and without meaning to, publicity
ends up benefiting those it was meant to harm. Moreover, the issue
of spirits is so interesting and arouses so much curiosity that it is
enough to merely draw attention to it and people will want to
examine it more profoundly.10
         Visitor – So, in your opinion, criticism is useless and public
opinion doesn’t count for anything?
         A.K. – I don’t regard criticism as an expression of public
opinion, but as a personal opinion that may be mistaken. Look
at history and you will see how many masterpieces were criticized
when they first appeared; but that did not keep them from being
masterpieces. When something is bad, all the praise in the world
will not make it good. If Spiritism is an error, it will fall by itself; if
it is a truth, all the diatribes in the world will not render it a lie. Your
book will be a personal appraisal from your own point of view
– true public opinion will decide whether or not you are right.
Thus, people will want to examine the matter for themselves, and
if they realize that you were wrong, your book will be ridiculed
like the one published not too long ago against the theories on the
circulation of the blood, on vaccine, etc.
         But I have forgotten that you are going to treat the issue ex
professo, which means that you have studied it from every angle;
that you have seen all there is to see and have read everything
that has been written on the matter; that you have analyzed and
compared all the different opinions; that you were in the best
position to observe for yourself; that you have dedicated your

10
     After this dialogue, written in 1859, experience largely proved the correctness of this
     proposition. – Tr.



                                             54

                    A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


waking hours to the subject for years; in other words, that you
have neglected nothing to arrive at the truth. I must believe that
you have done so if you are a trustworthy person, because only one
who has done all those things has the right to say that he speaks
with full knowledge of the facts.
       What would you think of someone who claimed to be a
critic of a literary work but who had no knowledge of literature, or
of a painting but who had never studied art? It’s only logical that
critics must understand, not superficially but in depth, what they
are discussing; otherwise, their opinion is worthless. To disprove
a calculation, one must oppose it with another calculation, but
in order to do so one must know how to calculate. Critics must
not limit themselves to saying that a certain thing is good or
bad. They must justify their opinion with a clear and categorical
demonstration based on the very principles of art or science. How
can they do so if they do not know what such principles are? Could
you evaluate the qualities or defects of a machine if you didn’t
know anything about mechanics? No, you couldn’t. Well then!
Since you know nothing about Spiritism, your opinion would
be no more valuable than your opinion about that machine. At
each step you would be caught in your ignorance, because those
who have studied Spiritism would see right away that you are not
knowledgeable on the matter, which would lead them to conclude
either that you are not serious or that you are acting in bad faith.
In either case, you would be exposing yourself to being disavowed,
which would hardly be flattering to your self-esteem.
       Visitor – It is precisely to avoid such a pitfall that I have
come to ask you to allow me to watch a few experiments.
       A.K. – And you think that that would be enough for you
to be able to speak ex professo about Spiritism? How could you
comprehend such experiments – let alone judge them – if you
haven’t studied the principles upon which they are based? How


                                  55

                               Chapter I


could you rightly or wrongly evaluate the result of metallurgical
experiments, for instance, if you don’t even know the fundamentals
of metallurgy? Allow me to say that your plan is exactly the same
as if, in spite of knowing neither mathematics nor astronomy,
you were to say to one of the members of the Observatory: “Sir,
I would like to write a book on astronomy, and what is more, I
would like to prove that your theory is wrong. But since I don’t
know the first thing about the science, I need you to let me look
through your telescope once or twice. That should be enough for
me to know as much about it as you do.”
       It is only by extension that the verb to critique becomes
synonymous with the verb to censure. In its proper meaning and
according to its etymology, the term to critique means to judge,
to appraise; hence, a critique may be approving or disapproving.
To critique a book is not necessarily to condemn it. Those who
undertake the job should do so without any preconceived ideas.
But if they have already condemned the book in their minds before
having even opened it, their appraisal cannot be impartial.
       Such is the case with the majority of those who have spoken
about Spiritism. They formed an opinion based solely on the name,
and they proceeded like a judge who has passed sentence without
having taken the time to study the documentary evidence. The
result was that their judgment was incorrect, and instead of being
persuasive, they aroused scorn. As for those who seriously studied
the subject, most changed their mind, and a good number of
adversaries became adherents once they realized it was something
different from what they had thought.
       Visitor – You speak of the appraisal of books in general. Do you
really think it is materially possible for journalists to read and study
everything that passes through their hands, especially if it deals with
new theories that require their in-depth verification? That would be
like requiring printers to read all the books that leave their presses.


                                  56

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


       A.K. – In light of such judicious reasoning I have nothing to
answer, except that, if one does not have the time to do something
conscientiously, one should not get involved with it, and that it is
better to do only one thing well than ten things badly.
       Visitor – Please don’t think that I arrived at my opinion
lightly. I have seen tables turn and produce raps; I have seen
persons who were supposedly writing under the influence of spirits.
Nevertheless, I’m convinced that charlatanism was involved.
       A.K. – And how much did you pay?
       Visitor – Why, nothing, of course.
       A.K. – Well, they must have been an odd breed of charlatans
and they will give a new meaning to the word. Until now, no one
has ever seen a charlatan who wasn’t in it for the money. If some
mischievous hoaxer happened to want to entertain himself once,
would it follow that other persons were in association with him?
Moreover, what would they hope to gain by being accomplices to
a hoax? To amuse people, you will say. I will admit that someone
might pull a hoax once, but if a hoax goes on for months and even
years, I would say that it is the hoaxer who is being duped. Would
someone sit tediously at a table for hours on end for the sheer
pleasure of making others believe in something he or she knows to
be false? The pleasure would not be worth the effort.
       Before concluding that something is a fraud, we must first
ask ourselves what might be gained from such deceit. You will
agree that there are situations that exclude all suspicion of fraud
and that there are individuals whose character alone is a guarantee
of honesty.
       It would be a different matter if it involved speculation,
because the attraction of profit is a bad advisor. However, even if
we were to accept the fact that in such a case a fraudulent operation
might be entirely possible, it would prove nothing against the
reality of the principle, because anything can be misused. Just


                                   57

                              Chapter I


because there are persons who sell adulterated wines, that doesn’t
mean that there is no such thing as pure wine. Spiritism is no
more responsible for those who misuse its name and exploit it
than medical science is responsible for the charlatans who sell their
snake oils or religion for the clergy who abuse their ministry.
        Due to its newness and its very nature, Spiritism may lend
itself to abuses. However, it has provided the means of recognizing
them by clearly defining its true character and by refusing to
have anything to do with those who exploit it or divert it from
its exclusively moral objective in order to make it a trade, an
instrument of divination or pointless experimentation.
        Since Spiritism sets its owns boundaries, determines what it
says and what it doesn’t say, what it can and what it cannot do, what
attributes it does or doesn’t entail, and what it accepts and what
it rejects, the error lies with those who, not having put forth the
effort to study it, judge it by appearances, and because they have
met entertainers employing the name Spiritist in order to attract
passers-by, they gravely state, “This is what Spiritism is.” In the
end, upon whom does ridicule fall? Not upon the entertainers, who
are only performing their act, nor upon Spiritism, whose written
doctrine belies such assertions. It falls upon convinced critics, who
either talk about what they do not know, or who consciously twist
the truth. Those who attribute to Spiritism what is contrary to its
very essence do so either out of ignorance or deliberately. As for
the former, it is thoughtlessness; as for the latter, it is bad faith.
In the latter case, they resemble certain historians, who, in the
interest of a party or an opinion, twist the historical facts. A party
always discredits itself by employing such means, and will fail to
reach its objective.
        Please take note of the fact that I don’t mean that critics
must necessarily approve of our ideas, even after having studied
them. We in no way reproach those who do not think as we do.


                                 58

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


What is obvious to us might not be to everybody else. People judge
matters from their own point of view, and not all draw the same
conclusions from the most obvious facts. For example, if a painter
puts a white horse in his painting, someone might very well say
that the horse produces a bad effect, that a black one would have
been more suitable. It would be an error, however, to state that the
horse is white when it is black – which is exactly what most of our
adversaries do.
        To sum it all up, people are perfectly free to approve of or
criticize the principles of Spiritism, to deduce the good or bad
consequences from them as they please; however, conscience
imposes a duty on every trustworthy critic not to state the opposite
of what Spiritism is. Thus, the first requirement of being a critic is
not to talk about things one knows nothing about.
        Visitor – Could we go back to the moving and talking
tables? Mightn’t they have been rigged beforehand?
        A.K. – It’s the same question of good faith, and I have already
answered it. The second that fraud is demonstrated, I will be the
first to admit it to you. If you can point out confirmed incidents
of fraud, charlatanism, exploitation or abuse of trust, I will deliver
them to your whip, and I’ll tell you right now that I’ll not take
up their defense, since real Spiritism is the first to repudiate them.
Pointing out such abuses helps to prevent them and renders a service
to Spiritism. But to generalize such accusations, to cast over a large
number of respectable individuals the reproof that only a few isolated
individuals deserve is an abuse of a different sort – it is slander.
        Even if we were to suppose that the tables had been rigged,
there would have to be a sufficiently ingenious mechanism to make
them produce such varied movements and noises. But why hasn’t
anyone found out who the skillful manufacturer is that builds
them? He should be enjoying great fame by now since his devices
are scattered all over the five continents. We also must agree that his


                                   59

                                            Chapter I


technique is highly ingenious since it can be successfully adapted
to the first table at hand without any exterior traces. Why is it that
from Tertullian11 – who spoke of turning and talking tables – down
to the present, no one has ever seen or described such a mechanism?
       Visitor – You are mistaken. A well-known surgeon has
discovered that when certain individuals contract a tendon in
their leg, they can produce a noise similar to what you attribute to
the tables, from which he concluded that your mediums entertain
themselves at the expense of others’ gullibility.12
       A.K. – Well, if it’s the tendon that crackles, then it’s not the
table that has been rigged. Since everyone explains this so-called
fraud in their own way, that in itself is the most obvious proof that
neither they nor anyone else knows the true cause.
       I respect the erudition of this learned surgeon; however there
are a number of problems with applying his theory to the talking
tables. First, until now, this ability has been regarded as exceptional
and has been seen as pathological, and it’s remarkable that it has
suddenly become so common. Second, one would have to have a
profound desire to deceive to warrant crackling one’s tendon for
two or three hours straight because it produces nothing but pain
and fatigue. Third, I can’t see how the tendon makes contact with
the doors and walls in which raps have been heard. Fourth and
finally, the crackling tendon would have to be endowed with the
marvelous ability of moving a heavy table, lifting it and keeping
it suspended in the air without any point of support, and then
finally smashing it back onto the floor. Certainly, no one could
have dreamed that this tendon had so many abilities!13
       Did the celebrated surgeon of whom you are speaking study
the phenomenon of typtology in those who produce it? No. He
11
     Late second, early third century theologian. – Tr.
12
      For further treatment of the “Crackling Tendon Theory,” see The Mediums’ Book, pt. 1, chap.
     IV, no. 41. – Tr.
13
     Revue Spirite, June of 1859, p. 141, “Le muscle craqueur.” – Auth.



                                                60

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


observed an abnormal physiological condition in a few individuals
who had never even concerned themselves with rapping tables.
After having drawn a certain analogy between this condition and
the effect produced by the tables, he didn’t bother with a more in-
depth examination, and using all the authority of his knowledge,
he concluded that all who cause tables to talk must possess the
ability to crack the short peroneal tendon, and that they are
nothing more than tricksters, whether they are princes or artisans,
and whether they receive payment or not. Did he at least study
the phenomenon of typtology in all its expressions? Did he check
to see if every one of the typtological effects could be produced
by means of this crackling tendon? If he had, he would have been
convinced of the insufficiency of his approach. But that didn’t
keep him from proclaiming his discovery to the Institute. For a
scholar, he really expounded quite a serious conclusion! And what
has become of him? I must confess that if I had to have surgery,
I would be very hesitant to entrust myself to this practitioner
because I would be afraid that he hadn’t diagnosed my problem
with any more precision than he did in this case.
       Since his opinion is one of the authorities upon which you
want to support your attack against Spiritism, it gives me a good
idea of the strength of your other arguments, if they have not been
drawn from a more reliable source.
       Visitor – Nonetheless, you can see that the turning table
fad has passed; it was all the rage for a while, but nowadays no
one cares about it anymore. Why not, if it has to do with such a
serious matter?
       A.K. – Because the turning tables led to something even more
serious; they led to an entire science, an entire philosophical doctrine,
which is of much greater interest for thinking individuals. When
they no longer had any more to learn by watching tables turn, they
were no longer concerned about them. For frivolous persons, who


                                    61

                               Chapter I


do not delve more deeply into anything, they were a pastime, a game
that they put aside once they had had enough. Such individuals
are not taken into account by science. The time of curiosity had its
day; the time of observation followed. Spiritism has thus entered
the realm of serious individuals, who do not entertain themselves
with it but seek enlightenment. Moreover, persons who regard it as
a serious matter do not lend themselves to any experiment out of
mere curiosity, and even less to persons who would approach it with
hostile thoughts. Since they do not amuse themselves, they do not
try to amuse others; I count myself among them.
       Visitor – Even so, nothing is as convincing as experimentation,
even if at first its purpose is mere curiosity. If you operate solely in
the presence of persons who are already convinced, allow me to say
that you are preaching to the converted.
       A.K. – It is one thing to be convinced and another to be
willing to be convinced. I address the latter, and not those who
think they are humiliating their reason by coming to hear about
what they call reveries; I concern myself very little with these. As
for those who say they have a sincere desire to be enlightened, the
best way they can prove it is by demonstrating perseverance. They
can be recognized by other signs besides the desire to watch one or
two experimental sessions: they are willing to work seriously.
       Conviction is acquired only over time, through continual
observation and special attention. Spirit phenomena differ
essentially from those displayed in the exact sciences: they cannot
be produced at will; we must seize them when they occur. Only
by observing them a great deal and for a long time can we discover
a drove of proofs that are not apparent at first glance, especially
if we are not familiar with the conditions in which they might
occur, and even more so when we come with a biased attitude. For
diligent and thoughtful observers, the proofs abound: for them, a
word, an apparently insignificant incident, may be a ray of light,


                                  62

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


a confirmation. For superficial and one-time observers, for the
simply curious, such incidents are nothing. That is why I do not
lend myself to experiments without plausible results.
       Visitor – But everything must start somewhere, after all. As
for beginners, who are blank slates, who have not seen anything
but who want to be enlightened, what can they do if you do not
provide the means?
       A.K. – I make a big distinction between the disbeliever
out of ignorance and the systematic disbeliever. Whenever I see
individuals with a favorable disposition, it takes me very little to
enlighten them. However, there are individuals whose desire to learn
is only a pretense. They are a waste of time because if they do not
immediately find what they seem to be looking for and what would
perhaps displease them if they did find it, the little they do see isn’t
enough to erase their prejudices. It’s a futile endeavor because they
draw the wrong conclusions and make it an object of ridicule.
       I will say to someone who truly wants to learn: “One cannot
take a course in experimental Spiritism as if it were a course in
physics and chemistry, because spirit phenomena cannot be
produced at will, and the intelligences that are their agents often
thwart all our expectations. What you might see by chance without
presenting continuity or any necessary connection will be of little
understanding to you. So learn the theory first; read and ponder
the literature that deals with this science. That is where you can
learn the principles; you’ll find a description of all the phenomena
and you’ll understand their plausibility by the explanation that is
provided and by the accounts of a large number of spontaneous
phenomena, which you yourself might have witnessed without
knowing it, and which will come back to your memory. You will
brace yourself against all the problems that might surface, and you
will thus form a preliminary moral conviction. Then, when the
circumstances arise to observe or act by yourself, you’ll understand


                                   63

                            Chapter I


them unhampered by the order in which the phenomena occur
because nothing will be strange to you.”
     That, sir, is what I advise all who say they want to learn,
and by their response it is easy to tell if they are motivated by
something other than mere curiosity.




                               64

              Second Dialogue
                          The Skeptic
       Visitor – Sir, I can understand the usefulness of the
preparatory study of which you have just spoken. As for my own
personal predisposition, I am neither for nor against Spiritism, but
the subject per se has awakened a great deal of interest in me.
Within the circle of my acquaintances, there are adherents but
there are adversaries too. In this regard, I have heard the most
contradicting arguments. I would like to submit to you some of
the objections made in my presence, and which seem to have some
value to them, at least for me, because I must confess my own
ignorance on the matter.
       Allan Kardec – It will be a pleasure, sir, to answer your
questions if they are sincere and hide no ulterior motives, although
I wouldn’t flatter myself by thinking I’m capable of answering all of
them. Spiritism is a newborn science, about which there is still much
to learn. So, it would be quite presumptuous on my part to presume
that I could solve every problem: I can tell you only what I know.
       Spiritism touches on all branches of philosophy, metaphysics,
psychology and morality. It is an immense field that cannot be
traversed in a few hours. Thus, you will understand, sir, that it would
be materially impossible for me to repeat orally and to each person
individually everything I have written for public use on the matter.
Moreover, upon a serious preliminary reading of the literature, you
will find an answer to most of the questions that may naturally
come to mind. Such a reading would have the two-fold advantage of

                                  65

                                            Chapter I


avoiding needless repetitions and of demonstrating a sincere desire
to learn. Afterward, if there are still any questions or obscure points,
explaining them would be much easier because then we would have
a point of reference and would not waste our time going over the
most elementary principles again. So if you would allow it, we will
limit ourselves to a few general questions for now.
       Visitor – Agreed, but I would ask you to call me back to the
subject if I happen to wander off it.

                      Spiritism and Spiritualism
       Visitor – To start with, why was it necessary to create the new
terms Spiritist and Spiritism to replace spiritualist and spiritualism,
which are part of everyday speech and well understood by everybody?
I understand that some view these new terms as barbarisms.14
       A.K. – The word spiritualist has had a well-defined
acceptation for a long time. The Academy defines it in this
way: a SPIRITUALIST is someone whose doctrine is contrary to
materialism. All religions are necessarily based on spiritualism.
Whoever believes that there is something within us besides matter
is a spiritualist; however, that does not imply a belief in spirits or
their manifestations. How would you distinguish such a person
from one who does believe? You would have to say something
like: A spiritualist is someone who might or might not believe
in spirits. For new things, new terms are needed if one wants to
avoid misunderstandings. If I had classified my REVUE15 as being
spiritualist, I would not have been clear about its purpose, since
I could very well have not said one word about spirits without

14
     Barbarism: the use of words or constructions felt to be undesirably alien to the established
     standards of a language. (Webster’s College Dictionary, Random House, 1991). For further
     explanations regarding these terms, see The Spirits’ Book, Introduction, sect. 1. – Tr.
15
     Revue Spirite, published by Kardec from 1858 to 1869. – Tr.



                                                66

                             A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


contradicting the title; in fact, I could have been against them
altogether. Some time ago I read in a periodical an article of
philosophical content stating that the author had written it from
a spiritualist point of view. However, those who believe in spirits
would have been particularly disappointed if, in trusting that
description, they had looked for the slightest confirmation of their
own ideas. Therefore, if I adopted the terms Spiritist and Spiritism,
it was because they unequivocally express ideas related to spirits.
Every Spiritist is necessarily a spiritualist, but not all spiritualists are
Spiritists. Even if spirits were a mere fancy, it would still be useful
to have special terms for matters related to them since terminology
is needed as much for erroneous ideas as for correct ones.
        Furthermore, these terms are no more barbaric than those
that the arts, sciences and industry create each day. They are surely
no more improper than those Gall16 coined for his nomenclature
of the faculties, such as: secretiviness, amativeness, combativeness,
alimentiveness, adhesiveness17, etc. There are persons who, due to
their argumentative nature, criticize anything that they, themselves,
have not come up with and thus want to put on airs of opposition
to it. Those who insist on such petty squabbles prove only one
thing: the shallowness of their ideas. Attacking with such trifles
merely shows that they are short on good arguments.
        Spiritualism and spiritualist are English words used in the
United States ever since spirit manifestations first appeared; at
first, and for some time thereafter, they were also used in France.
However, as soon as the terms Spiritist and Spiritism appeared, their
usefulness was understood and they were immediately accepted by

16
     Franz Joseph Gall (1758-1828). German physician and founder of phrenology [sought to
     establish relationships between mental faculties and skull shape]. Pioneer in ascribing
     cerebral functions to various areas of the brain (localization); first to identify gray
     matter of brain with neurons and white matter with ganglia. Webster’s New Biographical
     Dictionary. – Tr.
17
     Elements of Phrenology – George Combe. – Tr.



                                             67

                                             Chapter I


the public. Nowadays, their use is so established that even those
who at first opposed them and proclaimed them to be barbarisms
do not use any others. The sermons and pastoral letters that lash
out against Spiritism and Spiritists would not have been able to
cast their anathemas against spiritualism and spiritualists without
bringing confusion to the issue.
       Barbarisms or not, the terms Spiritism and Spiritist have entered
everyday usage and all the languages of Europe. They are the only ones
used in all publications – pro or con – in every country. They are the
backbone of the new science’s nomenclature. In order to express the
special phenomena of this science, special terms were needed. Spiritism
now has its own nomenclature, just as chemistry has its own.18

                            Dissenting Opinions
       Visitor – This diversity of belief in what you call a science
seems to me to be its undoing. If this science were actually based on
provable facts, wouldn’t it be identical in both America and Europe?
       A.K. – I will first respond that such divergence exists more
in form than in essence. In reality, it exists only in the way certain
points of the Doctrine are considered, but it does not constitute any
radical antagonism concerning the principles, as our adversaries
love to say without even having studied the issue.
       But tell me: what science is there that, at its start, did not
give rise to dissenting opinions until its principles became clearly
established? Isn’t this dissent still present today in the sciences
that have been around much longer? Are all scholars in agreement
18
      Moreover, these terms have become more or less bourgeois; they may be found in the
     supplement to the Petit Dictionnaire des Dictionnaires Français, excerpt from Napoleon
     Landais, with a circulation of 20,000 copies. It contains definitions and etymologies
     of the terms erraticity, medianimic, medium, mediumship, perispirit, pneumatography,
     pneumatophony, psychographer, psychography, psychophony, reincarnation, sematology,
     Spiritist, Spiritism, and typtology. All of these terms may also be found in the new edition of
     the Dictionnaire Universel by Maurice Lachâtre. – Auth.



                                                 68

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


about the same principle? Don’t they all have their particular
theories? Do sessions at the Institute always display the picture of
perfect and cordial understanding? In medicine, aren’t there the
Paris School and the Montpellier School? Isn’t each discovery in
any science cause for schisms between those who want to progress
and those who want to remain behind?
       Concerning Spiritism, then, wouldn’t it be natural that, at the
appearance of the first phenomena, when the laws governing them
were unknown, everyone would have their own theory and would
consider them in a certain way? But what has become of those
early isolated theories? They have fallen before a more complete
observation of the facts. A few years were enough to establish the
magnificent unity that prevails today in the Doctrine, and which
brings the great majority of its adherents together, except for a few
individuals, who, in this as in all things, cling to primitive ideas
and die with them. What science, what philosophical or religious
doctrine can offer a similar example? Has Spiritism ever displayed
even a hundredth of the schisms that have afflicted the Church
over so many centuries, and which still divide it today?
       It is truly curious to see the puerilities that Spiritism’s
adversaries hold on to; doesn’t that indicate a lack of good
arguments? If they had them, they wouldn’t hesitate to use them.
So, what do they use to oppose it? Ridicule, denial and slander;
but peremptory arguments – none whatsoever. And the proof
that they still haven’t found a vulnerable angle is that nothing
has hindered Spiritism’s forward progress, and that after just ten
years, it includes more adherents than any sect has ever had after
a century in existence. This is a fact taken from experience and
recognized even by its adversaries. In order to destroy it, it is not
enough to say “this cannot be; this is absurd.” It is necessary to
prove categorically that the phenomena do not and cannot exist.
That is precisely what no one has done.


                                   69

                             Chapter I


            Simulated Spirit Phenomena
        Visitor – Hasn’t it been proven that the same phenomena can
be produced outside of Spiritism? One may conclude, therefore, that
they don’t have the origin that Spiritists attribute to them.
        A.K. – Simply because something can be imitated, does that
mean that it doesn’t exist? What would you say about the logic
of someone who claimed that, because wine from Champagne
is made with seltzer water, all wine from Champagne is nothing
but seltzer water? Such is the particular character of all things
that can be counterfeited. Illusionists have believed that, due to
its popularity and the controversies surrounding it, the name
Spiritism might be worth exploiting, and in order to attract a
crowd, they have more or less crudely simulated a few mediumistic
phenomena, just as they used to simulate somnambulistic
clairvoyance. And all the scoffers applauded, exclaiming, “Look
at what Spiritism is!” When the ingenious production of specters
appeared on the scene, didn’t they proclaim far and wide that
Spiritism had received its mortal blow? Before passing such an
assured judgment, they should remember that the assertions of
a magician are not the Gospel truth, and they should check to
see if there is a true identity between the imitation and the thing
imitated. No one buys a diamond before first making sure it’s not
a rhinestone. A study of the matter, even if not very thorough,
would have convinced these scoffers that spirit phenomena occur
under completely different conditions, and furthermore, they
would have known that Spiritists concern themselves neither
with making specters appear nor with fortune-telling.
        Only malevolence and remarkable ill will would compare
Spiritism to magic and sorcery, since Spiritism repudiates their
purpose, practices, formulas and mystical words. There are even
those who haven’t been afraid to compare Spiritist meetings with


                                70

                             A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


Sabbat gatherings,19 where people wait for the ominous hour of
midnight to make ghosts appear.
       One of my Spiritist friends was watching a presentation of
Macbeth one day seated next to a journalist he did not know. When
it was time for the scene with the witches, he overheard the journalist
say to his neighbor, “Oh, look! We’re going to watch a session of
Spiritism. This is exactly what I need for my next article. Now I’m
going to see what goes on in them. If there were one of those crazies
here, I’d ask him if he recognized himself in this scene.” “Well, I’m
one of those crazies,” said my Spiritist friend, “and I can assure
you that I don’t see myself in this scene at all because, although I
have taken part in hundreds of Spiritist meetings, I haven’t found
anything like this at any of them. If you have come here to gather
material for your article, it will not shine with the truth.”
       Many critics do not have a more serious basis. On whom
does the ridicule fall if not on those who proceed so carelessly?
Far from being bruised, Spiritism’s credibility has grown because
of the publicity that all these ruses have provided by arousing the
interest of a crowd of individuals who had never heard of Spiritism.
These ploys have prompted the study of it and have increased the
number of its adherents because they saw that, instead of a mere
game, it was something to be taken quite seriously.

               The Powerlessness of Detractors
      Visitor – I agree that, among Spiritism’s detractors, there
are many thoughtless individuals, such as the one you have just
mentioned. But alongside them, aren’t there some truly worthy
persons whose opinions carry a certain weight?

19
      Nocturnal gathering of witches, a colorful and intriguing part of the lore surrounding
     them in Christian European tradition. The concept dates from the mid-14th century when
     it first appeared in Inquisition records. www.britannica.com. – Tr.



                                             71

                                Chapter I


       A.K. – I wouldn’t deny that at all, but I’ll respond by saying
that the ranks of Spiritism also contain a good number of individuals
who are no less worthy. I’ll say further: the overwhelming majority
of Spiritists is composed of intelligent and studious persons. Only
bad faith would lead anyone to say that they have been recruited
from among naive women and the uneducated masses.
       Besides, one decisive fact answers this objection: despite their
knowledge and official positions, none have managed to hinder
Spiritism’s progress. Hence, there is no one – even the most obscure
pamphlet writer – who has not flattered him or herself for having
dealt it a deathblow. Instead, all of them, without exception, have
unwittingly helped to popularize it. But doesn’t the fact than an idea
has resisted such efforts and has advanced undaunted through the hail
of blows dealt to it prove its power and the depth of its roots? Doesn’t
such a phenomenon deserve the attention of serious thinkers? More
than a few these days have declared that there must be something to it;
that maybe it is one of those great, irresistible movements that shake
up societies from time to time in order to transform them.
       That is the way it has always been with all the new ideas
called upon to revolutionize the world. They run up against
obstacles because they have to fight against the very self-interests,
prejudices and abuses they have come to overthrow. However,
since they are part of God’s designs for fulfilling the law of progress
for humankind, nothing can stop them when their time comes. It
is the proof that they are the expression of truth.
       Moreover, as I have already stated, this powerlessness of
Spiritism’s detractors shows, first of all, an absence of good arguments,
since the ones used against it are not convincing. Such powerlessness,
however, has to do with another cause that has frustrated all their
schemes. They are alarmed by Spiritism’s progress, in spite of all they
have done to stop it; they have been unable to discover the reason
for such progress because they have been looking in all the wrong


                                   72

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


places. Some have seen it in the great power of the Devil, who would
thus show himself stronger than they are, and even stronger than
God. Others have regarded it as an increase in human madness. The
mistake of all of them is in believing that Spiritism has only one
source, and that it rests on the opinion of only one man; thus, they
think that if they can ruin this one man, they can ruin Spiritism.
They are searching for this source on the earth, whereas it is to be
found in the spirit world. It is not in one place; it is everywhere
because spirits manifest everywhere, in every country, in the palace
as well as the hovel. Hence, the true cause lies in the very nature of
Spiritism, which does not receive its impulse from one person only;
instead, it allows anyone to receive communications directly from
spirits, and thus to be reassured of the reality of the phenomena.
How can millions of persons be persuaded that all this is nothing
more than conjuration, charlatanism, trickery or a feat of skill, when
they themselves can get results without anyone’s help? Could they
be made to believe that they are their own accomplices and produce
deceit and trickery only for their own sake?
        The universality of spirit manifestations, which have
appeared at all points of the globe to disavow the detractors of
Spiritism and to confirm the principles of the Doctrine, is a power
that cannot be comprehended by those who know nothing about
the invisible world, just as the speed of sending a telegraph message
would be incomprehensible to those who know nothing about the
law of electricity. It is against this power that all denials have been
shattered, because it is like telling persons who receive the rays of
the sun that the sun does not exist.
        The qualities of the Doctrine notwithstanding – qualities
that are more pleasing than the qualities that oppose it – the
manifestations are behind the cause of the setbacks of those who
have been trying to stop its progress. In order to succeed, they would
have to find the means to keep spirits from manifesting. This is why


                                   73

                                Chapter I


Spiritists are so unconcerned about their maneuvers: they have the
experience and authority of the phenomena on their side.

   The Extraordinary and the Supernatural
        Visitor – Spiritism obviously tends to revive beliefs founded
on the extraordinary and supernatural. However, in our positivistic
century, this seems to me to be a problem because it acknowledges
popular superstitions and errors that reason has condemned.
        A.K. – An idea is superstitious only because it is erroneous; it
ceases to be superstitious the moment it is a recognized truth. The
issue, therefore, is to know whether there are spirit manifestations or
not. Now, you cannot brand something as superstitious until it can be
proven that it does not, in fact, exist. You will say: my reason refuses
to accept such manifestations. Nevertheless, those who do believe in
them – and who can hardly be regarded as fools – also call upon their
reason in addition to the phenomena; so, which side should you take?
The great judge in the matter is the future, just as it has been with all
scientific and industrial subjects that were at first branded as absurd
and impossible. You judge a priori according to your own opinion;
we judge only after having taken a long time to watch and observe.
We would add that, as enlightened as it is today, Spiritism, on the
contrary, tends to destroy superstitious ideas because it shows what is
true or erroneous in popular beliefs; everything that is absurd about it
has been added out of ignorance and bias.
        I would go even further and say that the positivism of our
century is precisely what led us to accept Spiritism, and that it
partly owes its rapid spread to positivism, and not, as some claim,
to a return to the love for the extraordinary and supernatural.
The supernatural disappears when exposed to the light of science,
philosophy and reason, just as the gods of paganism vanished
before the light of Christianity.

                                   74

                               A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


        The supernatural lies outside the scope of the laws of nature;
positivism, on the other hand, accepts nothing outside such laws.
But does it know all of them? Throughout time, phenomena whose
causes were unknown have been regarded as supernatural; each new
law discovered by science, however, has diminished the borders of
the supernatural. Well then! Spiritism has come to reveal a new law
according to which conversing with the spirit of a deceased person
rests upon a law that is as natural as the one that enabled electricity
to establish contact between two individuals hundreds of miles
apart. The same applies to all the other Spiritist phenomena. As far
as Spiritism is concerned, it repudiates every extraordinary effect,
i.e., those outside the laws of nature. It performs neither miracles
nor prodigies; rather, by virtue of a law, it explains certain effects
that have until now been reputed as miracles and prodigies, and
as such demonstrates their possibility. Thus, it has broadened the
realm of science, and in doing so, it has become a science itself.
However, because the discovery of this new law has entailed moral
consequences, the codification of such consequences makes it, at
the same time, a philosophical doctrine.
        From the philosophical point of view, Spiritism responds to
people’s aspirations concerning the future because it is positive and
rational, and that is why it is suitable for the positivist character of
the century. You’ll understand all this once you put forth the effort
to study it.20

                     The Opposition of Science
     Visitor – You say you are supported by facts, but you are
opposed by the opinion of learned individuals who either contest
them or who explain them differently than you. Why didn’t they
20
     The Mediums’ Book, chap. II; Revue Spirite, Dec. 1861, p. 393, and Jan. 1862, p. 21. Also, see
     below, chap. II. – Auth.



                                                 75

                               Chapter I


focus on the turning tables phenomenon? If they had seen anything
serious about it, it seems to me that they would not have neglected
such extraordinary occurrences, nor would they have rejected
them with disdain; however, they are all against you. Aren’t learned
individuals the guiding light of the nations, and isn’t it their duty
to spread the light? Why do you suppose they have stifled it when
given such a fine opportunity to present to the world the existence
of a new force?
       A.K. – You have just described the duty of learned individuals
quite admirably, and it’s unfortunate that they have neglected it on
more than one occasion. But before responding to your judicious
observation, I must inform you that you are gravely mistaken by
saying that all learned individuals are against us.
       As I stated just a while ago, it is precisely among the
enlightened classes in all the countries of the world that Spiritism
has won the most converts. Among them there are a large number
of physicians from every nation, and as we know, physicians
are men and women of science; the judges, professors, artists,
writers, officials, high-ranking public servants, major dignitaries,
ecclesiastics, etc. who have gathered under its banner are all
persons whom we would not deny as possessing a certain dose of
enlightenment. Learned persons are not only to be found within
official science and within established organizations.
       Because Spiritism doesn’t yet have the right to citizenship
in official science, is that a reason to condemn it? If science had
never been mistaken, its opinion would carry weight in this case;
unfortunately, experience has shown otherwise. Hasn’t science
rejected as pipe dreams a multitude of discoveries that later glorified
the memories of their authors? Isn’t it due to a report by our elite
corps of scholars that France was deprived of the steam power
enterprise? When Fulton came to the field at Bologna to present
his theory to Napoleon I, who then recommended its immediate


                                  76

                                A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


examination to the Institute, didn’t the Institute conclude that
such a theory was an impractical dream and that it didn’t have
the time to bother with it? From this should we conclude that
the members of the Institute are unlearned? Does it justify the
coarse and tasteless epithets that certain persons enjoy heaping on
them? Of course not. There isn’t one sensible person who doesn’t
praise their eminent knowledge, while realizing that they are not
infallible and that their judgment is not final, especially when it
comes to new ideas.
       Visitor – I will be the first to admit that they are not
infallible; but it is no less true that, in virtue of their knowledge,
their opinion is worth something, and that if you had them on
your side, it would give a lot of weight to your theory.
       A.K. – But you must also admit that you are only a good judge
within your area of competence. If you wanted to build a house,
would you employ a musician? If you were ill, would you let yourself
be treated by an architect? And if you wanted to file a lawsuit, would
you consult a dancer? Lastly, if you had a theological question, would
you go to a chemist or an astronomer for an answer? No. To each
their own specialty. The regular sciences rest upon the properties
of matter, which can be manipulated at will; the phenomena that
it produces have material forces as their agents. The phenomena
of Spiritism have as their agents intelligent beings, endowed with
independence and free will and not subject to our whims; they are
not bound by our laboratory procedures or calculations, and are
not, therefore, within the scope of science per se.
       Science was thus mistaken when it wanted to experiment
with spirits the same way it did with a voltaic battery21. It failed – as
it well should have – because it proceeded based on an analogy that
doesn’t exist. And then, without going any further, its conclusions
were negative. It was a rash judgment, which time has been
21
     An electric battery composed of a primary cell or cells. The American Heritage Dictionary. – Tr.



                                                 77

                               Chapter I


rectifying day by day, just as it has done with many others. Those
who judged it hastily will be ashamed at having so thoughtlessly
set themselves against the infinite power of the Creator.
       The scientific community cannot, and never will be able
to make a statement on this issue; it is as much outside of their
area of competence as it is for them to say whether or not God
exists; thus, it is an error to accept their judgment. Spiritism is
a matter of personal belief that cannot depend on the vote of
an assembly, because such a vote, even if favorable, cannot force
conviction. Once public opinion is formed on the matter, scholars
will accept it as individuals and submit to the force of things. Let
this generation pass, and with it the prejudices of its obstinate self-
centeredness and you will see that what happens with Spiritism
will be no different from what has happened to so many other
contested truths that one would be foolish to question nowadays.
Today, believers are the ones who are being called mad; tomorrow,
it will be the turn of those who do not believe, just as those who
believed the earth spun on its axis used to be called crazy.
       Not all learned individuals have judged Spiritism in the
same way, however, and by learned individuals I mean individuals
of study and knowledge, with or without an official degree. Many
have made the following argument:
       “There is no effect without a cause, and the most ordinary
effects may lead the way to the most difficult problems. If Newton
had disregarded the fall of an apple, if Galvani had dismissed his
servant as a lunatic and dreamer when he told him about the frogs
that danced on the plate, perhaps we still would not have discovered
the wonderful law of universal gravity and the numerous properties
of the electric battery. The phenomenon sarcastically labeled as the
“dance of the tables” is no more ridiculous than the “dance of the
frogs”, and it too perhaps contains one of those secrets of nature that
will revolutionize humankind once it possesses the key.”


                                  78

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


      These learned individuals have stated further: “Since so many
people are occupied with spirit phenomena, and since trustworthy
individuals have studied them, then there must be something to
them after all. An illusion – if you will – cannot have this character
of generality; it might bewitch a certain circle or faction, but not the
whole world. So let’s guard against denying the possibility of what
we do not understand, dreading to be proven wrong sooner or later,
which would not be very flattering to our judiciousness.”
      Visitor – Very well, we are talking about a learned individual
who reasons with wisdom and prudence; and although I’m not
a learned individual myself, I agree with him. Notice, however,
that he affirms nothing: he doubts. Thus, on what, exactly, are
we to base the belief in the existence of spirits, and especially, the
possibility of communicating with them?
      A.K. – This belief is based on both reasoning and the facts.
I myself did not adopt it until after careful examination. My study
of the exact sciences gave me the habit of positivist thinking,
which requires thought and analysis, and I probed and scrutinized
this new science in its innermost details. I wanted to account for
everything because I do not accept an idea before I know the whys
and hows. Here is the reasoning I got from an erudite physician
who used to be a disbeliever but who is now a fervent adherent:
      “It is said that invisible beings communicate; and why
not? Before the invention of the microscope, did we suspect the
existence of the billions of microscopic organisms that cause such
harm to the body? Why is it materially impossible for there to
be beings in space that escape our senses? Would we perchance
harbor the foolish pretense of knowing everything and tell God
that he has nothing more to teach us? If these invisible beings
surrounding us are intelligent, why couldn’t they communicate
with us? If they are in any way related to human beings, they must
perform a role in destiny and life’s events. Who knows? Maybe it


                                   79

                               Chapter I


is one of the forces of nature, one of those hidden forces that we
never even suspected. What a new horizon this would open up to
our thought! What a vast field of observation! The discovery of
the world of invisible beings would be much different than the
world of the infinitely small; it would be more than a discovery –
it would be a revolution in our way of thinking. How much light
could be shed! How many mysteries explained! Those who believe
in it are ridiculed, but what does that prove? Hasn’t it been the
same with all great discoveries? Wasn’t Christopher Columbus
rebuffed, met with disgust and treated as insane? These ideas, it is
said, are so strange that no one can believe in them. But anyone
who would have said only a half century ago that we would be
able to correspond from one part of the world to another in only
a few minutes; that we could cross France in just a few hours;
that with the steam produced by a little boiling water a ship
could go forward against the wind; that we could derive from
water the means of providing ourselves with light and warmth;
that it would be possible to illuminate all of Paris in an instant
with only a reservoir of an invisible substance – surely such a
person would have been laughed at. Well then, would it be so
utterly exceptional for space to be populated by thinking beings,
who, after having lived on the earth, left their material envelopes
behind? Don’t we find in this fact the explanation of a multitude
of beliefs that may be traced back to remotest antiquity? Such
matters are well worth delving into.”
       Such are the thoughts of a learned individual, but an
unpretentious one. They are also the thoughts of a huge number
of enlightened persons who have understood, not superficially and
narrowly, but who, after having examined the matter seriously and
without any preconceptions, have had the modesty not to say: I do
not understand it; therefore, it does not exist. Their convictions were
formed by observation and reasoning. If these ideas were a passing


                                  80

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


fancy, do you think that such an intellectual elite would have adopted
them? That they could have been victims of an illusion for so long?
       Hence, it is not materially impossible for there to be beings
invisible to us populating space, and this consideration alone
should lead to more circumspection. A short time ago, who would
have thought that a drop of clear water could contain thousands of
beings so small that it would boggle our minds? I would say that it
was much harder for our minds to conceive of such subtle beings,
having all our organs and functioning like us, than to believe in
the beings that we call spirits.
       Visitor – Of course, but just because something might be
possible doesn’t mean that it actually exists.
       A.K. – I agree, but you must concur that, the moment it
ceases to be impossible, that is an important start because it is
no longer repugnant to reason. All that remains is to verify it by
observing the facts. This is nothing new: sacred and secular history
have both demonstrated the ancientness and universality of this
belief, which has continued through all the unexpected changes
in the world, and which can be found among the most primitive
peoples in the form of innate and intuitive ideas engraved on
their minds like the belief in the Supreme Being and the future
existence. Spiritism, therefore, is not a modern creation – far from
it; everything proves that the ancients knew about it as well as we
do and perhaps even better, except that it was taught only with
mysterious precautions that rendered it inaccessible to the common
folk, who were intentionally left in the quagmire of superstition.
       As for the phenomena, they are of two natures: some are
spontaneous and some are induced. Among the spontaneous
phenomena, we list the highly common visions and apparitions, in
addition to noises, raps or movements of objects without apparent
physical cause. Also listed are a large number of unusual effects
that used to be regarded as supernatural, but which nowadays


                                   81

                              Chapter I


seem so common to us that we find nothing supernatural about
them since they all belong to the realm of the immutable laws
of nature. As for induced phenomena, they are the ones that are
obtained through mediums.

 Erroneous Explanations of the Phenomena
      Hallucination. – Magnetic fluid. – Thought reflection. –
Overexcitement of the brain. – The somnambulistic state of mediums.

        Visitor – Criticism has been mostly aimed at the induced
phenomena. Let’s put aside any supposition of charlatanism and
base it on good faith; mightn’t we think that mediums are pawns
of a hallucination?
        A.K. – I don’t know if the mechanism of hallucination has
yet been explained clearly. As it is understood, it is a most singular
effect and well worth studying. So why is it that those who try to
explain spirit phenomena based on this premise cannot explain
their own explanation? Furthermore, there are phenomena that
rule out this hypothesis: when a table or other object moves, rises
or raps; when it moves at will around a room without coming
in contact with anyone; when it rises up from the floor and
remains suspended in the air without any point of support; and
lastly, when it collapses and crashes to the floor – this is certainly
not a hallucination. Supposing that, through an effect of their
imagination, mediums believe they are seeing something that does
not actually exist, is it possible that an entire community could be
caught up in the same figment of the imagination? That it would
be repeated far and wide, in every land? The hallucination in that
case would be more prodigious than the phenomenon itself.
        Visitor – If we were to accept the reality of the turning
and rapping table phenomenon, wouldn’t it be more rational

                                 82

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


to attribute it to the action of some fluid – the magnetic fluid,
for example?
        A.K. – That was actually my first thought, and that of
many others. If the effects had been limited to material effects,
there is no doubt that we could have explained them in that way.
However, when the movements and raps gave proof of intelligence
and when it was realized that they responded to thought with
complete freedom, we had to draw the following conclusion: If
every effect has a cause, then every intelligent effect has an intelligent
cause. If it were the effect of a fluid, wouldn’t we have to say that
the fluid was intelligent? When we see the arm of a telegraph
make the signals that transmit thought, we know very well that
it is not the wooden or iron arm that is intelligent, but we say
that an intelligence is making them move. The same happens
with the table. Are there or aren’t there intelligent effects? That is
the question. Those who contest it are persons who didn’t see the
whole picture and rushed to draw conclusions according to their
own ideas and a superficial observation.
        Visitor – I would respond to that by saying that if there is
an intelligent effect, it comes from nothing more than intelligence
itself, whether of the medium, the questioner or one of the
participants, because it is said that the response is always within
someone’s thought.
        A.K. – That is yet another error following a faulty observation.
If those who think that way had put forth the effort to study the
phenomenon in all its aspects, they would have recognized at each
step the complete independence of the manifesting intelligences.
How can this theory be reconciled with responses that are outside
the intellectual capacity and education of the mediums, that
are contrary to their own ideas, desires and opinions, or that
completely baffle the expectations of the onlookers? What about
mediums writing in a language unknown to them or in their own


                                    83

                              Chapter I


language when they don’t even know how to read or write? I will
admit that at first sight this theory has nothing irrational about it,
but it is contradicted by facts so numerous and so conclusive that
doubt is no longer possible.
        Furthermore, even if we were to accept this theory, the
phenomenon, far from being simplified, would then, in fact, be
quite extraordinary. Imagine! Could thought actually be reflected
on surfaces like light, sound or heat? That would truly be something
that would stoke science’s interest. Also, what would make it even
more extraordinary is the fact that, out of twenty participants, it
would be the thought of this or that particular individual that
is reflected rather than the thought of one of the others. Such a
theory is unsustainable. It is truly interesting to see opponents do
their utmost to find causes a hundred times more extraordinary
and difficult to understand than the ones that are offered to them.
        Visitor – According to the opinion of some, couldn’t we say
that mediums in such cases are in an altered state and are enjoying
a lucidity that gives them a somnambulistic perception, a sort of
second sight? That would explain the momentary broadening of
their intellectual faculties, since it is said that the communications
obtained by mediums do not exceed the scope of those obtained
by somnambulists.
        A.K. – That is yet another theory that doesn’t hold up under
serious examination. These mediums are not in an altered state,
nor are they asleep; they are wide awake, acting and thinking like
everyone else, displaying nothing out of the ordinary. Certain
particular effects might have given rise to this mistake. However,
those who do not limit their judgment to only one angle would
easily realize that mediums are endowed with a unique faculty
that does not allow confusing them with somnambulists, and that
the complete independence of their thought is proven by facts
of indisputable evidence. Written communications aside, what


                                 84

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


somnambulist has ever made an inert body produce a thought? Or
produced visible and even tangible apparitions? Or kept a heavy
object suspended in the air with no point of support? Was it by
some somnambulistic effect that a medium once drew for me, in
the presence of twenty witnesses, the portrait of a young woman
who had died eighteen months earlier, and whom he had never
known, but whose father at the session recognized her? Is it due to
a somnambulistic effect that a table accurately answers questions
put to it – even those posed only mentally? Even if we were to
actually believe the medium is in a magnetic state, it would still
seem hard to believe that the table is somnambulistic.
       It is also said that mediums speak intelligibly only about
things that are known. Then how can the following occurrence
and a hundred others like it be explained? One of my friends,
a very good writing medium, asked a spirit if a person he had
not seen for fifteen years was still in this world. “Yes, she is still
alive,” it answered; “she lives in Paris, on such and such a street, at
such and such a number.” He went and found the person at the
address indicated. Is that an illusion? His thought could hardly
have suggested the response, since considering the person’s age,
there was every possibility that she was no longer even alive. If in
certain cases answers have actually matched thoughts, is it rational
to conclude that it is a general law? In this, as in all matters, hasty
judgments are always dangerous because they can be invalidated
by facts that have not been looked at.

              Disbelievers Cannot See in
               order to be Convinced
      Visitor – It is actual phenomena that disbelievers would like
to see, that they ask for, and that most of the time they cannot


                                   85

                              Chapter I


be furnished with. If people could witness these occurrences,
there would be no more room for doubt. How is it, then, that
so many people haven’t been allowed to see anything in spite of
their willingness? One might argue that it is due to their lack of
faith, but to that they correctly reply that they cannot have faith in
advance, and that if belief is desired of them, they must be given
the means to believe.
       A.K. – The reason is quite simple. They want the phenomena
to happen at their command, but spirits do not obey commands;
one must wait for their good will. Hence, it isn’t enough to say:
Show me this or that phenomenon and I will believe; one must
have the willingness to persevere, to let the phenomena occur
spontaneously, without trying to force or direct them. The ones
that are hoped for will perhaps be exactly the ones that are not
received. But others will appear, and the one hoped for will come
at a time when it is least expected. To the eyes of the attentive and
diligent observer, they will appear collectively, corroborating each
other. However, those who think that it is enough to turn a crank
to start the machine are badly mistaken. What do naturalists do
when they want to study the habits of animals? Do they command
them to do such and such a thing so they may have the leisure
to observe them as they please? No, because they know very well
that the subject will not obey them; they watch for spontaneous
expressions of their instinct; they wait and learn about them as they
occur. Plain common sense shows that it is even more reasonable
that the same would apply to spirits, who are intelligences much
more independent than animals.
       It is wrong to believe that faith is necessary, but good faith
– that is something different. There are skeptics who deny the
evidence, and not even miracles could convince them. How many
are there who, having seen the phenomena, nonetheless insist on
explaining them in their own way, saying that it doesn’t prove


                                 86

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


anything! Such people serve only to disrupt meetings without
any benefit to themselves. That is why we should avoid them and
not want to waste any time on them. There are those who would
become downright angry at being forced to believe, because their
pride would suffer at having to admit that they were wrong. What
can we say to people who see nothing but illusion and charlatanism
everywhere? Nothing; we must leave them alone and say, as is their
desire, that they did, in fact, see nothing, and even say that no one
was able or willing to enable them to see.
       Alongside these hardened skeptics there are those who want
to see things their own way; who, having formed an opinion,
want everything to relate to it. They do not understand that the
phenomena will not obey their will; they do not know how to – or
do not want to – situate themselves in the necessary conditions.
Those who want to observe in good faith should not believe
without question, but rid themselves of all preconceived ideas and
not want to compare incompatible things. They should wait, follow
and observe with tireless patience. The same applies to adherents,
since it shows that they haven’t arrived at their convictions lightly.
Do you have such patience? No, you will say; I don’t have the time.
Then don’t concern yourself with it; but don’t talk about it either
– no one is making you.

      Spirits’ Good or Ill Will to Convince
      Visitor – All that being said, it seems that spirits ought to
be interested in making converts. Why don’t they lend themselves
more than they do to ways that would convince certain individuals
whose opinion would have a great influence?
      A.K. – Because apparently, for now, they aren’t interested
in convincing certain individuals whose importance they do not
consider to be as great as such individuals think it is. I will admit

                                   87

                               Chapter I


that this is not very flattering, but we cannot control their opinions;
spirits have a way of judging things that is not always like our own.
They see, think and act according to other perspectives; whereas
our sight is circumscribed by matter, limited by the narrow circle
in which we find ourselves, spirits embrace the whole. Time, which
seems so long to us, is only an instant for them; distance is only
a step; certain details that may seem extremely important to us
are childish to them; on the other hand, they deem as important
certain things whose significance we do not grasp. In order to
understand them, we must raise ourselves in thought above our
material and mental horizon and see things from their perspective.
It isn’t for them to come down to us, but for us to go up to them,
and that is done through study and observation.
        Spirits appreciate diligent and conscientious observers, and
they multiply the sources of enlightenment for them. What keeps
them away is not doubt born of ignorance, but the self-complacency
of supposed observers who observe nothing, who intend only to
put them in the spotlight and manipulate them like puppets while
harboring a sentiment of hostility and disparagement whether in
thoughts or in words. Spirits do nothing for these and are very
little concerned about what they might say or think, because their
time will come. That is why I have said that it is not faith per se
that is necessary, but good faith.

      The Origin of Modern Spiritist Ideas
      Visitor – One thing I would like to know, sir, is the origin
of modern Spiritist ideas. Are they really a spontaneous revelation
by the spirits or are they the result of a prior belief in their
existence? You can understand the importance of my question
because in the latter case, one could believe that imagination
might have played a role.

                                  88

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


        A.K. – As you have put it, this question is important for such
a point of view, although it is difficult to believe – assuming that
Spiritist ideas were born of a prior belief – that the imagination could
have produced all the material results that have been observed. In
fact, if Spiritism had been founded on the preconceived thought
of the existence of spirits, one could, with some semblance of
reason, doubt their reality, for if a cause is merely a pipe dream,
the consequences themselves must be imaginary; however, things
do not happen like that.
        Note first that this line of reasoning is completely illogical.
Spirits are a cause and not an effect; when we see an effect, we can
look for the cause, but it is not natural to imagine a cause before
having seen the effects. Thus, we couldn’t conceive the idea of spirits
unless there were effects that might be explained by the existence
of invisible beings. Well, that is not the way the idea appeared;
that is, it was not a hypothesis imagined in order to explain certain
phenomena; the first supposition made about them was one of
an entirely material cause. Thus, rather than spirits having been
a preconceived idea, we started from a materialistic point of view.
And since this point of view was unable to explain everything,
observation alone led to the spirit-related cause. I speak of modern
Spiritist ideas since we know that the belief in spirits is as old as the
world itself. This is how the matter progressed:
        Spontaneous phenomena, such as strange noises, raps,
movements of objects, etc., were produced without an ostensible
cause and under the influence of certain persons. Up to this
point, nothing had warranted looking for a cause other than the
action of a magnetic or other fluid whose properties were still
unknown. But it didn’t take long to recognize an intentional and
intelligent character in these noises and movements, from which
it was deduced, as I have already stated, that if every effect has a
cause, every intelligent effect must have an intelligent cause. This


                                    89

                               Chapter I


intelligence could not have resided in the object itself, because
matter is not intelligent. Was it the reflection of the intelligence of
the person or persons present? That is what was initially thought, as
I have also stated. Experience alone could pronounce itself on the
matter, and on many occasions, experience demonstrated, through
irrefutable proofs, the complete independence of this intelligence.
Thus, it had to be outside the object and outside the person. But
what was it? The intelligence itself answered this question, stating
that it belonged to the order of incorporeal beings called spirits.
So, the idea of spirits was not a priori, nor was it even a posteriori;
in other words, it did not come from the mind but was given by
the spirits themselves, and everything we have learned about them
ever since has been taught to us by the spirits themselves.
       Once the existence of spirits was revealed and the means
of communicating with them established, we were able to have
continual conversations with them and to obtain information
about their nature, the conditions of their existence and their role
in the visible world. If we could interrogate the beings from the
world of the infinitesimal in the same way, how many interesting
things we could learn about them!
       If we were to suppose that, before the discovery of America,
there had been an electric wire stretched across the Atlantic,
and that signs of intelligence were received at its European end,
we would have concluded that there were intelligent beings at
the other end wanting to communicate; they could have been
questioned and they would have answered. Thus, we would have
acquired certainty of their existence, knowledge of their customs,
their habits and way of living without having ever seen them. It was
the same with the relations with the invisible world: the physical
manifestations were like signals, a means of awareness that put us
on the path to more regular and continuous communications. And
remarkably, as easier means of communication became available,


                                  90

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


the spirits abandoned the primitive, insufficient and cumbersome
means, just as the speech-impaired would give up sign language if
they recovered their ability to speak.
       Who were the inhabitants of this world? Were they separate
beings outside of humanity? Were they good or evil? Once again,
experimentation was entrusted with resolving these questions. But
until numerous observations had thrown light on the subject, the
field of conjectures and theories was wide open, and God knows
how many appeared! Some believed spirits were superior in every
way, whereas others saw them only as demons. It was by their
own words and actions, however, that we were able to tell what
they were. Let’s suppose that, regarding the unknown transatlantic
inhabitants we have just mentioned, some said good things, whereas
others were noticed for the cynicism of their speech. This would
lead us to conclude that there were good and bad ones. The same
happened in the case of spirits: it was through a similar process that
we discerned every degree of goodness and wickedness, ignorance
and knowledge among them. Once enlightened about their faults
and qualities, it fell to our own judiciousness to distinguish the
good from the evil, the true from the false in their relations with
us – exactly as we do with regards to humans.
       Observation enlightened us not only about the moral
qualities of spirits but also their nature and what we might call
their physiological state. We learned from the spirits themselves
that some are very happy and others very unhappy; that they are
not separate beings of an exceptional nature, but the souls of those
who used to live on the earth, where they had left their corporeal
envelope behind; that they inhabit space, surround us and
continually rub elbows with us; that, through indisputable signs,
anyone could recognize among them their relatives, friends and
those whom they knew here on earth; that they could be followed in
all the phases of their existence beyond the grave from the moment


                                   91

                               Chapter I


they left their bodies, and their situation could be observed
according to their kind of death and the manner in which they had
lived on the earth. Lastly, it was realized that they are not abstract,
incorporeal beings, in the absolute sense of the word. They have
an envelope, to which we gave the name perispirit, a sort of fluidic,
vaporous, diaphanous body that is invisible in the normal state,
but which, in certain cases and by a kind of condensation or
molecular arrangement, can become momentarily visible and even
tangible; hence, the phenomena of apparitions and the ability to
touch them were explained. This envelope exists throughout the
life of the body; it is the link between the spirit and matter. When
the body dies, the soul, or spirit – which is the same thing – casts
off only the coarse envelope and keeps the second one, much like
when we remove an outer garment and keep only the one beneath,
or when the seed of a fruit casts off the cortical envelope and keeps
only the perisperm. It is this semi-material envelope of the spirit
that is the agent of the different phenomena through which it
manifests its presence.
        Such is the story of Spiritism in a few words; once you
have studied it in-depth, you will see and realize even better that
everything concerning it is the result of observation and not a
preconceived theory.

              Means of Communication
       Visitor – You mentioned the means of communication;
could you give me an idea about them since it is hard to understand
how these invisible beings can converse with us?
       A.K. – Gladly; I will do so only briefly, however, because
it would demand long drawn-out explanations that you can find
particularly in The Mediums’ Book. But the little I will tell you will
suffice to set you on the path of the mechanism, and will help you,

                                  92

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


above all, to better understand some of the sessions you might
attend while awaiting your full initiation.
        The existence of the semi-material envelope, or perispirit, is
a key that explains many things and demonstrates the possibility of
certain phenomena. As for the means per se, they are quite varied
and depend either on the degree of purity of the spirits themselves
or on the particular dispositions of the persons who serve as their
intermediaries. The most common one – the one we might call
universal – consists of intuition, that is, of the ideas and thoughts
they suggest to us; but this method is little considered in most
cases. There are others that are more dependable.
        Certain spirits communicate by raps, answering either yes
or no, or designating individual letters to form words. These raps
may be obtained by spirits tilting an object – a table, for example,
that strikes one of its legs on the floor; but quite often, they make
themselves heard within the actual material of the object, without
the object making any movement at all. This primitive approach is
slow and doesn’t easily lend itself to communicating lengthier ideas.
Writing has replaced it and is obtained in different ways. At first, we
used a movable object such as a small planchette, a basket or a box,
to which we attached a pencil whose point rested on the paper. We
still use this method at times. The nature and substance of the object
doesn’t matter. The medium places his or her hands on the object,
transmitting to it the influence he or she receives from the spirit,
and the pencil writes the letters. But properly speaking, this object is
nothing more than an extension of the hand, a sort of pencil holder.
We have since recognized that it is pointless to use this intermediary
object because it merely complicates the process. Its sole merit was
that it physically established the mediums’ independence, but they
can write just as well by holding the pencil themselves.
        Spirits can also express themselves by transmitting their
thoughts through articulated sounds that either resound in the air


                                   93

                               Chapter I


or in the ears, as well as through the medium’s voice, through sight,
drawings, music, and other means that a thorough study would
reveal. For these different means, mediums have special aptitudes
connected with their physical and mental make-up. Thus we have
physical effects mediums, that is, those who are able to produce
physical phenomena such as raps, the movement of objects, etc.
There are also hearing, speaking, seeing, drawing, musical and
writing mediums. This last faculty is the most common, the most
easily developed through practice; it is also the most valuable because
it allows for the most regular and the quickest communications.
       There are several kinds of writing mediums, two of which
are very distinct. In order to understand them, we must understand
how the phenomenon occurs. The spirit sometimes acts directly on
the medium’s hand, to which it gives an impulse that is completely
independent of the medium’s will. The medium has no awareness
of what is being written: this is the mechanical medium. In other
cases, the spirit acts on the brain; its thought passes through that
of the medium. Although the medium writes involuntarily, he
or she is more or less clearly aware of what is being received: this
is the intuitive medium. The medium’s role is exactly like that of
interpreters who transmit a thought that is not their own, although
they do understand it. Although in this case the spirit’s thought and
that of the medium sometimes intermingle, experience has taught us
how to easily distinguish them. Equally good communications may
be obtained through both these types of mediums; the advantage of
the mechanical type is that it is particularly effective on people who
are not yet convinced. Besides, the essential qualities of mediums are
to be found much more in the nature of the spirits who assist them
and in the communications they receive than in the means by which
the communications are received.
       Visitor – The procedure seems simple enough. Would it be
possible for me to try it out myself?


                                  94

                    A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


       A.K. – Certainly; I would even say that if you have been
endowed with this mediumistic faculty, it would be the best way to
convince you because you couldn’t doubt your own good faith. But
I would strongly urge you not to try it out before having studied
it carefully. Communications from beyond the grave are fraught
with more difficulties than one might think; they are not exempt
from pitfalls or even dangers for those who lack the necessary
experience. It is like someone who would like to experiment with
chemicals without knowing chemistry: the person could run the
risk of burning his or her fingers.
       Visitor – Is there any sign by which one can recognize this
aptitude?
       A.K. – So far, we don’t know of any diagnoses for
mediumship; those we thought we had identified turned out to
be worthless. Experimentation is the only way to know if one is
endowed with the faculty. Moreover, mediums are very numerous,
and if we ourselves are not mediums, it is extremely rare for us
not to find one amongst our family members or the persons with
whom we associate. Sex, age and temperament don’t matter; men
and women, children and the elderly, as well as individuals who
are well and those who are sick may be mediums.
       If mediumship were conveyed by some outward sign,
this would imply that the faculty is permanent, whereas it
is essentially changeable and temporary. Its physical cause
lies in how easily the perispiritual fluids of the incarnate and
discarnate spirit are assimilated. Its moral cause lies in the will
of the spirit, who communicates when it wants to, and not in
our own will. From this we may conclude that, first, not all
spirits can communicate indiscriminately through all mediums,
and that, second, all mediums are capable of losing or having
their faculty suspended when they least expect it. This brief
summary should be enough to show you that there is a great


                                  95

                                Chapter I


deal of study to be done in order to recognize the variations
that this phenomenon presents.
       Thus, it would be a mistake to think that any spirit whatsoever
can come when called and communicate through the first medium
at hand. For a spirit to communicate, first, it must agree to do so;
second, its position or activities must allow it to; and third, it must
find the medium to be a suitable instrument, adequate to its nature.
       In principle, one may communicate with spirits of all orders,
with relatives and friends, with the most highly evolved spirits as well
as with the commonest; apart from possible individual situations,
however, they come more willingly or less so according to the
circumstances, and especially according to their affinity for the persons
who call them, and not because of the request of the first person who,
on a whim, evokes them out of curiosity. In such a case they would
not have bothered with it when alive, much less after death.
       Serious spirits come only to serious meetings, where they are
called in an atmosphere of respect and for serious reasons; they pay
no heed to any questions of curiosity or proof, useless purpose or
experimentation.
       Frivolous spirits go everywhere, but at serious meetings they
remain quiet and stand aside to listen, like students at a gathering of
scholars. They have fun at frivolous meetings, however, where they
are amused by everything, frequently mock those in attendance,
and answer everything with no concern for the truth.
       Spirits known as rapping spirits, and in general, all those
who produce physical manifestations, are of a lower order,
although they are not necessarily evil because of it; they simply
have a somewhat special aptitude for physical effects. High order
spirits do not concern themselves with such things any more than
scholars concern themselves with feats of strength; if high order
spirits need to communicate through physical means, they use
these spirits, just as we use laborers for heavier work.


                                   96

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


                     Mediums for Hire
        Visitor – Before they delve into a prolonged course of study,
some people would like to be certain that they will not be wasting
their time, and certain that they will be provided with a conclusive
fact, even if they have to pay for it.
        A.K. – People who don’t want to go to the trouble of studying
display more curiosity than an actual desire to learn. Well, spirits
don’t like the curious any more than I do. Moreover, cupidity is
especially disagreeable to them, and they don’t lend themselves to
anything that may satisfy it. One would have to have a very wrong
idea of them to believe that highly evolved spirits such as Fenelon,
Bossuet, Pascal or St. Augustine would submit to the orders of the
first person who showed up and paid a certain amount per hour.
No, sir; communications from beyond the grave are too serious
and require too much respect to serve as exhibitions.
        Moreover, we know that spirit phenomena do not function
like the gears of some mechanism, because they depend on the will
of the spirits. Even if a person does have a mediumistic faculty, he
or she cannot claim to be able to obtain spirit phenomena at any
given moment. If disbelievers are inclined to suspect the good faith
of mediums in general, it would be much worse if mediums harbored
a desire of profit. They would have good reason to suspect that paid
mediums would simulate the phenomena when spirits were not
actually present because their main concern would be getting paid.
Not only is absolute disinterest the best guarantee of authenticity, it
would be repugnant to our reason to ask the spirits of our loved ones
to come for a price – even supposing they would consent to it, which
is more than doubtful. In any case, it would involve only low order
spirits who were unscrupulous as to the means and undeserving of any
trust. Furthermore, such spirits often take malicious pleasure in foiling
the schemes and calculations of those who try to control them at will.


                                    97

                              Chapter I


       The nature of the mediumistic faculty is thus opposed to
its becoming a profession, since the faculty depends on a will
foreign to the medium; and it can fail to manifest at the moment
the medium needs it most, unless he or she can supply it with
skilful dexterity. But even admitting complete good faith, since
phenomena cannot be obtained at will, it would be by sheer chance
if during a paid session a phenomenon were produced because
of a desire to be convinced. We could give a hundred thousand
francs to a medium and we wouldn’t enable him or her to get the
spirits to do what they didn’t want to do. This enticement not
only distorts the intention and transforms it into an intense desire
for profit, but quite to the contrary, it is a reason for the medium
not to be successful. If we are well imbued with this truth, that
is, that affection and affinity are the most powerful incentives for
attracting spirits, we will understand that they cannot be solicited
with the thought of being used to make money.
       Therefore, those who need phenomena to be convinced
should prove their goodwill to the spirits by means of serious and
patient observation if they want to be assisted by them. But if it is
true that faith cannot be imposed, it is no less true that it cannot
be bought.
       Visitor – I can understand this line of reasoning from a
moral point of view; however, isn’t it fair for those who give their
time to the interest of their cause to be compensated for it if it
keeps them from working for a living?
       A. K. – In the first place, are they really doing it in the
interest of their cause, or are they doing it for their own gain? If
they did leave their job, it was because they were not satisfied with
it, and because they hope to earn more or work less at their new
one. There is no self-sacrifice in giving one’s time when it can lead
to making a profit from it. That would be like saying that the baker
makes bread in the interest of humankind. Mediumship isn’t the


                                 98

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


only resource open to them; without it, they would have to earn
their living some other way. When they do not have independent
means, truly serious and devoted mediums look for ways to earn
a living with regular work, and they do not give up their jobs.
They devote only as much time as they can to their mediumship
without jeopardizing themselves, and if they do so voluntarily in
their leisure time or rest, it is simply devotion on their part; they
are thus valued and respected all the more for it.
        Furthermore, the large number of family mediums makes
professional mediums unnecessary, even supposing that they offer
all the desirable guarantees, a fact that is extremely rare. Without the
discredit that is attributed to this kind of exploitation – a discredit
I am happy to have contributed to extensively – we would have
seen mediums for hire multiply and newspapers covered with their
advertisements. For each honest medium, there would have been
a hundred charlatans who, by exploiting an authentic or simulated
faculty, would have done great harm to Spiritism. It is therefore
a given that all those who see in Spiritism something beyond an
exhibition of curious phenomena, and who understand and value
the dignity, consideration and genuine interests of the doctrine,
condemn every type of speculation in whatever form or disguise it
presents itself. Serious and sincere mediums – and I give this name
to those who understand the sanctity of the mandate that God
has entrusted to them – avoid even the appearance of what might
suggest the slightest hint of cupidity casting its shadow over them.
The accusation of making any profit with their faculty would be
regarded by them as an insult.
        Complete disbeliever that you are, you must admit, sir, that
mediums with such conduct would make an entirely different
impression on you than if you had paid for your seat to see them
operate, or, in the event you had been given free admission, if
you knew that behind it the purpose was money. You must admit


                                   99

                              Chapter I


that if you saw mediums animated by a true religious sentiment,
stimulated only by faith and not by the desire for profit, they
would unwittingly command your respect, even if they were
from the humblest working class. They would inspire you with
more trust because you would have no reason to doubt their
honesty. Well, sir, you can find thousands of them, and it is one
of the causes that have contributed powerfully to the credit and
spread of the doctrine, whereas if it had had only interpreters
interested in making a profit, it would not have a quarter of the
adherents it has today.
        It is well-known that professional mediums are extremely
rare, at least in France; that they are unknown in most of the
Spiritist centers in the country, where a reputation as mediums for
hire would be enough for them to be excluded from any serious
group. Furthermore, the job would not be very profitable for
them due to the discredit they would cause and the competition
of disinterested mediums, who may be found everywhere. To
make up for it, whether it is the mediumistic faculty they lack or
a shortage of clientele, there are the so-called mediums who use
card games, egg whites, coffee grounds, etc., to satisfy every taste,
hoping in this way and in the absence of spirits, to attract those who
still believe in such foolishness. If they harmed only themselves,
the evil would be minor; but there are individuals who, without
going any farther, mistake the abuse for the reality, and then the
ill-intentioned take advantage of it by saying that that is what
Spiritism is all about. So you can see that when the exploitation of
mediumship leads to abuses that jeopardize the doctrine, serious
Spiritism is right in condemning it and repudiating it as an aid.
        Visitor – All that is very logical, I must agree, but non-paid
mediums are not at just anybody’s disposal; furthermore, it would
not be right to bother them, whereas there would be no problem
with going to someone who gets paid because it wouldn’t make


                                 100

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


them waste their time. If there were public mediums, it would
make it easier for people who wanted to be convinced.
        A.K. – But if public mediums – as you call them – could
not offer any guarantees, of what use could they be for convincing
anyone? The drawback you have indicated doesn’t cancel out the
other, more serious ones that I have mentioned. People would
go to public mediums more for the sheer amusement of it or to
have their fortunes told than to get enlightenment. Those who
seriously wish to be convinced will find the means sooner or later
if they have perseverance and goodwill; however, they won’t be
convinced by attending a session if they haven’t been prepared for
it. If they take an unfavorable impression with them, they will
leave even less convinced than before, and will perhaps put off
the idea of pursuing the study of something in which they saw
nothing serious; experience has proven this.
        But aside from the moral considerations, the progress of
today’s Spiritist science has shown us a material difficulty that we
did not suspect in the beginning, but which has made us more
aware of the conditions in which manifestations are produced.
This problem has to do with the fluidic affinities that must exist
between the evoked spirit and the medium.
        I put aside any thought of fraud and deception, and I presume
complete honesty. In order for professional mediums to elicit full
trust from the people who consult them, they would have to possess
a permanent and universal faculty; that is, they would have to be able
to communicate easily with any spirit and at any given moment; like
doctors, they would have to be constantly at the public’s disposal,
and they would have to satisfy any evocation that might be asked of
them. However, paid or not, mediums cannot offer such guarantees
due to causes independent of the spirit’s will, which I will not
describe in-depth, because I am not giving you a course in Spiritism.
I will limit myself to saying that fluidic affinities, which are the very


                                   101

                               Chapter I


basis for the mediumistic faculties, are individual and not general,
and that the medium might have them regarding one particular
spirit but not another; that without these affinities, whose nuances
are very numerous, communications are incomplete, erroneous or
impossible; that most frequently, the fluidic assimilation between
the spirit and the medium is established only over time, and only
in one case out of ten is it established the very first time. So, as you
can see, sir, mediumship is subject to laws that are in some way
organic, and to which every medium is subject. Thus, you cannot
deny that this would be an obstacle to professional mediumship,
since the potential for precise communications is linked to causes
independent of both the medium and the spirit. (See below, chap.
II, sect. Concerning Mediums).
       Therefore, if we reject the exploitation of mediumship, it
is not because of caprice or principle, but because the very tenets
that govern communications with the invisible world are opposed
to the regularity and precision that would be required for those
who would place themselves at the public’s disposal, and because
the desire to satisfy a paying clientele would lead to abuse. I would
not conclude from all this that all mediums for hire are charlatans,
but I would say that the interest in making a profit encourages
charlatanism and at least warrants suspicion of fraud if it does not
justify it outright. Those who wish to be convinced should, more
than anything else, look for the elements of authenticity.

                 Mediums and Sorcerers
      Visitor – Since mediumship consists in communicating
with unseen powers, it seems to me that mediums and sorcerers
are almost the same thing.
      A.K. – In every age there have been natural, unconscious
mediums who, just because they produced unusual and misunderstood

                                  102

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


phenomena, were labeled as sorcerers and were accused of making a pact
with the Devil. It was the same with most of the learned individuals
who possessed knowledge beyond the ordinary. Ignorance
increased their power, and they themselves often abused public
credulity by exploiting it; hence their justified condemnation.
We only need compare the power attributed to sorcerers with the
faculty of genuine mediums to see the difference, but most critics
do not go to the trouble. Far from reviving sorcery, Spiritism has
destroyed it forever by stripping it of its supposed supernatural
power, formulas, conjuring books, amulets and talismans, and by
reducing the feasible phenomena to their rightful worth, without
departing from natural laws.
       The similarity that certain people claim exists comes from
their error in thinking that spirits are under mediums’ orders; it is
repugnant to their reason to believe that the first medium to come
along could make the spirit of this or that relatively illustrious
character respond to the medium’s beck and call at just that given
moment. They are absolutely right in this, and if they had taken
the trouble to familiarize themselves with Spiritism before casting
stones at it, they would know it states very clearly that spirits are
not at the command of anyone’s whim, and no one can make them
come at will and against their wishes; from which it follows that
mediums are not sorcerers.
       Visitor – Based on this, wouldn’t all the effects that certain
accredited mediums obtain at will and in public be, according to
you, nothing more than trickery?
       A. K. – I wouldn’t say so categorically. Such phenomena
are not impossible, because there are low order spirits who may
willingly participate and have fun with these sorts of things,
having perhaps been in the sleight-of-hand trade themselves when
alive. Moreover, there are mediums especially suited to these kinds
of manifestations; nonetheless, the most average common sense


                                  103

                              Chapter I


rejects the idea that even little-evolved spirits would turn up to put
on a show and perform clever feats simply to amuse the curious.
       Obtaining these phenomena at will – and especially in
public – is always suspect; in this case, mediumship and sleight-
of-hand are so similar that it is often very hard to distinguish
one from the other. Before seeing the action of spirits in such a
situation, meticulous observation is required, either taking into
account the medium’s character and antecedents or a multitude
of circumstances that only a thorough study of the theory of spirit
phenomena can enable us to evaluate. It is worth noting that this
type of mediumship – when mediumship is actually involved – is
limited to producing the same phenomenon over and over with a
few variants, which is not likely to clear up any doubts about it.
An absolute disinterestedness is the best guarantee of authenticity.
       Whatever the reality of these phenomena may be, as
mediumistic effects, they have a good result in that they lend impact
to the Spiritist idea. The controversy surrounding this subject
stimulates many to study the subject more deeply. Of course, it is
not there that Spiritism’s true teachings or its philosophy should
be sought, but it is a way to grab the attention of the indifferent
and to force the most recalcitrant to talk about them.

                Diversity among Spirits
       Visitor – You speak of good or evil, serious or frivolous
spirits; I must admit that I do not understand this difference. It
seems to me that, upon leaving their corporeal envelope, they
must shed the imperfections inherent to matter; that light must
shine for them regarding all the truths that are hidden from them,
and that they surely must be free of earthly prejudices.
       A.K. – Of course they are free of physical imperfections, that
is, bodily illnesses and infirmities; however, moral imperfections

                                 104

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


have to do with the spirit and not the body. Among their numbers
are those who are intellectually and morally advanced to varying
degrees. It would be a mistake to believe that after having left their
material bodies, spirits are suddenly struck with the light of truth.
Do you believe, for example, that when you die, there will be no
difference between your own spirit and that of a primitive or an
evildoer? If that were so, what good would it have done to have
worked on your education and improvement since a villain would
be just like you after death? Spirits progress only gradually and
sometimes very slowly. Some of them – and this depends on their
purification – see things from a more correct point of view than
during their physical life; on the other hand, others still have the
same passions, the same prejudices and the same misapprehensions
until time and new trials enable them to enlighten themselves.
Be well aware that this is the result of experience because this is
the way they present themselves to us in their communications.
Hence, it is an elementary principle of Spiritism that there are
spirits of all levels of intelligence and morality.
       Visitor – But then, why aren’t all spirits perfect? What you have
said would seem to imply that God has created all sorts of categories.
       A.K. – That would be like asking why all the students at
a college are not philosophy majors. All spirits have the same
origin and the same destiny. The differences among them do not
constitute different kinds, but different degrees of advancement.
       Spirits are not perfect, because they are the souls of human
beings, and humans are not perfect; likewise, humans are not
perfect, because they are the incarnation of spirits that are of
varying degrees of advancement. The corporeal world and the
spirit world are constantly intermingling; through the death of
the body, the corporeal world supplies its contingent to the spirit
world; through birth, the spirit world supplies humankind. With
each new existence, the spirit accomplishes much or little progress,


                                  105

                                Chapter I


and when it has acquired on earth the full knowledge and moral
elevation possible for our globe, it leaves it and goes to a more
highly evolved world, where it learns new things.
       The spirits who form earth’s invisible population are in a
way the reflection of the corporeal world; one finds there the same
vices and the same virtues. Among them there are the learned,
the ignorant, the pseudo-learned, the wise and the foolish, the
philosophers, the thinkers, the theorizers. And since they haven’t
rid themselves of their prejudices, all political and religious
factions have their representatives there. They speak according to
their own ideas, and what they say is often nothing more than
their personal opinion. That is why we must not blindly believe
everything spirits say.
       Visitor – If that is so, I can see a big problem. In this conflict
of diverse opinions, how does one distinguish error from truth? I
can’t see what good spirits are to us or what we have to gain from
communicating with them.
       A.K. – If spirits served only to teach us that there are, in fact,
spirits and that these spirits are the souls of humans, wouldn’t that
be of great importance to all those who doubt that they even have a
soul, and who do not know what will become of them after death?
       As with all philosophical sciences, this one demands lengthy
study and meticulous observation in order for us to learn to
distinguish the truth from falsehood and to keep deceitful spirits
away. Above the throngs of low order spirits, there are high order
ones, who have only the good in mind and whose mission is to lead
people to the right path. It is up to us to know how to recognize
and understand them. They teach us great things, but we mustn’t
think that studying the others is useless; in order to get to know the
inhabitants of a place, we must observe them in all their aspects.
       You yourself have proof of this; you thought that it was
enough for spirits to leave their corporeal envelope to rid themselves


                                  106

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


of their imperfections. However, communications with them have
taught us just the opposite, and have made us aware of the true state
of the spirit world, something which is of a high degree of interest to
all of us since we all have to go there. As for the errors that can arise
from spirits’ differences of opinion, these vanish by themselves once
we learn to distinguish between the good and the evil, the learned
and the ignorant, the sincere and the hypocritical, exactly as we do
amongst ourselves; common sense exposes false doctrines.
        Visitor – My observation arises from the point of view of
scientific questions and others that we can put to the spirits. The
differences in their opinions regarding the theories that divide
scholars leave us in doubt. I can understand that since not all of
them are knowledgeable to the same degree, they cannot all know
everything. But then of what use could the opinions of those who
do know be for us if we cannot tell who is right or wrong? It
wouldn’t matter if we addressed either humans or spirits.
        A.K. – That thought is another result of not knowing
Spiritism’s true character. Those who think they can use it as an
easy way to know everything, to discover everything, are greatly
mistaken. Spirits are not responsible for bringing us ready-made
knowledge. In fact, it would be too convenient if all we had to do
was ask in order to be helped, thus sparing us the trouble of doing
the research. God wants us to work, to exercise our thought, and we
cannot acquire knowledge except at such price. Spirits do not come
to exempt us from this necessity; they are what they are, and the object
of Spiritism is to study them in order to learn by analogy what we will
become one day, and not to enable us to know what must remain
hidden from us, or to reveal things before the proper time.
        Furthermore, spirits can no longer be taken for fortune-
tellers, and those who pride themselves on getting certain secrets
from them should be prepared for strange deceptions on the
part of mocking spirits. In other words, Spiritism is a science of


                                   107

                              Chapter I


observation and not a science of divination or speculation. We study
it in order to understand the state of the individual inhabitants
of the invisible world, the relationships between them and us,
and their concealed actions on the visible world, and not for the
material usefulness we can get from it. From this point of view,
no study of any spirit is useless; we can learn something from all
of them: their imperfections, flaws, inadequacies and even their
ignorance are subjects of observation that initiate us into the study
of the inner nature of that world. And when it is not they who
educate us through their teachings, it is we who educate ourselves
by studying them, just as we do when we study the customs of a
people unknown to us.
       As for enlightened spirits, they can teach us a great deal, but
within the limits of what is possible, and we must not ask them
what they cannot or must not reveal to us. We must be content
with what they tell us; to want to go any further is to expose
ourselves to the hoaxes of frivolous spirits, who are always ready
to respond to anything. Experience teaches us how to discern the
degree of trust we can put in them.

 The Practical Usefulness of Manifestations
       Visitor – Supposing that the matter is verified and Spiritism
is recognized as a reality, what would its practical usefulness be? If
we have done without it until now, it seems to me that we could
continue to do without it and still live quite serenely.
       A.K. – One could say the same about railroads and steam,
without which we used to live very well.
       If we understand “practical usefulness” to mean living well,
making fortunes, knowing the future, discovering coal mines or
hidden treasures, receiving inheritances or saving ourselves from
the efforts of doing research, Spiritism serves no one; it can neither

                                 108

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


raise nor lower the stock market, be transformed into shares, or
produce finished inventions ready to be utilized. But how many of
our sciences would be useless from that point of view! How many
there are with no advantages, commercially speaking! Humans
got along perfectly well long before the discovery of all the new
planets, before they knew that it is the earth that orbits and not the
sun, before eclipses could be calculated, before they knew about
the microscopic world, and a hundred other things. In order to
live and grow their wheat, peasants don’t have to know what a
comet is. So why do scholars devote themselves to such research,
and who would dare say they are just wasting their time?
        Everything that serves to lift a corner of the veil aids the
development of our intelligence and enlarges our range of ideas
by enabling us to penetrate the laws of nature more deeply. Since
the spirit world exists by virtue of one of such laws of nature,
Spiritism enables us to know about it. It teaches us the influence
that the invisible world exerts on the visible world and the
connections between the two in the same way that astronomy
teaches us the connections between the stars and the earth. It
shows us that invisible world is one of the forces that govern the
universe and contributes to maintaining overall harmony. But
let’s suppose that its usefulness ends there; apart from any moral
doctrine, wouldn’t the revelation of such a power still be very
useful? So, is it really nothing that a whole new world is revealed
to us, especially if knowledge about the spirit world puts us on
the track of a multitude of up-to-now unsolvable problems? Is it
nothing at all that it initiates us into the mysteries beyond the
grave, which ought to hold some interest to us because each and
everyone must take that fateful step sooner or later? Spiritism has
another, more positive usefulness, however: the moral influence
it exerts by necessity. Spiritism is the obvious proof of the soul’s
existence, of its individuality after death, its immortality, and its


                                  109

                                Chapter I


future destiny; thus, it is the destruction of materialism, not by
means of reasoning, but by the facts.
       We shouldn’t ask Spiritism what it can give, nor look for
something in it that is beyond its beneficial purpose. Before the
serious progress made in astronomy, people believed in astrology.
Would it be reasonable to claim that astronomy is useless because
we can no longer find the prediction of our future in the influence
of the heavenly bodies? In the same way that astronomy has
dethroned the astrologers, Spiritism has dethroned the soothsayers,
sorcerers and fortune-tellers. Spiritism is to magic what astronomy
is to astrology, and chemistry is to alchemy.

             Insanity, Suicide, Obsession
       Visitor – Certain people regard Spiritist ideas as likely to
disturb the mental faculties, and for that reason they think it
prudent to stop its expansion.
       A.K. – You know the proverb: When you want to kill a dog,
you say it is rabid. So it isn’t surprising that the enemies of Spiritism
try to lean on any pretext they can. Such a ploy to arouse fear and
susceptibilities seemed right to them, and so they eagerly seized
upon it; however, their argument collapses under the slightest
scrutiny. Consequently, one should look at this “insanity” as the
reasoning of the insane.
       All great preoccupations of the mind can produce insanity;
the sciences, the arts – even religion itself – have provided their fair
share. The source of insanity lies in a pathological condition of the
brain, the instrument of thought: when the instrument is damaged,
thought is impaired. Thus, insanity is a consequential effect, whose
primary cause is an organic predisposition that makes the brain
susceptible in varying degrees to certain impressions. This is so true
that there are people who think a great deal, yet do not go mad,

                                  110

                                A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


and others that go mad under the influence of the slightest over-
excitement. Whenever there is a predisposition toward insanity, it
will take on the character of its main concern, which then becomes
an idée fixe. This idée fixe can involve spirits in someone who is
preoccupied with spirits, just as it can involve God, angels, the
Devil, fortune, power, an art, a science, motherhood, a political or
social theory. It is probable that the religious insane would become
insane Spiritists if Spiritism happened to be their dominant fixation.
Its’ true that a newspaper stated that in only one place in America
– I cannot recall the name – there were four thousand cases of
Spiritist insanity; however, we know that amongst our adversaries
it is an idée fixe that they consider themselves to be the only ones
gifted with reason, and that is a mania like any other. In their eyes,
we all deserve to be in an insane asylum, and consequently, those
four thousand Spiritists must be crazy as well. If that is the case,
the United States has hundreds of thousands of them, and all the
other countries in the world an even greater number. This bad tale
started to make its rounds after it was noticed that this so-called
insanity had reached the highest levels of society. A lot of noise was
made about the well-known example of Victor Hennequin22, but we
shouldn’t forget that, before concerning himself with Spiritism, he
had already demonstrated an unmistakable eccentricity of ideas. If
table turning had not happened, which, according to our adversaries’
very witty play on words made his head turn, his insanity would
have taken another course.
        So I will say that Spiritism is in no way privileged in this
regard; but I will go even further: I will say that, when well
understood, it is actually a protection against insanity and suicide.
        Among the most frequent causes of brain over-excitation we
must include disappointment, misfortune and thwarted affections,
22
      A philosopher, politician, lawyer, and literary man, Victor Hennequin was sent to prison after
     the French coup of 1851. He had been suffering from schizophrenia, which became worse
     after he left prison. It was then that he became acquainted with table turning. – Tr.



                                                111

                              Chapter I


which are also the most frequent causes of suicide. True Spiritists,
however, see the things of this world from such a comprehensive
point of view that for them troubles are nothing more than the
disagreeable incidents of a journey. That which might cause a
violent emotion in others barely affects Spiritists at all. They know,
moreover, that life’s sufferings are trials that aid their advancement
if they bear them without complaining because they will be
rewarded according to the courage with which they have endured
them. Their convictions thus endow them with a resignation
that saves them from despair, and consequently, from an ongoing
cause of insanity and suicide. Also, because of what they have
seen through communications with spirits, they also know of the
deplorable fate of those who intentionally shorten their days, and
this picture serves well to make them reflect; hence, the number
of those who have opted against choosing that disastrous slope is
considerable. This is just one of the results of Spiritism.
       To the number of the causes of insanity we must also add
fear, and fear of the Devil has deranged more than one mind. Do
we perchance know the number of victims created by frightening
feeble imaginations with this depiction, made even more frightful
with hideous details? The Devil, they say, not only scares children
but is also a restraint for them to be good; yes, exactly like the
bogey-man and the werewolf, and once they are no longer afraid
of them, they become even more ill-behaved than before. And for
such a fine result, no one has counted the number of fits caused by
the shock to a delicate mind.
       We mustn’t confuse pathological insanity with obsession. The
latter doesn’t originate from any sort of brain injury, but from
the control that malevolent spirits exert over certain individuals,
and which sometimes has the appearance of insanity per se. This
malady, which has nothing to do with any belief in Spiritism, is very
common and has always existed. Ordinary medication is powerless


                                 112

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


and even harmful in such a case. Spiritism has made this new cause
of the disorder known while at the same time offering the only way
to overcome it by acting not on the patient, but on the obsessor
spirit. It is the remedy for, and not the cause of the ailment.

                Forgetfulness of the Past
       Visitor – I don’t understand how people can benefit from
the experience acquired in their past lives if they cannot remember
them. Each new existence is as if it were the very first, and therefore
they are always having to start all over again. Let’s suppose that
every day when we wake up we forget what we did the day before;
we would have made no more progress by the time we reach
seventy years of age than we did at ten. But since we do remember
our wrongs, our imperfections and the punishments we have
incurred, we make sure that we do not have to start all over again.
To use your comparison of equating a person on earth with a high
school student, I cannot understand what this student could gain
from his fourth grade studies, for example, if he can’t remember
what he learned in third grade. These breaks in the continuity of
the spirit’s life interrupt all its relationships, and in a matter of
speaking, make it a new being. What we may conclude is that our
memories die with each existence; hence, we are born without any
awareness of what we have been. It is a kind of nothingness.
       A.K. – From question to question, you are leading me to give
you a complete course on Spiritism since all the objections you have
raised are natural for someone who knows nothing about it. An
earnest study of Spiritism, however, could provide a much fuller view
than I can in a brief explanation, which, in and of itself, will raise
even more issues. Everything is connected in Spiritism, and when
we follow the whole, we see that the principles follow one from the
other, and mutually support one another. Then, what appears to

                                  113

                              Chapter I


be an anomaly that is contrary to God’s justice and wisdom seems
completely natural and confirms such justice and wisdom.
        Such is the problem of the forgetfulness of the past, which is
connected to other questions of equal importance, and that is why
I will touch on it only briefly here.
        If with every existence a veil is thrown over the past, the
spirit loses nothing of what it acquired in that past: it forgets only
the way in which it acquired it. To use the comparison of the
student, I would say that it makes little difference to him to know
where, how, and under what teacher he completed the third grade
if upon reaching the fourth he knows what he learned in the third.
Why should it matter to him to know if he had been punished for
his laziness and disobedience if such punishments made him hard-
working and well-behaved? Thus it is that upon reincarnating,
persons bring through intuition and innate ideas what they have
acquired in knowledge and morality. I say “in morality” because if
they improved themselves during a lifetime and if they benefited
from the lessons of experience, then upon returning, they will
be instinctively better; matured in the school of suffering, and
through work, their spirits will be stronger. Rather than having
to start everything all over again, they will possess an increasingly
richer basis upon which to rely in order to acquire even more.
        The second part of your objection – the wiping out of
memories – is no better founded, because this forgetfulness takes
place only during corporeal life. Upon leaving it, the spirit recovers
the memory of its past and can then judge the path it has taken
and what still remains for it to do; hence, there is no breach of
continuity in the spirit life, which is the normal life of the spirit.
        Temporary forgetfulness is a gift from Providence. Experience
is often acquired through harsh trials and terrible expiations, and
remembering them would be very painful and would add to the
troubles of our present life. If the sufferings of life seem long,


                                 114

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


what would it be like if their duration were increased with the
memory of sufferings from past lives? For example, today you are
an honest man, but perhaps you owe it to the harsh punishments
you experienced for a wrong you committed in the past that
would be repugnant to your conscience now. Would it be pleasant
for you to remember having been hanged for it? Wouldn’t shame
haunt you, thinking that everyone knows about the wrong you
committed? What does it matter to you what you were capable of
doing and what you may have endured in expiation if you are now
a person worthy of esteem? In the eyes of the world, you are a new
person, and in the eyes of God, a rehabilitated spirit. Free from the
memory of a troublesome past, you act with more freedom; it is a
new beginning for you; your old debts are paid and it is up to you
not to incur new ones.
       During their present lives, how many persons would love to
be able to throw a veil over their early years! How many have said
at the end of their lives, “If I had it to do all over again, I certainly
wouldn’t do what I did!” Well then! What they cannot redo in this
lifetime, they will redo in another; in a new existence, their spirit
will bring with it through intuition the good decisions they made
in the past. This is how human progress is gradually accomplished.
       Let us suppose further – and this is very common – that in
your relationships, maybe in your own family, there is someone
you had much to complain about in a past life; someone who
perhaps ruined or dishonored you, and now, as a repentant spirit,
has come to incarnate in your midst, to unite with you through
family ties to make amends by way of his or her current devotion
and affection for the evil done to you in the past. Wouldn’t it
be very awkward for both of you if you both remembered your
enmity? Instead of being abated, the hatred would be perpetuated.
       We may conclude from this that the remembrance of the past
would greatly upset social relations and would be an obstacle to


                                   115

                                Chapter I


progress. Do you want actual proof? A man condemned to prison
makes a firm resolution to become honest; what will become of
him once released? He will be rejected by society, and this rejection
will plunge him again into vice. Suppose, on the other hand, that
no one is aware of his past; he will be well-received. If he himself
is able to forget his past, he will be no less honest and will be able
to walk with his head held high instead of bent under the shame
of his memories.
       This agrees perfectly with the Spirits’ doctrine about worlds
that are more highly evolved than ours. On such worlds, where
only the good reigns, remembrance of the past is not at all painful;
that is why spirits on them can remember their previous lives as
easily as we remember what we did yesterday. As for the sojourns
they may have made on lower worlds, they are nothing more than
a bad dream.

                 Elements of Conviction
       Visitor – I would agree, sir, that from a philosophical point
of view, the Spiritist doctrine is perfectly rational. But there is still
the matter of the manifestations, which cannot be resolved except
by the phenomena themselves; it is precisely the reality of these
phenomena that many people dispute and you should not find it
surprising that they would like to witness them.
       A.K. – I do think that is quite natural; however, since I
want to make the most of this opportunity, I will explain what
conditions are best for observing the phenomena, and especially
for understanding them. Those who do not want to observe them
under such conditions do not have a true desire to learn, so it
would be useless to waste our time on them.
       You will also agree, sir, that it would be strange indeed if
a rational philosophy had emerged from illusory and fabricated

                                  116

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


occurrences. In good logic, the reality of the effect implies the
reality of the cause; if one is true, the other cannot be false, because
where there is no tree, no fruit can be gathered.
       It is true that not everyone has been able to confirm
the phenomena because not everyone has met the conditions
needed to observe them or has had the necessary patience and
perseverance. The same applies here as in all the sciences: what
some do not do, others will. Every day, we accept astronomical
calculations without having made them ourselves. Be that as it
may, if you find a particular philosophy to be good, you will
accept it as you would any other, but you will reserve your
opinion about the ways and means that have led to it, or at least
accept it as a hypothesis until fully verified.
       The elements of conviction are not the same for everyone;
what convinces some makes no impression on others – and that
is why we must have a little of everything. But it is wrong to
believe that physical experiences are the only means of convincing
someone. I have seen persons unmoved by the most remarkable
phenomena but convinced by a simple written response. When
we see a phenomenon that we do not understand, the more
extraordinary it is the more suspicious it seems, and our minds
always look for an ordinary cause behind it. If we do understand
it, however, we accept it more easily because it has a reason for
being and the extraordinary and supernatural vanish. Indeed,
the explanations I have just given you in this interview are far
from being complete; but as abridged as they may be, I am
persuaded that they will give you something to think about;
and if circumstances enable you to witness any incidents of
manifestation, you will see them with a less biased eye because
you will have a basis for your reasoning.
       There are two aspects to Spiritism: the experimental part,
involving the manifestations, and the philosophical doctrine. I


                                  117

                              Chapter I


am visited by people every day who have not seen anything but
who believe as firmly as I do simply because of the study they
have made of the philosophical part; for them, the phenomena
involving the manifestations is secondary. The foundation is the
doctrine, the science. They see it as so great, so rational, that they
find in it everything conducive to satisfying their inner yearnings,
apart from the manifestations. They have concluded that even if
there were no manifestations at all the Spiritist Doctrine would
nonetheless be the one that best resolves a multitude of problems
thought unsolvable. How many have stated that similar ideas had
been brewing in their minds but had remained unclear. Spiritism
stated such ideas precisely and gave them a form, and it was like
a flash of light. This explains the number of adherents won over
by a single reading of The Spirits’ Book. Do you think that would
have been the case if Spiritism hadn’t gone beyond the turning and
talking tables?
       Visitor – You were right in saying that the turning tables
gave rise to a philosophical doctrine, and I am far from suspecting
the consequences that could arise from something regarded as a
simple object of curiosity. I can now see how vast the field opened
up by your system is.
       A.K. – I would stop you there, sir; you accord me way too
much honor by attributing this system to me, because it is not
mine. It has been deduced in full from the Spirits’ teachings. I
only saw, observed and coordinated, and I am now trying to help
others understand what I myself do; that is the full lot that has
fallen to me. There is this crucial difference between Spiritism and
other philosophical systems: the latter are the work of persons who
were enlightened to varying degrees, whereas personally, I haven’t
been worthy of inventing one single principle regarding what you
attribute to me. They say: the philosophy of Plato, Descartes and
Leibnitz; they will not say: the doctrine of Allan Kardec. That is


                                 118

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


fortunate because what importance could a name have in such
a serious matter? Spiritism has vastly superior auxiliaries, next to
whom we are but atoms.

  Society for the Continuation of the Spiritist
    Works of Allan Kardec, 7 de Lille Street

       Visitor – You have a society that concerns itself with these
studies; would it be possible for me to be a member?
       A.K. – Certainly not, at least for the time being. Even
though applicants don’t have to have a doctorate in Spiritism in
order to be accepted, their ideas must at least be more settled
on the subject than yours are. Since the Society doesn’t want to
be disturbed during its study times, it cannot admit those who
would come to waste its time on elementary questions, nor those
who, unsympathetic toward its principles and beliefs, would incite
disorder through untimely arguments or a spirit of conflict. Like
so many others, it is a scientific society that concerns itself with
delving into the different points of the Spiritist science, and which
seeks to become enlightened. It is the center where information is
received from all over the world, and where topics related to the
progress of the science are delineated and coordinated. But it is not
a school, nor is it a course of elementary instruction. Later, when
your convictions have been formed by study, we will see if there is
room to admit you. Nevertheless, while waiting, you will be able
to attend once or twice at the most as a visitor, on the condition
that you harbor no thought that could offend anyone; otherwise,
because I was the one who will have introduced you, I would incur
the reproach of my colleagues and the door would be forever closed
to you. You will find it to be a gathering of serious and distinguished


                                  119

                                 Chapter I


men and women, most of whom have been recommended due to
the superiority of their knowledge and their social stance, and who
would not allow those admitted to deviate from propriety in the
least. You mustn’t think that the public is invited and that just
anyone will be permitted to attend the sessions. Since the Society
doesn’t put on demonstrations with the idea of satisfying people’s
curiosity, it is careful to turn away the curious. So, those who think
they might find a diversion or some kind of spectacle would be
disappointed and would do better not to come at all. That is why
the Society refuses to admit, even as simple observers, those it does
not know or whose hostile dispositions are well-known.

         The Prohibition against Spiritism
         Visitor – One last question, if you please. Spiritism has
powerful enemies; couldn’t they prohibit its practice and its
societies, and thereby stop its spread?
         A.K. – They would only defeat themselves a little faster
because the use of force is the argument of those who have nothing
good to say. If Spiritism is a passing fancy, it will fall by itself
without anyone having to go to so much trouble; if they persecute
it, it is because they fear it, and they fear only what is authentic. If
it is a reality, it is, as I have already said, a part of nature itself, and
a law of nature cannot be revoked with the stroke of a pen.
         If Spirit manifestations were the privilege of one individual,
there’s no doubt that if that individual were gotten out of the way,
it would put an end to the manifestations. Unfortunately for its
opponents, such manifestations are not a mystery to anyone; there
is nothing secret or occult; everything happens in the full light of
day; they are at everyone’s disposal, from the palace to the hovel.
One might prohibit obtaining them in public, but we know for
certain that it is not in public that they are best produced, but in

                                    120

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


private. Therefore, since anyone may be a medium, who could
prevent a family in their home, an individual in the silence of
his or her own study, or the prisoner who is locked away, from
communicating with spirits without the henchmen’s knowledge
and right under their noses? Even if a government were strong
enough to put a stop to them, would it be able to stop its neighbors
and the entire world since there is not a single country in the two
hemispheres where there are no mediums?
       Furthermore, Spiritism’s source is not to be found among
humans; it is the work of the Spirits, who can neither be burned
nor put in prison. It rests on individual belief and not on societies,
which are not necessary. If they succeeded in destroying all the
Spiritist books, the Spirits would dictate them all over again.
       To sum up, Spiritism today is an assured fact; it has won
its place in the public eye and among philosophical doctrines.
Therefore, those who do not appreciate it must be prepared to see it
all around them, even though they are perfectly free not to accept it.




                                  121


               Third Dialogue
                           The Priest
        A Priest – Would you kindly permit me to ask you a few
questions on my part?
        Allan Kardec. – Gladly. But before answering you, I think
I should let you know how I intend to discuss matters with you.
        First, I must say that I have no intention whatsoever of
converting you to our ideas. If you want to know about them in
detail, you will find them in the books where they have already
been explained. You can study them at your leisure and feel free to
accept or reject them.
        The goal of Spiritism is to combat disbelief and its disastrous
consequences while providing obvious proofs for the existence of
the soul and future life. It thus speaks to those who believe in
nothing at all or those who doubt; and their numbers are large, as
you know. Those who have religious faith, and for whom such faith
is sufficient, do not need Spiritism. To those who say, “I believe in
the authority of the Church and I shall hold to what it teaches,
without looking further,” Spiritism replies that it does not impose
itself on anyone and has not come to force any conviction.
        Freedom of conscience is one consequence of freedom
of thought, which is one of the attributes of human beings;
Spiritism would be in conflict with its own principles of charity
and tolerance if it did not respect this freedom. For Spiritism,
every belief, if it is sincere and does not lead people to do wrong
to their neighbor, is respectable, even if erroneous. For example,

                                 123

                                Chapter I


if people were to find their consciences telling them to believe
that it is the sun that orbits around the earth, we would say to
them: Believe it if you like, because it will not keep the earth from
orbiting the sun. Just as we do not try to violate your conscience,
do not try to violate other people’s consciences. If you make an
innocuous belief into an instrument of persecution, it becomes
harmful and should be opposed.
       That, Reverend, is the line of conduct I have followed with
the clergy of several denominations who have addressed me. When
they question me about certain points of the Doctrine, I provide
them with the explanations they need, but I avoid arguing about
certain dogmas that Spiritism is not concerned with; thus, they
are all free to make their own evaluations. However, I have never
sought them out with the desire to undermine their faith through
any kind of pressure. Those who come to us as brothers, we
welcome as brothers; those who reject us, we leave in peace. This is
the advice I always give to Spiritists because I have never approved
of those who believe it their mission to convert the clergy. I always
tell them: Sow in the field of the disbelievers because there is an
ample harvest to gather.
       Spiritism does not impose itself because, as I have said, it
respects freedom of conscience. Moreover, it understands that
any imposed belief is superficial and gives only the appearances
of faith, but it is not real faith. It lays out its principles in front of
everyone so that all may form an opinion with full knowledge of
the facts. Those who accept its principles, whether they are clergy
or laity, do so freely because they find them to be rational. But we
in no way trouble ourselves with those who are not of our opinion.
If there is a struggle between the Church and Spiritism nowadays,
we know that we are not the ones who caused it.
       Priest – If the Church sees the rise of a new doctrine and
believes its principles condemnable according to the Church’s


                                   124

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


conscience, do you question its right to discuss them and fight
them, and to caution the faithful against what it regards as error?
       A.K. – In no way do we question a right that we ourselves
claim. If the Church would confine itself to the limits of the
discussion, there would be nothing to be concerned about. But
read most of the writings issued by its members or published in
the name of religion, in addition to the sermons that have been
preached, and you will see offense and slander bursting forth far
and wide, and the principles of the Doctrine undeservedly and
maliciously misrepresented. Haven’t we heard from atop the pulpit
that its adherents are enemies of society and the public order? That
those whom it has brought back to the faith are to be anathematized
and rejected by the Church because it is better to be a disbeliever
than to believe in God and the soul through Spiritism? Hasn’t it
been lamented that there are no Inquisition-type burnings-at-the-
stake for Spiritists? In certain locations, haven’t they singled them
out for the reprehension of their fellow citizens, even urging them
to pursue and insult them in the streets? Haven’t they enjoined all
the faithful to flee from them like the plague, dissuading domestic
servants from going to work for them? Haven’t women been
urged to leave their husbands, and husbands to leave their wives
because of Spiritism? Haven’t they caused employees to lose their
jobs, depriving workers of their wages and the unfortunate of the
bread of charity because they are Spiritists? Haven’t they even sent
the blind away from certain almshouses because they wouldn’t
renounce their beliefs? Tell me, Reverend, is that fair treatment?
Have Spiritists answered insult with insult, wrong with wrong?
No. They have applied calm and moderation. Public awareness has
already absolved them of being the aggressors.
       Priest – Any sane person would deplore such excesses, but
the Church shouldn’t be held responsible for the abuses committed
by some of its less informed members.


                                  125

                                           Chapter I


        A. K. – I agree, but aren’t these less informed members the
leaders of the Church? Look at the pastoral letter of the Bishop
of Algiers23 and a few others. Wasn’t it a bishop who ordered the
book-burning in Barcelona?24 Don’t the higher level ecclesiastical
authorities have all the power over their subordinates? If the
Church thus tolerates sermons unworthy of the evangelical pulpit,
if it favors the publication of offensive and defamatory writings
against a class of citizens, and if it does not oppose persecutions
practiced in the name of religion, it is because it approves of them.
        In sum, by systematically turning away Spiritists who return
to it, the Church has forced them to withdraw unto themselves. By
the nature and violence of its attacks, it has widened the discussion
and taken it to new ground. Spiritism is merely a philosophical
doctrine; it is the Church itself that has caused it to grow by
presenting it as a dreaded enemy. Lastly, it is the Church itself that
has proclaimed it a new religion. That was a blunder, but passion
does not reason.
        A Free Thinker – You have proclaimed freedom of thought
and conscience and have declared that every sincere belief is
respectable. Materialism is a belief like any other; why shouldn’t it
enjoy the freedom you grant to all the others?
        A.K. – Everyone is certainly free to believe as they please or to
believe in nothing at all, and we would no more excuse persecution
against those who believe in nothingness after death than against a
schismatic from any religion. In combating materialism, we attack
23
      “Circular Letter and Ordinance of the Bishop of Algiers on the Superstition called
     Spiritualism” – August 18, 1863, signed by Louis Antoine-Augustin, Bishop of Algiers. – Tr.
24
      A modern-day book-burning held on the morning of October 9, 1861 on the Barcelona
     Esplanade. The difference between this burning and the fiery executions of earlier
     centuries was that the early victims were humans, while these were all the books,
     pamphlets, and works of a Spiritualist character that could be found at that period of
     the movement. Resting on the “funeral pyre” were the writings of Allan Kardec and Baron
     Ludwig von Guldenstubbe, some copies of English and American Spiritualist papers, and
     a large collection of tracts issued by Spaning Spiritualists. http://www.novelguide.com/a/
     discover/eop_02/eop_02_04226.html. – Tr.



                                               126

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


not individuals, but a doctrine, which, if harmless to society when
confined to the conscience of educated people, turns into a social
calamity if it becomes widespread.
       The belief that everything ends for human beings at death,
that all solidarity ceases when physical life ceases, leads us to
regard sacrificing our present welfare on behalf of someone else
as pure nonsense; hence the maxim: “Every man for himself
because there is nothing after this life.” In other words, charity,
fraternity and morality have no basis, no reason for being.
Why inconvenience, restrain and deprive ourselves today, when
tomorrow, perhaps, we will be no more? The denial of the
future and the mere doubt about the future life are the greatest
stimulants of selfishness, the source of most of humankind’s ills.
A great deal of virtue is needed to keep us from falling into vice
and crime, with no restraint other than our will-power. Human
respect might restrain men and women of the world, but not
those for whom the fear of public opinion is nil.
       Belief in the future life, demonstrating the continuation of
relationships between individuals, establishes a solidarity that does
not stop at the grave; thus, it changes the course of ideas. If this
belief were nothing but a “man of straw,” it would be temporary;
but since its reality is a fact derived from experience, then, in the
interest of the social order, it is an obligation to spread it and strive
against the opposite belief. This is what Spiritism does, and it
does so with success because it provides proof, and because people
would surely prefer the certainty of the continuation of life and
of being able to live happily on a better world as compensation
for the miseries of this one, as opposed to believing in being
dead forever. The thought of being erased from existence forever,
of believing that their children and those dear to them are lost
with no possibility of coming back, puts a smile on a very small
number of faces, believe me. That is why attacks against Spiritism


                                   127

                               Chapter I


in the name of disbelief have had such little success and have not
weakened it for an instant.
       Priest – Religion teaches all of that, and until now it has
been sufficient. Why is there a need for a new doctrine?
       A.K. – If religion is sufficient, why are there so many
disbelievers, religiously speaking? It is true that religion teaches us
and tells us to believe, but there are so many people who do not
believe in words alone! Spiritism proves and enables us to see what
religion teaches through theory. Moreover, where do these proofs
come from? From spirit manifestations. Well now, it is likely that
spirits manifest only with God’s permission; thus, if God, out of
divine mercy, sends this aid to people to draw them out of disbelief,
it would be impious to reject it.
       Priest – But you cannot deny the fact that Spiritism is not in
agreement with religion on all points.
       A.K – Goodness, Reverend! All religions say the same thing:
Protestantism, Judaism, Islam, as well as Catholicism.
       If Spiritism denied the existence of God, the soul, the soul’s
individuality and immortality, future rewards and punishments,
and free will; if it taught that we are on this world only for
ourselves and that we should think only of ourselves, it would
not be only contrary to Catholicism, but all the religions of the
world; it would be the negation of all moral laws, the foundations
of human society. Far from it. The Spirits proclaim a sole God
who is supremely just and good. They say that human beings
are free and are responsible for their actions, and that they are
rewarded and punished according to the good or evil they have
done. They place above all other virtues evangelical charity and
this sublime rule taught by Christ: “Do unto others as you would
have them do unto you.” Aren’t these the foundations of every
religion? And the Spirits have done even more: they have initiated
us into the mysteries of the future life, which for us is no longer


                                 128

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


an abstraction but a reality. Those whom we ourselves once knew
have come back to describe their situations to us and to tell us
how and why they suffer or are happy. What is anti-religious about
that? This certainty of the future, of meeting our loved ones once
again – is that not comforting? Isn’t the magnificence of the spirit
life – which is our essence – compared with the paltry anxieties of
earthly life enough to make us lift up our souls and to encourage
us toward the good?
       Priest – Regarding general matters, I agree that Spiritism is
consistent with the great truths of Christianity; but does the same
apply from the dogma point of view? Doesn’t it contradict certain
principles that the Church teaches us?
       A.K. – Spiritism is, above all, a science and does not
concern itself with dogmatic issues at all. This science has
moral consequences as do all philosophical sciences. Are these
consequences good or bad? We can judge them by the general
principles I just mentioned. A lot of people are mistaken about the
true character of Spiritism. The matter is serious enough to merit
some further discussion.
       First, let us cite a comparison: electricity, present in nature,
has existed throughout time, and throughout time it has produced
the effects that we are familiar with and many that we are not yet
familiar with. Ignorant of the true cause, people used to explain
these effects in a more or less bizarre way. The discovery of electricity
and its properties has undermined a host of absurd theories, while
shedding light on more than one of nature’s mysteries. What
electricity and the physical sciences in general have done for certain
phenomena, Spiritism has done for phenomena of a different order.
       Spiritism is founded on the existence of an invisible world
made up of incorporeal beings who populate space, and who are
none other than the souls of those who used to live on the earth or
on other spheres, where they left their material envelopes behind.


                                   129

                              Chapter I


We call these beings spirits. They surround us continuously,
exerting a great influence on people without them even being
aware of it; they play a very active role in the mental world, and up
to a point in the physical world. Spiritism is therefore contained
in nature, and we may say that, for a certain order of ideas, it is
a power, just as electricity is a power from another point of view,
and gravity from yet another. The phenomena, whose source is
the invisible world, have in fact been produced throughout time;
that is why the history of every culture mentions them. As with
electricity, only in their ignorance did people attribute these
phenomena to more or less-rational causes and give free reign to
their imaginations regarding them.
       Spiritism has been studied more thoroughly since its
popularization and has shed light on a multitude of questions
formerly insolvable or misunderstood. Its true character is
therefore that of a science and not of a religion, and the proof is
that it counts among its adherents people of all faiths who have not
had to renounce their convictions because of it: devout Catholics
who do not in any way neglect all the duties of their creed – as
long as they are not rebuffed by their Church; Protestants of all
denominations, Jews, Muslims, even Buddhists and Brahmans.
       Therefore, Spiritism rests on principles independent of
any dogmatic nature. Its moral consequences are those found
in Christianity because Christianity is the clearest and purest of
all doctrines. Furthermore, it is for this reason that, of all the
religious sects in the world, Christians are the most capable of
understanding Spiritism in its true essence. Can we blame it
because of this? Of course, everyone can make a religion of their
opinions and interpret known religions as they please, but from
there to establishing a new church there is a great distance.
       Priest – But don’t you perform evocations according to
some religious formula?


                                130

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


       A.K. – Of course, we bring a religious sentiment to the
evocations and to our meetings, but there is no sacramental formula;
for spirits, thought is everything and form is nothing. We call them
in God’s name because we believe in God and we know that nothing
is done in this world without his permission, and that if God does
not allow them to come, they will not come. We proceed with our
work calmly and thoughtfully, first because it is a necessary condition
for observations, and second because we know the respect we owe to
those who no longer live on earth, whatever their circumstances may
be, happy or unhappy, in the spirit world. We evoke good spirits
because, knowing there are good ones and evil ones, we do not want
the latter to come and interfere deceitfully in the communications
we receive. What does all this prove? That we are not atheists, but it
does not at all imply that we are religionists.
       Priest – Well then! What do the high order spirits say about
religion? The good ones ought to advise and guide us. Suppose I
have no religion and I want to choose one. What would they say
if I were to ask them: Would you advise me to become a Catholic,
Protestant, Anglican, Quaker, Jew, Muslim or Mormon?
       A.K. – There are two points to consider regarding religions:
the general principles common to all of them, and the principles
peculiar to each one. The former are those we have been speaking of
thus far; those that all spirits proclaim, regardless of their order. As
for the latter, average spirits, although not evil, may have preferences
and opinions; they may advocate this or that form. Thus, they may
encourage certain practices either from personal conviction, whether
from ideas retained from earthly life, or whether out of prudence so as
not to frighten timid consciences. Do you believe, for example, that an
enlightened spirit – maybe Fenelon himself – in addressing Muslims
would tell them inappropriately that Mohammed was an impostor,
and that they will be damned if they do not become Christians? He
would refrain from doing so, because he would be rejected.


                                  131

                               Chapter I


        In general, when not asked to address a matter specifically,
high order spirits do not concern themselves with particulars.
They limit themselves to saying: “God is good and just; God
wants only the good.” The best of all religions, therefore, is that
which teaches only what conforms to God’s goodness and justice;
which entails the broadest, most sublime idea about God and
does not lessen him by attributing human narrow-mindedness
and passions to him; which renders people good and virtuous and
teaches them all to love each other as brothers and sisters; which
condemns every wrong done to one’s neighbor; which does not
authorize injustice under any form or pretext; which does not
prescribe anything contrary to the immutable laws of nature, for
God cannot contradict himself; whose clergy embody the best
example of goodness, charity, and morality; the one that best
pursues the struggle against selfishness and least flatters people’s
pride and vanity; and lastly, in whose name the least amount of
evil is committed, for a good religion cannot be the pretext for
any evil whatsoever – it must not leave any door open to it, either
directly or by interpretation. Observe, judge and choose.
        Priest – I suppose that certain points of the Catholic doctrine
are contested by spirits you regard as being of a high order. I
suppose that these points may actually be erroneous; according to
these same spirits, for those for whom they are articles of faith –
whether right or wrong – and who practice them accordingly, can
such a belief be harmful to their salvation?
        A.K. – Certainly not, if such belief does not deter them from
doing good, and if, on the contrary, it prompts them to do so. On the
other hand, the best-founded belief will obviously harm their faith
if it gives them occasion to do evil, to be lacking in charity toward
their neighbor, and if it makes them hard and selfish, because then
they are not acting according to the law of God, and God considers
thoughts before acts. Who would dare think otherwise?


                                 132

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


       For example, regarding those who might believe
wholeheartedly in God, but in God’s name commit acts that are
inhumane or contrary to charity, do you think that their faith will
do them any good? Aren’t they all the more blameworthy because
their means of being enlightened are all the greater?
       Priest – So devoted Catholics who scrupulously fulfill the
duties of their creed are not condemned by the Spirits?
       A.K. – No, if it is a matter of conscience for them, and if
they do so with sincerity. But yes – a thousand times yes – if it is
out of hypocrisy, and if it displays only the appearance of piety.
       High order spirits, those whose mission is the progress of
humankind, rise up against every abuse that might hinder such
progress, regardless of the nature of the abuse and regardless of which
individuals or social classes may profit from it. Now you cannot deny
the fact that religion has not always been exempt from this. Even if
among its clergy there are those who fulfill their mission with true
Christian devotion, who render their mission grand, beautiful and
respectable, you will have to agree that not all have always fulfilled
the sanctity of their ministry. The Spirits are opposed to evil wherever
it may be found. Is pointing out the abuses of religion the same as
attacking it? Religion has no greater enemies than those who defend
such abuses, for they are what give rise to the thought that something
better can replace it. If religion is in danger, we have to lay the blame
on those who offer a false idea of it, transforming it into a battleground
of human passions, and who exploit it to further their ambitions.
       Priest – You say that Spiritism does not argue over dogma,
and yet it accepts certain points contested by the Church, such
as reincarnation and the presence of humans on the earth before
Adam. It also denies eternal punishment, the existence of demons,
purgatory, and the fires of hell.
       A.K. – These points have been argued over for a long time,
and it is not only Spiritism that has questioned them; they are


                                   133

                              Chapter I


merely opinions, some of which are considered controversial
even by theology and which only the future will settle. One great
principle governs them all: the practice of the good, which is the
higher law, the essential sine qua non condition for our future, as
proved by the condition of the spirits who communicate with us.
While waiting for light to be shed on these questions, believe, if
you wish, in flames and material tortures if doing so keeps you
from doing evil. But that will not render them more real if they
do not actually exist. Believe that we have only one corporeal
existence if it pleases you: that will not prevent you from being
born again here or elsewhere if that is really the way it is, and
despite what you might think. Believe that the world was fully
created in six twenty-four hour days if that is your opinion: that
will not keep the earth from bearing proof to the contrary in its
geological layers. Believe, if you wish, that Joshua stopped the sun:
that will not stop the earth in its orbit. Believe that humankind
has been on the earth for only 6,000 years: that will not keep
the facts from showing that that is impossible. And what would
you say if one fine day this inexorable geology produces obvious
evidence that demonstrates the anteriority of humankind, just as
it has demonstrated so many other things? So believe in anything
you like, even in the Devil, if such belief enables you to be good,
humane and charitable toward your fellow beings. As a moral
doctrine, Spiritism imposes only one thing: the necessity of doing
good and not doing evil. It is a science of observation, which, I
repeat, has moral consequences, and these consequences are the
confirmation and proof of the great principles of religion. As for
the secondary questions, it leaves those to each one’s conscience.
       Be mindful of the fact, sir, that Spiritism does not dispute
in principle some of the different points of which you just spoke.
If you had read everything that I have written on the subject,
you would have seen that it is limited to giving such points a


                                134

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


more logical and rational explanation than the one commonly
given. This is why it does not deny purgatory, for example; on
the contrary, it demonstrates its necessity and justice. But it does
even more – it defines what purgatory is. Hell has been described
as an immense furnace, but is that really how scholarly theology
understands it? Obviously not; it says quite clearly that it is
merely a symbol and that the fire in which one burns is a mental
fire, a symbol of the greatest sorrows.
        As for eternal punishment, if it were possible to survey
the personal opinion of all individuals in a position to reason or
understand – even among the most devout – we would see on
what side the majority is because the idea of eternal torment is a
denial of God’s infinite mercy.
        Moreover, let’s see what the Spiritist doctrine says on the
subject:
        The length of the punishment depends on the improvement
of the guilty spirit. No condemnation for a set time is pronounced
against it. What God requires of it to bring its suffering to an
end is repentance, expiation, and reparation; in other words, a
serious, effective improvement and a sincere return to the good.
The spirit is thus the arbiter of its own fate; it can prolong its
suffering by its obstinacy in evil, or it can mitigate or shorten it
through its efforts to do good.
        Since the length of the punishment depends on repentance,
it follows that the guilty spirit who did not repent and never
improved itself would continue to suffer, and that for it, the
punishment would be eternal. Eternal punishment should thus be
understood in the relative and not the absolute sense.
        A condition inherent to low order spirits is that they cannot
see the end of their situation and so they think that they will have to
suffer forever; for them it is a punishment. But as soon as their soul
opens up to repentance, God enables them to glimpse a ray of hope.


                                  135

                              Chapter I


       This doctrine obviously conforms more to God’s justice,
which punishes as long as we persist in evil and pardons when
we enter the path of the good. Who devised this doctrine? Was
it us? No. It was the Spirits, who teach and demonstrate it by the
examples they set before us each and every day.
       Therefore, spirits do not deny future punishment – they
have described their own sufferings; and this description has more
impact on us than that of never-ending fire, because everything
about it is perfectly logical. We understand that it is possible, that
it must be so, and that such a situation is a completely natural
consequence of things; it can be accepted by the philosophical
thinker because there is nothing about it that clashes with reason.
That is why Spiritist beliefs have brought a multitude of people
back to the good – even materialists, whom the fear of hell, as it
has been depicted, had not been able to restrain.
       Priest – Even if I were to accept your reasoning, don’t you
think ordinary people need images that are more frightening than
a philosophy they can’t understand?
       A.K. – That is an error that has created more than one
materialist, or at the very least, has turned more than one person
away from religion. There comes a time when such images are no
longer frightening, and then people who do not bother to delve
into the matter more deeply after rejecting one aspect end up
rejecting the whole and say to themselves: If they have taught me
a false principle as an indisputable truth, if they have given me an
image, a symbol as being the reality, who says the rest is any more
truthful? On the contrary, if reason, as it increases, does not reject
anything, faith is strengthened thereby. Religion will always gain
by following the progress of ideas. If someday it runs into peril,
it will be because humans have advanced while it has remained
behind. It is a mistake in this day and age to believe that people
can be led by means of fear of the Devil and eternal tortures.


                                 136

                      A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


        Priest – The Church indeed recognizes nowadays that
physical hell is just a symbol, but that does not rule out the
existence of demons; without them, how can one explain the
influence of evil, which cannot come from God?
        A.K. – Spiritism does not believe in demons in the popular
sense of the word, but it does believe in evil spirits who are no better
and who do as much harm by arousing evil thoughts. Spiritism only
states that these are not separate beings, created for evil and perpetually
devoted to it as some kind of outcasts of creation and tormentors
of humankind. They are less-evolved, still-imperfect beings, but for
whom God reserves a future. That is in agreement with the Orthodox
Church, which believes in the conversion of Satan, an allusion to the
improvement of evil spirits. Note further that the word demon does
not imply the idea of evil spirits except through the modern meaning
that has been given to it, because the Greek word daimon means
genius, intelligence. Now, to admit communications from evil spirits
is to recognize in principle the reality of spirit manifestations. Next,
we must find out if only evil spirits communicate, which the Church
uses as its reason to prohibit communicating with spirits. Here we call
upon both reasoning and the facts. If spirits, whatever they may be,
communicate, it is only with God’s permission: are we to understand
that God allows only the evil ones to communicate? How could
that be? If he gives them full liberty to come and deceive humans,
would he prohibit the good ones from coming as a counterweight to
neutralize their pernicious teachings? Wouldn’t believing such a thing
call into question God’s power and goodness and make Satan a rival
to the Divinity? The Bible, the Gospel and the Church Fathers fully
recognize the possibility of communicating with the invisible world,
and that good spirits are not excluded from that world; so why would
they be excluded nowadays? Moreover, by accepting the authenticity of
certain apparitions and communications from the saints, the Church
is thus rejecting the idea that we can communicate only with evil


                                   137

                                   Chapter I


spirits. When communications contain only good things; when they
preach the purest and most sublime evangelical morals, selflessness,
disinterest and love toward our neighbor; when they fight evil, no
matter in what shade it presents itself, is it really rational to believe
that malicious spirits have thereby come to perform their work?
        Priest – The New Testament teaches us that the angel of
darkness, or Satan, can transform himself into an angel of light to
seduce people.
        A.K. – According to Spiritism and the opinion of many Christian
philosophers, Satan is not a real being; he is the personification of evil, just
as Saturn used to be the personification of time. The Church takes this
allegorical figure literally; it is a matter of opinion that I will not discuss.
Let us say, for a moment, that Satan is a real being; by exaggerating his
power in order to frighten people, the Church achieves a completely
different result, i.e. one of the destruction not only of all fear, but also
of all belief in his person, according to the proverb: “Those who wish
to prove too much prove nothing at all.” The Church represents Satan
as eminently clever, skilful, and cunning; however, when it comes to
Spiritism, the Church makes him play the role of an inept and a fool.
        Since Satan’s goal is to feed hell with his victims and to steal
souls from God, we can see why he busies himself with those who
are on the path of the good to lead them into evil. And to do
so, according to a beautiful allegory, he transforms himself into
an angel of light; that is, he hypocritically feigns virtue; what is
incomprehensible, however, is why he would let those he already
has in his clutches escape. Those who believe in neither God nor
the soul, who scorn prayer and are immersed in vice, already belong
to Satan as much as is possible. He has nothing further to do to
sink them deeper in the mire; thus, to encourage them to return
to God, to pray to him, to submit to his will, and to encourage
them to renounce evil while showing them the happiness of the
elect and the sad fate that awaits the wicked would be the act of a


                                      138

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


fool, which would be more stupid than if we were to give freedom
to caged birds with the thought of catching them again afterward.
       Therefore, in the doctrine of exclusive communication with
demons, there is a contradiction that strikes all sensible people. That
is why no one could ever be persuaded that spirits who lead back to
God those who used to deny him and used to do evil; that spirits
who console the afflicted, give strength and courage to the weak,
and who, by the sublimity of their teachings, raise the soul above
material life, are Satan’s accomplices, and that on such grounds we
ought to interdict all relations with the invisible world.
       Priest – If the Church forbids communications with the
spirits of the dead, it is because they are against religion, since
they are formally condemned by the Gospels and by Moses. The
latter, declaring the death penalty against such practices, proves
how reprehensible they are in God’s eyes.
       A.K. – I beg your pardon, but this prohibition is not found
anywhere in the Gospels; it is found only in the Mosaic Law. It is
thus a matter of knowing if the Church puts the Mosaic Law above
the law of the Gospels; or to put it another way, if the Church
is more Jewish than Christian. It is also worth noting that of all
religions, the one that opposes Spiritism the least is Judaism, and
that it has not resorted to the Mosaic Law, upon which Christian
denominations rest their opinion, to prohibit evocations. If biblical
instructions are the code of the Christian faith, why prohibit the
reading of the Bible? What would be said of forbidding a citizen
from studying the law code of his or her own country?
       The reason for Moses’ prohibition was that the Hebrew
lawmaker wanted his people to break with all the customs they
had acquired while among the Egyptians, and the one we are
discussing here was a subject of abuse. The dead were not evoked
out of respect and affection for them, or out of a sentiment of piety,
but as a means of fortunetelling, the object of shameful dealings


                                  139

                               Chapter I


exploited by charlatanism and superstition. Moses was therefore
right to prohibit it. If he pronounced a severe punishment against
this abuse, it was because he needed harsh means to govern his
unruly people; also, the death penalty was widely used in his
lawmaking. One wrongly leans on the severity of the punishment
in order to prove the degree of culpability in evoking the dead.
        If the argument against evoking the dead comes from God
himself – as the Church claims – it must have been God who decreed
the penalty of death against offenders. The death penalty therefore
has an origin as sacred as the prohibition. So why hasn’t it been
preserved? Moses promulgated all his laws in the name of God and
under God’s orders. If we believe that God is their author, why are
they no longer observed? If Moses’ law is for the Church an article of
faith at one point, why isn’t it an article of faith at every point? Why
resort to it for what we need, but then reject it when it is unsuitable?
Why not follow all its regulations; for instance, circumcision, to
which Jesus himself submitted and did not abolish?
        There were two parts to the Mosaic Law: first, the law of
God, summarized in the Sinai tablets, which has remained because
it is divine, and which Christ only developed further; second, the
civil or criminal law, appropriate for the customs of the time, and
which Christ abolished.
        Today, circumstances are no longer the same, and Moses’
prohibition has no reason to be. Moreover, if the Church forbids
evoking spirits, can it prevent them from coming without being
called? Every day, don’t we see people who have never been
involved in Spiritism, and who knew nothing about it before it
was divulged, experiencing manifestations of all kinds?
        Another contradiction: if Moses prohibited evoking the
spirits of the dead, it was because such spirits could, in fact, come;
otherwise, his prohibition would have been needless. If they were
able to come in his time, they still can today. And if they are spirits


                                  140

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


of the dead, then they are not demons exclusively. We must be
logical above all.
       Priest – The Church does not deny that good spirits can
communicate, since it acknowledges that saints have manifested.
But it cannot consider as good those who come in order to
contradict its immutable principles. The Spirits teach of future
punishment and reward, but they do not teach as the Church does;
the Church alone can judge the spirits’ teachings and distinguish
the good from the evil.
       A.K. – That is the big question. Galileo was accused of heresy
and of being inspired by the Devil because he revealed a law of
nature that proved the error of a belief regarded as unassailable; he
was condemned and excommunicated. If the Spirits had concurred
with the Church’s exclusive point of view, and if they had not
proclaimed freedom of conscience and condemned certain abuses,
they would have been welcomed by the Church and would not
have been regarded as demons.
       This is also the reason why all religions – Islam as well as
Catholicism – believe themselves to be in the exclusive possession
of the absolute truth, and why they regard any doctrine that is not
completely orthodox from their point of view as the work of the
Devil. Now, the Spirits have not come to overthrow religion, but
like Galileo, to reveal new laws of nature. If some points of faith
are disputed because of this, it is because they are in conflict with
these laws, as in the case of belief in the sun’s movement. The issue
is in knowing if an article of faith can annul a law of nature, which
is the work of God. And if this law is acknowledged, wouldn’t it
be wiser to interpret dogma in light of it instead of attributing it
to the Devil?
       Priest – Let’s leave the issue of demons; I know that it
has been diversely interpreted by the theologians. The theory of
reincarnation, on the other hand, seems more difficult to reconcile


                                  141

                                            Chapter I


with dogma because it is nothing more than metempsychosis
taken afresh from Pythagoras.
      A.K. – Now is not the time to discuss an issue that would
require a long explanation. You can find it discussed in The Spirits’
Book and in The Gospel according to Spiritism.25 I will say only a few
words about it.
      The metempsychosis of the ancients consisted in the
transmigration of humans’ souls into animals, which would imply
degradation. Besides, this doctrine was not what is commonly
believed. Transmigration into animals was not considered a
condition inherent to the nature of the human soul, but as a
temporary punishment; thus, the souls of murderers would pass
into the bodies of savage beasts to receive their punishment
therein; those of the unchaste, into swine and wild boar; those
of the inconstant and inconsistent, into birds; those of the lazy
and ignorant, into aquatic animals. After a few thousand of years,
more or less, according to the culpability of this kind of prison, the
soul would re-enter humanity. Animal reincarnation was therefore
not an absolute condition, and we can see that it was allied with
human reincarnation. The proof of it is that the punishment of
timid men would consist in passing into the bodies of women to
be exposed to scorn and insults.26 It was a kind of bogeyman for
the simple-minded, much more than an article of faith among
philosophers. Just as one says to children: “If you are naughty, the
wolf will eat you,” the ancients said to criminals: “You will turn
into wolves.” Today they say: “The Devil will get you and carry
you off to hell.”
      The plurality of existences, according to Spiritism, differs
essentially from metempsychosis in that it does not accept the

25
      See The Spirits’ Book, nos. 166 ff., ibid, 222 and 1010. Later titled The Gospel according to
     Spiritism, chaps. IV and VI. – Auth.
26
     See La pluralité des existences de l’âme, by Pezzani. – Auth.



                                                142

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


incarnation of souls into animals, even as a punishment. The
Spirits teach that the soul does not regress, but that it progresses
continuously. Its different corporeal lives take place in humanity;
each existence is a step forward on its path of intellectual and
moral progress – which is quite different from metempsychosis.
Not being able to acquire full development in one sole existence,
frequently shortened by accidental causes, God allows it to use a
new incarnation either to finish the task it was unable to finish or
to start over what it had done badly. Expiation in the corporeal
body consists of the tribulations one endures while in it.
        As for the issue of knowing if the plurality of existences is
or is not contrary to certain dogmas of the Church, I will limit
myself to saying that one of two things is true: either reincarnation
exists or it does not; if it does, it is within the laws of nature. In
order to prove that it does not exist, we would have to prove that
it is contrary not to dogma but to such laws, and that we can
find another law that would explain more clearly and logically the
questions that only reincarnation can solve.
        Moreover, it is easy to demonstrate that certain dogmas
find a rational endorsement in reincarnation that renders them
acceptable to those who used to reject them because they did
not understand them. So it’s not a matter of destroying, but of
interpreting. This will occur later by necessity. Those who will not
accept the interpretation will be perfectly free, as they are today,
to believe that it is the sun that revolves around the earth. The
idea of the plurality of existences is becoming popularized with
astonishing speed because of its sound logic and its conformity
with God’s justice. Once it is acknowledged as a natural truth and
accepted by everyone, what will the Church do?
        In sum, reincarnation is not a doctrine invented for the needs
of a cause, nor is it a personal opinion. It either is or isn’t a fact.
If it is demonstrated that there are certain things that are materially


                                  143

                               Chapter I


impossible without reincarnation, we must accept the fact that they are
the result of reincarnation, because if it is part of nature, it cannot
be annulled by an opposing opinion.
       Priest – According to spirits, are those who do not believe in
them or their manifestations less fortunate in the next life?
       A.K. – If this belief were indispensable for people’s salvation,
what would become of those who, since the world began, have not
held it, and those who, for a long time to come, will die without
holding it? Could God close the door of the future to them?
No, the Spirits who teach us are more logical than that; they tell
us: God is supremely just and good and does not make people’s
future destinies depend on conditions outside their will; they do
not say: Without Spiritism there is no salvation, but like Christ:
Without charity there is no salvation.
       Priest – Then allow me to tell you that, since the Spirits teach
only the principles of the morals we find in the Gospel, I do not see
of what use Spiritism can be since we used to be able to be saved
before it and we still can be without it. That would not be the case if
the Spirits had come to teach some great new truths, some principles
that would change the face of the world as Christ did. At least Christ
did it by himself alone and his doctrine was unique, whereas there
are spirits by the thousands who contradict each other; some say
white; others, black. From this it follows that, from the beginning,
their adherents have formed many sects. Wouldn’t it be better to
leave spirits alone and hold on to what we already have?
       A.K. – You are mistaken, sir, not to abandon your point
of view of taking the Church as the sole criterion of human
knowledge. If Christ spoke the truth, Spiritism could not do
otherwise; and instead of throwing stones at it, it should be
welcomed as a powerful auxiliary that has come to confirm,
through all the voices beyond the grave, the fundamental truths
of religion that have been refuted by disbelief. For materialism to


                                 144

                    A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


fight against Spiritism is understandable, but for the Church to
unite with materialism against it is inconceivable. What is just as
inconsistent is that the Church labels as demonic a teaching that
is based on the same authority and proclaims the divine mission
of the founder of Christianity.
       But did Christ say all there was to say? Could he reveal
everything? No, because he himself said: “I still have many things
to tell you, but you would not understand them, which is why I
speak to you in parables.” Spiritism has come at this time – now
that people are mature enough to understand it – to complete
and explain what Christ touched upon only lightly, or spoke
about only in allegorical form. Of course, you will say that the
responsibility for this belongs to the Church. But to which one? To
the Roman, Orthodox or Protestant Church? Since they are not
in agreement, each one has given its own explanation and claimed
this privilege. Which one has managed to unify all the dissident
denominations? God is wise, and foreseeing that humans would
get their passions and prejudices involved, he did not want to
entrust them with the care of this new revelation. He entrusted it
to spirits, his messengers, who have proclaimed it to every corner
of the globe and apart from any particular denomination so that it
could apply to all of them, and so that no one could turn it to his
or her own advantage.
       On the other hand, haven’t the many Christian denominations
turned away from the path traced out by Christ? Are his moral
precepts scrupulously observed? Haven’t his words been twisted to
make them an argument for ambition and human passions when,
in fact, they are a condemnation of them? Spiritism, on the other
hand, through the voice of the Spirits sent by God, has come to
call for the strict observation of his precepts by those who have
turned away from them. Mightn’t this last motive in particular be
the one that qualifies it as the work of Satan?!


                                 145

                              Chapter I


       You are wrongly giving the name sect to a few differences of
opinions related to spirit phenomena. For many, at the beginning
of any science, when the observations are still incomplete, it isn’t
at all surprising that contradictory theories would arise; but such
theories rest on details and not on the fundamental principle.
Schools can thus explain certain facts in their own way, but these are
no more sects than the different systems that divide our scholars
regarding the exact sciences, such as in medicine, physics, etc. So
delete the word sect because it is entirely inaccurate for the case in
question. Moreover, hasn’t Christianity given birth to a multitude
of sects since its inception? Why hasn’t the word of Christ been
powerful enough to impose silence on every controversy? Why is
it susceptible to interpretations that still divide Christians today
into different churches, each claiming to be the sole keeper of the
truth necessary for salvation, cordially detesting each other and
denouncing each other in the name of their Divine Master, who
preached only love and charity? Human weakness, will you say? So
be it; how can you expect Spiritism to triumph suddenly over this
weakness and transform humanity as though by magic?
       Now, I will address the question of usefulness. You stated
that Spiritism teaches us nothing new; that is an error. It teaches a
great deal to those who do not stop at the surface. Moreover, had
it done nothing more than to put the maxim: Without charity there
is no salvation, which unites people, in the place of Without the
Church there is no salvation, which divides them, that alone would
have marked a new era for humankind.
       You also stated that we could do without Spiritism. Agreed.
Just like we could do without a multitude of scientific discoveries.
People did just as well before the discovery of all the new planets;
before eclipses were calculated; before the microscopic world was
known about – and a hundred other things. In order to live and
grow their wheat, peasants don’t have to know what a comet is, and


                                 146

                     A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


yet nobody denies that all these things have expanded the circle of
ideas and have enabled us to penetrate deeper into the laws of
nature. Well, the world of spirits is one such law, which Spiritism
has enabled us to know by teaching us the influence it has on the
corporeal world. Supposing that its usefulness were limited to just
that, wouldn’t the revelation of such a power be great enough?
        Now, let’s take a look at its moral influence. Let’s say that it
teaches absolutely nothing new in this respect. What is religion’s
greatest enemy? Materialism, because materialism believes in
nothing; well, Spiritism is the negation of materialism, which has
no more reason to exist. It is no longer by means of reasoning
or blind faith that materialists are told that everything does not
come to an end with their bodies, but by means of the phenomena,
which are shown to them and which allow them to touch them
with their fingers and see them with their eyes. Isn’t that by itself
lending a small service to humankind, to religion? But that isn’t
all: add the certainty of the future life, the living scenario of those
who have gone before us, showing the need for the good and
the inevitable consequences of evil. That is why, without being
a religion per se, it essentially takes religious ideas and develops
them in people who have none, and it strengthens them in those
who are uncertain. Religion therefore finds a support in it, not for
those persons with narrow minds, who see religion entirely in the
doctrine of eternal fire and in form more than in essence, but for
those who see it according to the grandeur and majesty of God.
        In other words, Spiritism enlarges and elevates ideas, and it
combats abuses produced by selfishness, cupidity and ambition. But
who would dare defend them and declare themselves to be their
champion? Although it is not indispensable to salvation, Spiritism
facilitates it and sets us firmly on the path of the good. Moreover,
what sensible person would dare assert that a lack of orthodoxy is
more reprehensible in God’s eyes than atheism and materialism? I


                                  147

                              Chapter I


pose the following questions outright to all those who fight Spiritism
from the point of view of its religious consequences:
       1. Who will be worse off in the future life: those who believe
in nothing, or those who, believing in general truths, do not accept
certain parts of Church dogma?
       2. Will Protestants and schismatics be mixed in together in
the same punishment as atheists and materialists?
       3. Are those who are not orthodox in the strict sense of the
word, but who do all the good they can, who are kind and indulgent
toward their neighbors and honest in their social relationships, be
less assured of their salvation than those who believe in everything,
but who are hard, selfish and uncharitable?
       4. Which is worth more in God’s eyes: the practice of
Christian virtues without the practice of the duties of orthodoxy,
or the practice of the latter without the duties of morality?
       So, Reverend, I have responded to the questions and objections
that you have addressed to me; but as I told you at the beginning,
without any preconceived intention of leading you to our way of
thinking or of changing your convictions, I have restricted myself
to enabling you to consider Spiritism from its true point of view. If
you had not come to me, I would not have gone looking for you.
That does not mean that we would scorn your adherence to our
principles, if that had occurred – very far from it. On the contrary,
we are happy for all the adherents we can attract, and who are all the
more valuable to us when they come freely and willingly. Not only
do we not have the right to exert any constraint over anyone, but we
would hesitate to trouble the conscience of those who, having beliefs
with which they are satisfied, do not willingly come to us.
       We said that the best way to become enlightened about
Spiritism is to study the theory first; the phenomena will then
come naturally and you will understand them, regardless of the
order in which they are brought up by the circumstances. Our


                                 148

                    A Brief Discussion of Spiritism


publications are created with the goal of facilitating this study;
consequently, that is the route we recommend.
       The first reading should be this summary, which presents
a collection of the most salient points of the science. By reading
it, one can get an idea about it and be convinced that, in essence,
it contains something very serious. In this short exposition, we
have adhered to indicating points that should especially rivet the
attention of the observer. Ignorance of the fundamental principles
is the cause of erroneous appraisals by the majority of those who
judge what they do not understand, or do so according to their
preconceived ideas.
       If this first contact has created a desire to know more
about Spiritism, people should read The Spirits’ Book, where the
principles of the doctrine are fully developed; next, The Mediums’
Book for the experimental part, meant to serve as a guide for those
who want to proceed by themselves, and for those who want to
get a clear idea of the phenomena. Then come the assorted works
in which the applications and consequences of the doctrine are
developed such as The Gospel according to Spiritism, Heaven and
Hell according to Spiritism, etc.
       The Revue Spirite is a sort of applications course due to
the numerous examples and developments it contains on the
theoretical and the experimental aspects.
       To serious individuals who have done a preliminary study,
it would be a pleasure for us to verbally provide the necessary
explanations on the points they might not have entirely understood.




                                 149


      Chapter II
            M
Elementary Notions of Spiritism


         Elementary Notions
             of Spiritism
                  Preliminary Remarks
       1. It would be a mistake to think that witnessing a few
extraordinary phenomena would be enough for certain disbelievers
to be convinced. Those who cannot believe in a soul or spirit in
the human being cannot believe in it outside the human being
either. Consequently, by denying the cause, they deny the effect.
Hence, they nearly always come with a preconceived idea and
a negative stance that keeps them from making a serious and
impartial observation. They ask questions and raise objections to
which it is impossible to immediately respond completely, because
it would be necessary to give a sort of course and to start from the
beginning for each individual. The result of prior study is that it
can respond beforehand to objections, the majority of which are
founded on the ignorance of the cause behind the phenomena and
the conditions in which they are produced.
       2. Those who are unfamiliar with Spiritism believe that spirit
phenomena can be produced in the same way that other phenomena
can be produced in physics and chemistry experiments. Hence,
their intention to subject them to their will and their refusal to
place themselves in the conditions needed to observe them. Since
in principle they do not believe in the existence and intervention
of spirits – at least they do not understand their nature or their


                                153

                              Chapter II


modes of action – they act as if they were dealing with raw matter,
and since they do not get what they were asking for, they conclude
that there are no spirits after all.
       If they would look at the issue from a different perspective,
they would understand that spirits are human souls, that after death
we ourselves will be spirits and that we too would be ill-disposed
to serve as playthings to satisfy the fantasies of the curious.
       3. Even though certain phenomena may be induced because
they result from free intelligences, they are never at our complete
disposal, no matter who we are, and whoever attempted to obtain
them at will would be demonstrating either their ignorance or their
bad faith. We must wait for the phenomena and understand them
as they happen, and quite frequently it is at the moment when it is
least expected that the most interesting and most conclusive incidents
occur. Persons who seriously want to learn must therefore approach
this subject – like all others – with patience and perseverance, and do
everything that needs to be done; otherwise, they would be better off
not to concern themselves with the matter.
       4. Spiritist meetings meant for spirit manifestations do not
always present the best conditions, whether for obtaining satisfactory
results or for leading disbelievers to conviction; we must admit that
there are meetings from which disbelievers leave less convinced than
when they arrived, raising objections to those who talk to them
about the serious nature of Spiritism by mentioning the often-
ridiculous things they saw. They are no more logical than those who
judge an art by the sketches of an apprentice, a person by his or her
caricature, or a Greek tragedy by a parody on it. Spiritism has its
students too, and persons who want to know more about it should
not do so by drawing upon one sole source; only by examining and
comparing can they arrive at a decision.
       5. Frivolous meetings have grave consequences for beginners
who attend them because they give them an erroneous idea of the


                                 154

                    Elementary Notions of Spiritism


character of Spiritism. Those who attend only meetings of this
sort will never be able to take seriously something they see treated
frivolously by the very persons who claim to be its adherents. Prior
study will teach them to judge the importance of what they see
and to separate the good from the bad.
        6. The same line of reasoning applies to those who judge
Spiritism by certain eccentric books that can give them only an
incomplete and foolish idea of it. Authentic Spiritism is no more
responsible for those who understand it badly or who practice
it wrongly than poetry is responsible for those who write bad
verse. It is deplorable that such works exist, they say, because they
compromise the true science. Of course, it would be preferable for
only good works to be available, but the greater error falls to those
who do not go to the trouble to study the subject thoroughly.
The same applies to all the arts and sciences. Even on the most
serious subjects aren’t there treatises that are absurd and packed
full of errors? Why would Spiritism be any more privileged in
this respect, especially at its beginning? If those who criticize it
would stop judging it by its appearances, they would know what it
accepts and what it rejects, and they would not accuse it of what it
itself rejects in the name of reason and experience.

                    Concerning Spirits
       7. Spirits are not, as often imagined, separate beings within
creation. They are souls of those who used to live on the earth or
on other worlds, stripped of their corporeal envelope. Whoever
believes in the existence of the soul after the death of the body
must therefore also believe in the existence of spirits. To deny
spirits is to deny the soul.
       8. Generally speaking, people have a mistaken idea about the
make-up of spirits. They are not, as some believe, vague and indefinite

                                 155

                               Chapter II


beings, nor are they flames like will-o’-the-wisps or ghosts like in the
tales about souls from another world. They are beings like we are, with
a body like ours, but fluidic and invisible in its normal state.
       9. While the soul is united to the body during life, it possesses
a two-fold envelope: one heavy, coarse and destructible, which is the
body; the other fluidic, light and indestructible, called the perispirit.
       10. Thus, in the human being there are three essential
components: 1) the soul or spirit, which is the intelligent principle
that harbors the thought, will and moral sense; 2) the body,
which is the material envelope that enables the spirit to relate
to the exterior world; and 3) the perispirit, which is the fluidic,
light, imponderable envelope that serves as the connection and
intermediary between the spirit and the body.
       11. When the outer envelope is spent and can no longer
function, it succumbs and the spirit rids itself of it like the fruit
rids itself of its husk, the tree of its bark, the snake of its skin; in
other words, as if it were taking off an old and useless garment.
This is what is called death.
       12. Death is nothing but the destruction of the material
envelope; the soul abandons it like a butterfly leaving its chrysalis;
however, it retains its fluidic body or perispirit.
       13. The body’s death frees the spirit from the envelope that
had bound it to the earth and made it suffer; once freed of this
burden, it possesses only its ethereal body, which allows it to travel
space and traverse distances at the speed of thought.
       14. The union of the soul, perispirit and physical body
comprise the human being; the soul and perispirit apart from the
body comprise the being called the spirit.
       Note: The soul is thus a simple being; the spirit, a two-fold
being and the human being, a three-fold being. Hence, it would
be more precise to keep the word soul to designate the intelligent
principle, and the word spirit to refer to the semi-material being


                                  156

                              Elementary Notions of Spiritism


formed from this principle plus the fluidic body. However, since one
cannot conceive of the intelligent principle separate from all matter,
or the perispirit not being animated by the intelligent principle,
the terms soul and spirit are usually employed interchangeably. It is
the appearance only that consists in taking the part for the whole,
in the same way that one says that a town is populated by so many
souls, or a settlement by so many houses. Philosophically, however,
it is essential to differentiate between them.
        15. Spirits clothed with physical bodies comprise humankind
or the visible, corporeal world; when they are rid of these bodies,
they make up the spirit or invisible world. They populate the space
in the midst of which we live, without our even suspecting it, just
as we used to live in the midst of the world of the infinitesimal
without suspecting it before the microscope was invented.
        16. Spirits are not, therefore, abstract, vague and indefinite
beings, but concrete, circumscribed beings, who, if visible, would
resemble humans; thus, it follows that, if at some given moment,
the veil hiding them were to be lifted, they would form an entire
population around us.
        17. Spirits retain all the perceptions they had while on
earth, but to a higher degree because their faculties are no longer
deadened by matter. They experience sensations unknown to us;
they see and hear things that our limited senses do not enable us to
see or hear. For them there is no darkness, except for those whose
punishment requires them to be in darkness temporarily. All our
thoughts reverberate within them and they can read them like an
open book. What we may be able to hide from a living person
cannot be hidden once that person becomes a spirit.27
        18. Spirits are everywhere: in our midst and at our side,
rubbing elbows with us and observing us constantly. Due to their
continued presence amongst us, spirits are the agents of diverse
27
     See The Spirits’ Book, no. 237. – Auth.



                                               157

                              Chapter II


phenomena; they perform an important role in our mental world
and to a certain degree, in our physical world; consequently, they
are one of the forces of nature.
        19. Once the survival of the soul or spirit after death is
accepted, it is reasonable to accept the survival of affectionate
relationships; otherwise, the souls of our relatives and friends
would be lost forever to us.
        Since spirits can go everywhere, it is also reasonable to
assume that those who used to love us during their life on earth
continue to love us after death; that they can approach us, desiring
to communicate with us by utilizing the means at their disposal.
Experience has confirmed this fact.
        In effect, experience has shown that spirits hold on to the
serious relationships they had while on earth and that they take
delight in coming to those whom they loved, especially when they
are attracted by the affectionate thoughts and sentiments sent to
them; on the other hand, they are indifferent toward those who
show indifference toward them.
        20. Spiritism’s objective is to verify and study the
manifestations of spirits, their faculties, their happy or unhappy
conditions, and their future; in other words, to know about the
spirit world. Because such manifestations have been confirmed,
the result has been the irrefutable proof of the existence of the
soul, its survival after the body and its individuality after death,
i.e., the future life. Consequently, it is the negation of materialist
doctrines, not only by means of reason but by the facts.
        21. A more or less normal idea held by persons who are
not familiar with Spiritism is the belief that spirits must know all
things and possess supreme wisdom simply because they are free of
matter. This is a serious mistake.
        Since spirits are merely the souls of human beings, they
do not suddenly reach perfection upon leaving their earthly


                                 158

                              Elementary Notions of Spiritism


envelope. The spirit’s progress only occurs over time, and it is
only successively that it gets rid of its imperfections and acquires
the knowledge it lacks. It would also be illogical to believe that
the spirit of a primitive or of a criminal could suddenly become
wise and virtuous, just as it would be contrary to God’s justice to
believe that it would remain unevolved forever.
       Since there are humans of all degrees of knowledge and
ignorance, goodness and malice, the same applies to spirits.
There are those who are only frivolous and playful; others who
are deceitful, fraudulent, hypocritical, evil and vindictive, and still
others who are possessed of sublime virtues and wisdom unknown
upon the earth. Such diversity in the character of spirits is one of
the most important points to consider because it explains the good
or evil nature of the communications that may be received, and it
is especially important to be able to distinguish between them.28

     Communications with the Invisible World
       22. Having accepted the existence, survival and individuality
of the soul, Spiritism is left to answer one principal question: Are
communications between souls and the living possible? This possibility
is a result of experience. Once the exchange between the visible
and invisible worlds has been established as a fact, and once the
nature, cause and means of this exchange is understood, a whole
new field opens up to observation and is the key to a multitude
of problems; at the same time, it is a powerful moralizing element
since it puts an end to any doubts regarding the future.
       23. In many people’s minds, what sheds doubt on the
possibility of communicating with the dead is the mistaken
idea regarding the state of the soul after death. The soul is

28
     See The Spirits’ Book, no. 100: The Spirit Hierarchy; The Mediums’ Book, chap. XXIV. – Auth.



                                                159

                              Chapter II


usually imagined to be a breath, a vaporous being, or something
vague that can only be understood by means of thought; or
something that evaporates and goes off to who knows where,
to such a far away place that it is hard to understand how it
could return to the earth. If, to the contrary, we consider its
union with a fluidic, semi-material body, with which it forms a
physical, individual being, its communications with the living
hold nothing incompatible with reason.
       24. Since the visible world lives in the midst of the invisible
world and is in constant contact with it, it follows that these two
react incessantly upon each other; that, since there are human
beings, there are spirits too, and that if the latter have the ability
to manifest themselves, then they must have done so in all ages
and amongst all cultures. However, as of late, spirit manifestations
have increased substantially, and have taken on a greater character
of authenticity. It was in the designs of Providence to put an end
to the scourge of disbelief and materialism by means of obvious
proofs, enabling those who have left the earth behind to come
and attest to their existence, and to reveal their happy or unhappy
condition to us.
       25. The communications between the visible and invisible
worlds may be secretive or open, spontaneous or induced.
       Spirits act upon humans secretively through the thoughts
they suggest to them and through certain influences; they act
openly through effects discernible to the senses.
       Spontaneous manifestations occur unexpectedly and
fortuitously. Quite often, they occur to persons unfamiliar with
Spiritist ideas, and who, for that very reason, cannot understand
them; consequently, they attribute them to supernatural causes.
Manifestations that are induced occur by means of certain
individuals endowed with special faculties for producing such
effects, and who are designated by the name mediums.


                                 160

                               Elementary Notions of Spiritism


       26. Spirits can manifest in many different ways: by means
of sight, hearing, touch, noises, movements of objects, writing,
drawing, music, etc.
       27. Spirits sometimes manifest spontaneously through
noises and raps, which are frequently their way of attesting to their
presence and calling attention to themselves – just like someone
knocking on a door to let those inside know someone is there.
There are spirits who do not limit themselves to causing moderate
noises, but who go so far as to produce a racket that sounds like
dinnerware breaking, doors opening and closing, or furniture
being overturned. Some even cause real trouble and damage.29
       28. Although invisible to us in its normal state, the perispirit is
ethereal matter, nonetheless. In certain cases, the spirit can undergo
a sort of molecular modification that renders it visible and even
tangible; this is how apparitions are produced. This phenomenon
is no more extraordinary than steam, which is invisible when it is
extremely rarified, but which becomes visible when it is condensed.
       Spirits who make themselves visible nearly always appear as
they did while alive so that they can be recognized.
       29. The ongoing and widespread sighting of spirits is extremely
rare, but isolated apparitions are quite frequent, especially at the
time of death. The liberated spirit seems to be in a rush to see its
relatives and friends again, as if to advise them that it has just left
the earth and to tell them that it is still alive. Any person can delve
into his or her memories and see how many authentic incidents of
this type – unperceived at the time – have occurred not only at night
during sleep, but in broad daylight while wide awake. Formerly, such
incidents would have been considered supernatural and extraordinary,
and attributed to magic and sorcery; today, disbelievers attribute them
to imagination. However, since Spiritist science has provided the
29
      See Revue Spirite, 1858: L’Esprit frappeur de Bergzabern, pp. 125, 153, 184; ibid: L’Esprit
     frappeur de Dibbelsdorf, p. 219; ibid: 1860: Le Boulanger de Dieppe, p. 76; ibid: Le fabricant de
     Saint Pétersbourg, p. 115; ibid: Le chiffonnier de la rue de Noyers, p. 236. – Auth.



                                                 161

                                Chapter II


key to them, we know how they are produced and that they are not
outside the order of natural phenomena.
        30. It was with the help of its perispirit that the spirit used
to act upon its physical body; it is with this same fluid that it
continues to manifest itself by acting upon inert matter, producing
noises and moving tables and other objects, which it lifts, knocks
down or carries about. There is nothing surprising about this
phenomenon if we consider the fact that the most powerful
motors use the most rarified and even imponderable fluids such as
air, steam or electricity.
        It is also with the help of its perispirit that the spirit enables
a medium to write, speak or draw. Not having a tangible body to
act ostensibly when it wants to manifest, it uses the medium’s body
and borrows its organs, with which it acts as if it were its own body
by means of the fluidic emanation it pours out over the medium.
        31. It is by this same means that the spirit acts upon the
table in the phenomenon known as the turning or talking tables,
whether to cause them to move with no specific purpose in mind,
or whether to produce intelligent raps to spell out the letters of
the alphabet in order to form words and sentences. This is called
typtology. In this phenomenon, the table is merely an instrument
that the spirit uses in the same way that it uses a pencil in order
to write. It endows the table with momentary life by means of the
fluid that penetrates it; however, the spirit does not become part of
the table. Emotional persons who see a being who used to be dear
to them manifest and thus hug the table act foolishly because it is
exactly as if they were hugging a baton that a friend was using to
produce raps. The same applies to those who talk directly to the
table as if the spirit were contained within the wood itself, or as if
the wood had become the spirit.
        When communications occur by this means, the spirit must
be represented not as if it were within the table, but beside it, with


                                   162

                     Elementary Notions of Spiritism


the same appearance it had when alive and the way it would be seen
at that moment if it could make itself visible. The same applies to
written communications: the spirit should be thought of as being
at the medium’s side, guiding the hand or transmitting its thought
via a fluidic current.
        Whenever the table becomes detached from the floor and
floats in the air without any means of support, the spirit does not
lift it with its arms, but envelops it and penetrates it with a sort of
fluidic atmosphere that neutralizes the effects of gravity, like the air
in balloons and paper kites. This penetrating fluid momentarily
gives the table a specifically greater lightness. When it is held to
the floor, it is similar to what happens to the bell-jar from which
all the air has been removed. All these comparisons are used only
to demonstrate the similarity of the effects, not the complete
similarity of the causes.
        When the table chases someone, it is not the spirit who is
doing the chasing, because it can remain peacefully in the same
spot while moving the table by means of a fluidic current that
enables it to move the table at will. When raps are heard within the
table or somewhere else, the spirit is not beating it with its hand or
with some other object; it is directing a jet of fluid that produces
the effect of an electric-like jolt at the point where the noise is
heard. It can change the noise, just as the sounds produced by the
action of air can be changed.
        Therefore, one can see that it is no more difficult for a spirit
to lift a person than to lift a table, move an object from one place
to another, or throw it about; these phenomena are produced
according to one and the same law.
        32. One can see by these few explanations that there is
nothing supernatural or extraordinary about spirit manifestations.
They are phenomena induced according to the law that governs
the exchange between the visible and invisible worlds, a law as


                                  163

                               Chapter II


natural as the law of electricity, gravity, etc. Spiritism is the science
that enables us to know about this law, just as mechanics enables
us to know about the law of motion, and optics, the law of light.
Being part of nature, spirit manifestations have been produced in
all ages; once understood, the law governing them explains a series
of problems that used to be considered insolvable; it is the key to a
multitude of phenomena exploited and amplified by superstition.
       33. Once removed from the arena of the extraordinary,
these phenomena are in no way repugnant to reason, because they
may be placed alongside all other natural phenomena. In the ages
of ignorance, all effects whose causes were not understood were
regarded as supernatural. A string of scientific discoveries narrowed
the circle of the extraordinary; the knowledge of this new law has
reduced it to nothing. Therefore, those who accuse Spiritism of
having resuscitated the extraordinary demonstrate that they are
talking about something they know nothing about.
       34. Spirit manifestations are of two types: physical effects and
intelligent effects. The former are material and ostensive, such as
movements, noises, the carrying of objects, etc.; the latter consist
in the normal permutation of thought with the help of signs,
words, and especially, writing.
       35. Communications received from spirits may be good or
bad, correct or erroneous, profound or superficial, depending on
the nature of the spirits that manifest. Those that display wisdom
and knowledge are spirits that have evolved; those that display
ignorance and evil qualities are little-evolved spirits, but who will
evolve with time.
       Spirits can only respond to things they know about,
according to their advancement, and furthermore, to things
they are allowed to talk about because there are things they
must not reveal, since it has not yet been given to humans to
know about everything.


                                  164

                            Elementary Notions of Spiritism


       36. Due to the diversity in the qualities and aptitudes of
spirits, it is not enough simply to address any spirit available in
order to receive a correct response to every question, because, on
many subjects, it can give only its personal opinion, which may be
right or wrong. If it is wise, it will acknowledge its ignorance about
what it does not know; if it is frivolous or deceitful, it will respond
to anything without any concern for the truth whatsoever; if it is
proud, it will offer its idea on the matter as if it were the absolute
truth. This is why the book of 1 John 4:1 states: Do not believe
every spirit, but test the spirits to see if they are of God. Experience has
proven the wisdom of this advice. Thus, it would be imprudent
and thoughtless to accept everything that comes from spirits
without testing it first. That is why it is crucial to understand the
nature of the spirits with whom we are relating.30
       37. The quality of spirits may be determined by their
language. The language of truly good, high order spirits is
always dignified, noble, logical and lacking in contradictions; it
displays wisdom, benevolence, modesty and the purest morality;
it is concise and does not employ needless words. Regarding
ignorant or proud low order spirits, the emptiness of their
thoughts is almost always made up for by a superabundance
of words. Every obviously erroneous thought, every maxim
contrary to sound morality, every piece of foolish advice,
every gross, trivial or just plain silly expression, and lastly,
every trace of malevolence, presumptuousness or arrogance are
incontestable signs of the spirit’s unevolved character.
       38. Low order spirits are ignorant to various degrees; their
moral horizon is limited and their discernment restricted. They
often have only an erroneous and incomplete idea of matters and
are still under the influence of earthly preconceptions, which they
sometimes assume to be true; thus, they are incapable of solving
30
     See The Mediums’ Book, no. 267. – Auth.



                                               165

                              Chapter II


certain issues. They can lead us intentionally or unintentionally
into error concerning what they themselves do not understand.
       39. All low order spirits are not, therefore, downright evil;
there are those who are only ignorant and frivolous; others are
facetious, witty or fun-loving spirits who know how to pull off a
cunning, scathing joke. Moreover, we may find in the spirit world
– just as on the earth – every sort of wickedness or every degree of
intellectual and moral excellence.
       40. High order spirits are concerned solely with intelligent
manifestations intended for our instruction. Physical or purely
material manifestations are most often assigned to low order
spirits, who are commonly called rapping spirits, just as amongst
us, feats of physical strength are performed by manual laborers and
not scholars.
       41. Communicating with spirits must always be done calmly
and thoughtfully; we must never lose sight of the fact that spirits are
the souls of men and women, and that it would be inappropriate to
make them the object of a game or entertainment. If we owe due
respect to mortal remains, we ought to have even more respect for
the spirit. Frivolous and thoughtless meetings thus fail in their duty,
and persons who take part in them should be mindful that they
themselves may be called to the spirit world at any moment and
would not look favorably on being treated with such little deference.
       42. Another, equally important point to consider is the
fact that spirits are free; they communicate when they want, with
whom they want and when they are able because they have their
occupations to attend to. They are not at the beck and call of
anyone, no matter who they are, and no one has the right to make
them come against their will or make them reveal what they must
keep silent about. Consequently, no one can say for certain that
a particular spirit will come upon being evoked at a set time, or
respond to this or that question. To say otherwise is to display one’s


                                 166

                     Elementary Notions of Spiritism


complete ignorance about the most basic principles of Spiritism.
Only charlatanism has failsafe sources.
       43. Spirits are attracted out of affinity, similarity of tastes and
character, and the intention of whomever desires their presence.
High order spirits would no more attend a pointless meeting than
a scholar would attend a meeting of thoughtless children – plain
common sense says it could not be otherwise. If they sometimes
attend such meetings, it is for the purpose of providing healthy
counsel, combating vice or trying to lead someone onto the right
path. If they are not heeded, they withdraw. It would be completely
wrong to think that serious spirits could possibly enjoy responding
to futilities or idle questions that display neither respect for them
nor any real desire to learn, and even less to think they would come
to put on a show to entertain the curious. If they did not do such
things during their lifetime, they would not do so after their death.
       44. Frivolous meetings result in attracting frivolous spirits
who are looking for nothing else but the opportunity to deceive
and mystify. For the same reason that serious individuals do not
attend inconsequential gatherings, serious spirits attend only
serious meetings, whose purpose is instruction and not curiosity.
These are the types of meetings in which high order spirits enjoy
providing their teachings.
       45. The result of what we have stated so far is that in order
to be worthwhile every Spiritist meeting must be serious and
reverential as the number one condition. Everything must occur
respectfully, religiously and honorably if its aim is to obtain the
habitual concourse of good spirits. It must not be forgotten that if
these same spirits were present at such meetings while incarnate,
they would have been given the respect to which they are even
more entitled after death.
       46. It is useless to allege that certain curious, frivolous or
recreational experiments would convince disbelievers; actually,


                                   167

                              Chapter II


just the opposite is the case. Disbelievers who are already
inclined to mock the most sacred beliefs cannot see something
serious where entertainment is involved. They cannot be led to
respect something that is not presented to them in a respectable
manner; consequently, useless and frivolous meetings – those that
display no order, seriousness or concentration, always leave a bad
impression. What is most convincing, however, is the proof of the
presence of those whose memory is dear to them. In light of their
serious, solemn words and the intimate details they reveal, such
disbelievers blanch and tremble with emotion. But because they
have so much respect, admiration and fondness for the person
whose soul appears to them, they feel shocked and scandalized
to see him or her come to a disrespectful gathering in the midst
of dancing tables and the comedic performances of thoughtless
spirits. Disbelievers that they are, their minds reject such an
alliance between the serious and the frivolous, the religious and
the profane, and that is why they label the whole thing as trickery,
and often leave even less convinced than when they came.
       Meetings of this nature always do more harm than good
because they keep more individuals away from the Doctrine than
they lead to it, not to mention the fact that they open the way for
detractors to find plenty of reasons to mock them.
       47. It is a mistake to make a sport of physical manifestations;
if such manifestations no longer carry the weight of a philosophical
teaching, they nevertheless are useful from the phenomenological
point of view because they represent the ABCs of the science, to
which they have provided the key. Although they are not as useful
as they once were, they still help to convince certain people. Even
so, order and decency should not be excluded from meetings
where experiments are performed. If such experiments were
always performed appropriately, they would more easily convince
disbelievers and would in every respect produce better results.


                                 168

                   Elementary Notions of Spiritism


        48. Some people have gotten a completely mistaken
idea regarding evocations. There are those who believe they
involve bringing back the dead with the morbid appearance
of the grave. The little we have already stated so far should be
enough to correct this error. Only in novels, ghost stories and
plays are the discarnate dead seen to leave their graves dressed
ridiculously in their burial shrouds and rattling their bones.
Spiritism, which never performs miracles, has never produced
anything of the sort and has never made a dead body come back
to life; once the body is in the grave, it is there forever. But the
fluidic, intelligent spirit being does not remain there wrapped
in its coarse envelope; it disengages from it at the moment of
death, and once the separation occurs, it has nothing more in
common with it.
        49. Malevolent criticism is pleased to represent spirit
communications as involving the outlandish and superstitious
practices of magic and necromancy. If those who speak of Spiritism
without knowing anything about it had gone to the trouble of
studying the subject, they would have spared themselves the
trouble of wasting their imagination or making allegations that
serve no other purpose than proving their ignorance and ill will.
For the benefit of persons unfamiliar with the Spiritist science,
we will state that there are neither days, times nor places that
are more propitious than others for communicating with spirits;
that neither formulas, sacramental or cabalistic words are needed
to evoke them; that neither training nor initiation is needed; that
no use of symbol or material object, whether to attract them or to
repel them, is effective, and that thought alone is sufficient; and
lastly, that mediums, without leaving their normal state, receive
their communications as simply and as naturally as if they were
dictated by incarnate persons. Only charlatanism could employ
eccentric mannerisms and add ridiculous accessories.


                                169

                                         Chapter II


     Evoking spirits is done in God’s name with respect and
concentration: this is all that is recommended to serious persons
who wish to communicate with serious spirits.

                The Providential Aim of Spirit
                       Manifestations
        50. The providential aim of spirit manifestations is to
convince disbelievers that all does not end for human beings when
their life on earth ends, and to give believers a more correct idea
regarding the future. Good spirits come to instruct us for our
improvement and progress, but not to reveal to us what we must
not yet know or what we must learn solely by our own efforts. If
it were enough to simply ask spirits in order to get the solution
to every scientific problem or to make discoveries or profitable
inventions, any ignoramus could become a genius at no cost, and
any lazy person could get rich without having to work for it –
which is not what God has willed. Spirits help persons of genius
through inspiration, but in order to leave the merit to them they
do not exempt them from having to do work or research.
        51. It would be completely wrong to see spirits as merely
fortunetellers’ helpers. Serious spirits refuse to concern themselves
with useless matters. Frivolous, mocking spirits concern themselves
with anything and everything, respond to anything and everything,
and predict whatever people want them to predict with no concern at
all for the truth; they feel a mischievous sense of pleasure in deceiving
gullible persons. That is why it is essential to be perfectly certain about
the nature of the questions that can be put to spirits.31
        52. Apart from what can be of help to moral progress, there
is nothing but uncertainty contained in revelations that may be

31
     See The Mediums’ Book, no. 286: Questions that may be addressed to spirits. – Auth.



                                             170

                             Elementary Notions of Spiritism


received from spirits. The first regrettable consequence for persons
who divert their faculty from its providential aim is to be fooled by
the deceitful spirits that swarm around people; the second is to fall
under the control of these same spirits, who can, by way of false
advice, lead them to real, material misfortune; the third is to lose
after death the benefit of having known Spiritism.
       53. Thus, manifestations are not meant to serve material
interests; their usefulness lies in their moral consequences.
However, if they led to no further results than to make known a
new law of nature and to physically demonstrate the existence of
the soul and its survival after death, they would accomplish much,
because it would open up a broad new way to philosophy.

                         Concerning Mediums
       54. Mediums display a wide variety in their aptitudes, which
render them more suitable or less so for obtaining this or that
phenomenon, or this or that type of communication. According to
such aptitudes, we may say that there are physical effects, intelligent
communications, seeing, speaking, hearing, sensitive, drawing,
polyglot, poetic, musical, writing, etc. mediums. A medium cannot
expect what is outside his or her faculty. Without understanding
the various mediumistic aptitudes, the observer cannot be
informed about certain difficulties or impossibilities that may be
encountered in the practice of mediumship.32
       55. Physical effects mediums are most particularly capable of
inducing material phenomena, such as movements, raps, etc., with
the aid of tables or other objects. When these phenomena express
a thought or obey a will, they are intelligent effects, which for that
very reason, point to an intelligent cause and are a way for spirits to

32
     See The Mediums’ Book, chap. XVI, no. 185. – Auth.



                                              171

                                            Chapter II


manifest. By means of a number of ordinary raps, we may receive
answers such as yes or no, or the designation of letters of the alphabet
that may be used to form words or sentences. This primitive method is
very slow and does not lend itself to lengthy exchanges. Talking tables
began the science; nowadays, there are means of communication that
are as fast and complete as the ones used between incarnates; tables
serve only incidentally and for experimentation.
        56. Of all the means of communication, writing is the simplest,
fastest and most convenient, and allows the lengthiest exchanges; it is
also the faculty most frequently found among mediums.
        57. In order to obtain a written communication, physical
intermediaries such as baskets, planchettes, etc. attached to a pencil
were used at first.33 It was later realized that such accessories were
needless and that mediums could write directly with the hand as
in ordinary circumstances.
        58. Mediums write under the influence of the spirits who
use them as their instruments; their hand is caused to write by
involuntary movement, which most of the time they cannot control.
Some mediums have no awareness of what they are writing; others are
vaguely aware, although the thought is not their own. This is what
distinguishes the mechanical, intuitive and semi-mechanical mediums.
Spiritist science explains the way the spirit’s thought is transmitted to
the medium and the role the latter plays in communications.34
        59. Mediums possess the faculty of communication, but
effective communication depends on the will of spirits. If spirits
do not want to manifest, mediums obtain nothing and are like
instruments without musicians.
        Spirits communicate only when they want to or when they are
able to, and are not at anyone’s beck and call; no medium has the ability
to make them come whenever desired and against their will.
33
     See The Mediums’ Book, chap. XIII, nos. 152 ff. – Auth.
34
     See The Mediums’ Book, chap. XV, nos. 179 ff.; chap. XIX, nos. 223 ff. – Auth.



                                                172

                    Elementary Notions of Spiritism


       This explains the intermittence of the faculty in the best
mediums, in addition to its suspension, which they sometimes
must bear for several months.
       Consequently, it would be erroneous to liken mediumship
to a talent. Talents are acquired by work, and those who possess
them are always master over them; mediums are never master of
their faculty, because it depends on an outside will.
       60. Physical effects mediums who on a regular basis and at their
pleasure are able to obtain certain phenomena – if it does not involve
trickery – are being used by low order spirits who enjoy putting on
such exhibitions and who were perhaps involved in the same type of
work when they were alive. Nevertheless, it would be absurd to believe
that even such low order spirits would enjoy being put on display.
       61. The darkness required for the production of certain
physical effects of course arouses suspicion, but proves nothing
against their reality. In chemistry it is a known fact that there are
combinations that cannot occur under light, and that compositions
and decompositions occur under the action of the luminous fluid.
Since all spirit phenomena result from the combination of the
personal fluids of both the spirit and the medium, and since these
fluids are physical, it should come as no surprise that in certain
cases the luminous fluid works against their combination.
       62. Intelligent communications also occur by means of
the fluidic action of the spirit upon the medium; the fluid of the
latter must identify with the fluid of the former. The ease of the
communication depends on the degree of affinity between the two
fluids. Each medium is thus capable of receiving the impression or
impulse of this or that spirit’s thought to varying degrees. Such a
medium may be a good instrument for one, but a bad instrument
for another. The result is that even though two equally well-
endowed mediums may be right next to each other, a spirit may
manifest through one and not the other.


                                 173

                               Chapter II


       63. Therefore, it is a mistake to believe that it is enough
simply to be a medium in order to receive communications from
every spirit with the same ease. There are no more universal
mediums for making evocations than there is a universal
aptitude for inducing every type of phenomenon. Spirits prefer
to look for instruments who vibrate in unison with them; if
they were to impose themselves on the first to come along, it
would be like forcing a pianist to play the violin, under the
reasoning that if he or she knows music, he or she should be
able to play every instrument.
       64. Without harmony – the only quality that can lead to
fluidic assimilation – communications are impossible, incomplete
or false. They may be false because, in the absence of the spirit
desired, there is no lack of others who are ready and willing to take
advantage of the occasion to manifest, and who care very little
about telling the truth.
       65. The fluidic assimilation is at times completely impossible
between certain spirits and mediums. At other times – and this
is the most common case – it is only established gradually over
time. This is what explains why spirits who are accustomed to
manifesting through one particular medium do so more easily
and why the first manifestations nearly always display a certain
restraint and are less explicit.
       66. Fluidic assimilation is as necessary in communications
involving typtology as it is in those involving writing, since in either
case there is a transmission of the spirit’s thought, whatever the
material means employed.
       67. Since mediums cannot impose themselves on the spirit
they want to evoke, it behooves the spirit itself to choose its own
instrument. In any case, the medium must identify beforehand
with the spirit through concentration and prayer, at least for a few
minutes, and even for a few days, if possible, in order to induce


                                  174

                             Elementary Notions of Spiritism


and activate the fluidic assimilation. This is the way to attenuate
the difficulty.
        68. Whenever the fluidic conditions are not proper
for the spirit to communicate directly with the medium, the
communication may occur through the intermediary of the latter’s
spirit guide. In this case, the thought only arrives second hand;
that is, after having passed through two sources. Thus, one can
understand how important it is for the medium to be well assisted
because if he or she is assisted by an obsessor, ignorant or proud
spirit, the communication will inevitably be altered.
        Here, the medium’s personal qualities truly perform an
important role due to the nature of the spirits he or she attracts.
The most unworthy mediums can possess powerful faculties,
but the safest are those who combine such strength with the
best affinities in the spirit world. Now, these affinities are in no
way guaranteed by the impressive names that spirits might use
or that they might take when signing communications, but by
the consistently good nature of the communications obtained
from them.
        69. Whatever the mode of communication may be, the
practice of Spiritism from the experimental point of view entails
many difficulties and is not without its problems for anyone who
lacks the necessary experience. Whether one is experimenting
for oneself or whether simply observing, it is crucial to know
how to distinguish amongst the various natures of the spirits
that can manifest, to know the causes of all the phenomena, the
conditions in which they may be produced, and the obstacles
that may be encountered, in order not to ask the impossible. And
it is no less necessary to know about all the conditions and all the
dangers of mediumship, the influence of the environment, moral
dispositions, etc.35
35
     See The Mediums’ Book, pt. 2. – Auth.



                                             175

                                          Chapter II


          Dangers Mediums Might Encounter
       70. One of the greatest dangers regarding mediumship
is obsession, i.e. the control that certain spirits may have over
mediums by imposing themselves on them with apocryphal names
and by keeping them from communicating with other spirits. This
is also a danger to the new and inexperienced observer, who, not
being familiar with the characteristics of the phenomenon, may
be fooled by appearances, like those who, not knowing medicine,
may be mistaken about the cause and nature of a sickness. If prior
study in this case is useful for observers, it is indispensable for
mediums because it furnishes them the means of preventing a
problem that could have regrettable consequences. That is why
we feel that it is never too much to recommend studying before
delving into the practice.36
       71. Obsession presents three main, well-characterized
degrees: simple obsession, fascination and subjugation. In the first,
mediums are perfectly aware that they are not receiving anything
good and they are not mistaken about the nature of the spirits
who insist on manifesting through them, and from whom they
would love to disentangle themselves. This sort of case is not all
that serious: it is only a mere inconvenience and the medium can
get rid of it by not writing for a while. When the spirit tires of not
being listened to, it leaves.
       Obsessive fascination is much more serious in that the
mediums are completely deluded. Spirits who control them gain
their trust to the point of paralyzing their judgment in analyzing
their communications and making them believe that the most
absurd things are truly sublime.
       The distinctive characteristics of this type of obsession is that
of causing mediums to be excessively susceptible; to believe that only
36
     See The Mediums’ Book, chap. XXIII. – Auth.



                                              176

                            Elementary Notions of Spiritism


what they themselves write is good, just and true, rejecting and even
regarding as evil all critical advice and every critical observation; to
break off relations with their friends rather than admit that they
have been deceived; to envy other mediums whose communications
are deemed better than theirs; to want to control Spiritist meetings,
which they leave if they cannot prevail. They end up suffering
such overwhelming domination that the spirit can compel them to
assume the most foolish and compromising attitudes.
       72. One of the distinctive characteristics of evil spirits is that
they impose themselves; they give orders and expect to be obeyed.
Good spirits never impose themselves; they provide counsel and if
they are not heeded, they withdraw. As a result, evil spirits leave
a feeling that is grueling and tiring and which produces a sort of
uneasiness; it frequently causes a feverish agitation, and brusque,
irregular movements. Good spirits, on the other hand, leave a
calming and gentle feeling that instills a sense of true well-being.
       73. Obsessive subjugation, which used to be called possession,
is a physical coercion exerted by spirits of the worst kind and it
can even neutralize the obsessee’s free will. It is often limited to
simple disagreeable feelings, but sometimes it causes disorderly
movements, foolish actions, screams or incoherent or offensive
words. The mediums subject to it are at times aware of their
ridiculous behavior but they can do nothing about it. This state
differs essentially from pathological insanity, with which it is
wrongly confused, because in obsessive subjugation there is no
organic lesion; since the cause is different, the curative measures
must also be different. Applying the standard procedures of
douches37 and physical treatments to obsessive subjugation may
often induce true insanity where there was nothing but a strictly
moral cause to begin with.

37
      Hydrotherapy was widely used in the treatment of nervous and mental diseases in the
     1800s. – Tr.



                                           177

                                              Chapter II


        74. In insanity per se, the cause of the problem is internal
and it is necessary to try to reestablish the organism to its normal
state. In subjugation, the cause is external and it is necessary to
rid the patient of an invisible enemy by opposing it not with
medications but with a moral power superior to its own. Experience
has shown that, in such a case, exorcisms have never produced a
satisfactory result; they aggravate rather than improve the situation.
By pointing out the true cause of the problem, only Spiritism can
provide the means of combating it. The obsessor spirit must be
educated morally, somehow; by means of wisely directed counsel,
one can render it better morally and make it willingly renounce its
torment of the patient, who is then liberated.38
        75. As a rule, obsessive subjugation is individual; however,
when a phalanx of evil spirits invades a population, subjugations
can take on an epidemic scale. One such phenomenon occurred at
the time of Christ; only a powerful moral superiority could have
dominated those malevolent beings called demons and reinstate
their victims’ peace of mind.39
        76. An important fact to consider is that obsession, whatever
its nature, is independent of mediumship and may be found in
every degree – especially the third kind – in a large number of
individuals who have never even heard of Spiritism. In fact, since
spirits have existed in every age, they must have exerted the same
influence in every age. Mediumship is not a cause but only a
means of manifesting such influence; hence, one can state with
certainty that every obsessed medium must be enduring, in some
way and frequently in the commonest acts of life, the effects of
this influence, and that apart from mediumship it would express
itself through other effects often attributed to those mysterious
38
     See The Mediums’ Book, no. 279; Revue Spirite, Feb., Mar. and June of 1864: La jeune obsédée
     de Marmande. – Auth.
39
      Another such epidemic harangued a village in Haute-Savoie for several years. (See Revue
     Spirite, Apr. and Dec. of 1862; Jan., Feb., Apr. and May of 1863: Les possédés de Morzines. – Auth.



                                                  178

                            Elementary Notions of Spiritism


illnesses that escape every investigation by medicine. By means of
mediumship, the malfeasant being betrays its presence; without
mediumship, it is a hidden enemy no one suspects.
       77. Persons who cannot believe in anything apart from matter
cannot believe in a hidden cause, but when science finally emerges
from its materialistic impasse, it will recognize, in the action of the
invisible world that surrounds us and in the midst of which we live,
a force that acts upon physical things as well as mental things. This
will be the opening of a new road to progress and will provide the
key to a multitude of wrongly understood phenomena.
       78. Since obsession can never be caused by a good spirit, one
essential point is that of knowing how to recognize the nature of
the spirits who manifest. Unenlightened mediums can be deceived
by appearances, whereas those who are prudent look out for the
smallest signs of suspicion, and the spirit ends up withdrawing
upon realizing there is nothing it can do. Prior understanding of
the means of distinguishing between good and evil spirits is thus
indispensable to mediums who do not want to expose themselves to
being caught in a trap. It is no less indispensable to mere observers,
who can thereby evaluate the worth of what they see and hear.40

                   Characteristics of Mediums
        79. The mediumistic faculty is connected with the organism;
it is independent of the medium’s moral qualities and may be found
in the most unworthy as well as in the most worthy individuals.
This does not apply to the preference that good spirits give to the
medium, however.
        80. Good spirits communicate voluntarily to varying degrees
through this or that medium according to their affinity with

40
     See The Mediums’ Book, chap. XXIV. – Auth.



                                             179

                             Chapter II


the medium’s own spirit. What comprises the characteristics of
mediums is not the ease with which they receive communications,
but their ability to receive only good ones and not to become
playthings of frivolous and deceitful spirits.
       81. Mediums who leave much to be desired from the moral
point of view sometimes receive very good communications,
which can only have come from good spirits, and it would be a
mistake to be surprised by this fact; it is often in these mediums’
best interest and to give them wise advice. If they do not take
advantage of it, they have only themselves to blame because
they write their own condemnation. God, whose goodness is
infinite, cannot refuse assistance to those who have the most
need of it. The virtuous missionary who teaches good morals
to criminals is acting in the same way as good spirits do with
imperfect mediums.
       Furthermore, when good spirits want to provide a useful,
widespread teaching, they will make use of the instrument at
hand; however, they will leave him or her when they find one with
whom they have more affinity and who will take advantage of their
lessons. When good spirits withdraw, low order ones, unconcerned
about moral qualities, then have an open playing field.
       The result is that morally imperfect mediums who do not
mend their ways sooner or later become prey to evil spirits, who
quite often lead them to their ruin and great misfortune, even
while in this world. As for their faculty, as beautiful as it was and
would have remained, it becomes tarnished first by being forsaken
by good spirits and then by being lost altogether.
       82. Even the most deserving mediums are not exempt
from manifestations by deceitful spirits; first, because none are
sufficiently perfect not to have a weak spot that can provide access
to evil spirits; second, in order to exercise their judgment, good
spirits at times allow it to happen so that their mediums can


                                180

                     Elementary Notions of Spiritism


learn how to tell truth from error and be wary so as not to accept
anything blindly without having tested it first. But deception does
not come from good spirits and any respectable name that signs an
error is necessarily apocryphal.
       This may also be a test of patience and perseverance for any
Spiritist, medium or not. Those who become discouraged by a few
deceptions show good spirits that the latter cannot count on them.
       83. It is no more surprising to see evil spirits obsess respectable
persons than it is surprising to see evil persons persecuting good people.
       It is interesting that, ever since The Mediums’ Book was
published, obsessed mediums have become much less numerous,
because, having been forewarned, they are on their guard and
watch for the smallest signs that may betray the presence of a
deceitful spirit. Most of the ones who are obsessed either did not
study the subject first or did not heed the counsels offered to them.
       84. What comprises a medium per se is the mediumistic
faculty, which may be more developed or less so; what comprises
the sure medium, the one who can truly be classified as a good
medium, is the use of the faculty, the aptitude to serve as an
interpreter for good spirits. Regardless of the faculty, a medium’s
ability to attract good spirits and repel evil ones is due to his
or her moral ascendancy. This ascendancy is in proportion to
the sum of the characteristics that make such mediums moral
persons, and with it they obtain the affinity of good spirits and
exert control over evil ones.
       85. For the same reason, the sum of mediums’ moral
imperfections liken them more to the nature of evil spirits and
keep them from the ascendancy needed to avoid them. Instead
of being the ones who exert control over evil spirits, evil spirits exert
control over them. This applies not only to mediums, but to
everyone else, since there is no one who is not influenced by
spirits. (See nos. 74, 75 above)


                                   181

                               Chapter II


        86. In order to impose themselves on mediums, evil spirits
know how to skillfully exploit all their moral defects; the one
that gives them the greatest access is pride, the sentiment that
dominates most obsessed mediums, especially those who are
fascinated. Pride leads them to believe in their infallibility and to
scorn advice. Unfortunately, this sentiment is encouraged by the
praise of which they might be the object; when their faculty is a
little transcendental, they are sought out and flattered; they end
up believing in their own importance and regard themselves as
indispensable, which leads them to their downfall.
        87. While imperfect mediums pride themselves with
the illustrious names – usually apocryphal – that sign the
communications they receive, and regard themselves as the
privileged interpreters of heavenly powers, good mediums never feel
sufficiently worthy of such a favor and always maintain a healthy
distrust of the quality of what they receive; that is, they do not trust
their own judgment. Since they are only passive instruments, they
understand that if the communication is good, they cannot regard
it as their personal merit any more than they can be held responsible
if it is bad. It would be foolish to believe unquestionably in the
identity of the spirits who manifest through them, and they leave
the matter to be judged by disinterested third parties without any
more offence to their personal vanity for an unfavorable judgment
than an actor would be for criticism leveled at the play in which he
or she played a part. Their distinctive character displays simplicity
and modesty; they are happy with the faculties they possess, not
out of vanity but rather as a means of being useful, which they
willingly are when the occasion arises, and without being offended
if they are not given top preference.
        Mediums are spirits’ intermediaries and interpreters; thus,
it is the responsibility of the evoker, or even the mere observer, to
determine the worthiness of the instrument.


                                  182

                    Elementary Notions of Spiritism


       88. The mediumistic faculty is a gift from God as are all
faculties that may be used for either good or evil, and it may be
abused. Its purpose is to put us in direct communication with
the souls of those who used to live so that we may receive their
teachings and be initiated into the future life. Just as sight puts us
in communication with the visible world, mediumship puts us in
communication with the invisible one. Those who employ it for
useful purposes, for their own and their neighbors’ advancement,
are fulfilling a true mission, for which they will be rewarded. On
the other hand, those who abuse it and use it on useless matters
or for material gain divert it from its providential aim and must
sooner or later bear the consequences like anyone else who makes
bad use of a faculty.

                        Charlatanism
       89. Certain spirit manifestations lend themselves quite
easily to being imitated, but even though they may be exploited
like so many other phenomena by means of trickery and
sleight-of-hand, it would be absurd to conclude that they do
not actually exist at all. For anyone who has studied and knows
the normal conditions under which they may be produced, it
is easy to tell an imitation from an authentic manifestation.
Furthermore, an imitation could never be complete and could
deceive only unknowing observers incapable of understanding
the characteristic nuances of authentic phenomena.
       90. The manifestations easiest to imitate are certain physical
effects and common intelligent effects, such as movements, raps,
apportations, direct writing, banal responses, etc. The same does
not apply to intelligent communications of a high level. To imitate
the former, only skillfulness is required; to simulate the latter,
an uncommon erudition, exceptional intellectual abilities and a

                                 183

                                        Chapter II


comprehensively broad – so to speak – faculty of improvisation would
be necessary.
        91. Persons who are unfamiliar with Spiritism may be
led to suspect the good faith of mediums; study and experience
provide them the means of assuring themselves of the authenticity
of the phenomena. Additionally, the best guarantee lies in the
medium’s absolute disinterest and honorability. There are persons
who, because of their position and character, are beyond any
suspicion. If the possibility of material gain can encourage fraud,
common sense would indicate that where there is nothing to gain,
charlatanism has nothing to do.41
        92. We may find both enthusiasts and eccentrics among
Spiritism’s adherents – as in everything else. They are usually
the worst propagators because the ease with which they accept
everything without an in-depth examination arouses distrust.
Knowledgeable Spiritists are on their guard against blinding
enthusiasm and observe everything coolly and calmly. This is the
way not to fall victim to either illusions or deceptions. Besides the
issue of good faith, beginning observers should, before anything
else, take into consideration the seriousness of the character of the
persons they address.

                        The Identity of Spirits
       93. Since all the defects of humanity may be found among
spirits, cunningness and deceitfulness may also be found. There
are spirits who have no qualms about adorning themselves with
the most respectable names in order to inspire trust. Hence, it
is necessary to refrain from believing wholeheartedly in the
authenticity of every signature.
41
      See The Mediums’ Book, chap. XXVIII on Charlatanism and Trickery, Mediums for Hire,
     Fraudulent Manifestations; Revue Spirite, 1862, p. 52. - Auth.



                                           184

                      Elementary Notions of Spiritism


        94. Identity is one of the big problems of practical Spiritism
and it is often impossible to prove its authenticity, especially when
dealing with highly evolved spirits from ancient times. Amongst
those that manifest, many do not have names that mean anything
to us; consequently, to provide us with something to fix our
thoughts on, they may take the name of a known spirit of the
same category. Thus, if a spirit communicates using the name St.
Peter, for example, that does not mean that it really is the apostle
himself; it could be him, or it could be a spirit of the same order,
who has been sent by him.
        The question of identity in this case is by all means secondary,
and it would be childish to connect any importance to it; what
matters is the nature of the teaching. Is it good or bad, worthy or
unworthy of the personage who took the name? Would he or she
approve of it or condemn it? That is the whole issue.
        95. Identity is easiest to prove when dealing with contemporary
spirits, whose character and habits are known, because it is by the
habits and characteristics of their private lives that their identity is
more assuredly revealed, and often in an incontestable manner.
Whenever relatives or friends are evoked, it is their personality that is
of most interest and it is thus quite natural to try to prove their identity.
However, for those who are only partially familiar with Spiritism, the
means to do so are generally insufficient and may lead to error.
        96. A spirit can reveal its identity through a multitude of
circumstances highlighted in its communications, which reflect its
habits, character, language and even its familiar quirks. It may also
reveal its identity through intimate details, which it willingly divulges
to persons it cares about – these are the best proofs. However, it is
very rare that it will satisfy any direct questions asked of it in this
regard, especially if asked by persons who are indifferent toward
it, and whose sole objective is curiosity or proof. The spirit proves
its identity as it wishes or as it is able according to the type of its


                                    185

                                           Chapter II


interpreter’s faculty, and often these proofs are super-abundant. The
mistake is to want it to provide them in the way the evoker wants
them given; that is, when it refuses to yield to his or her demands.42

                                  Contradictions
       97. The contradictions that often appear in what spirits say
should come as a surprise only to observers who merely possess an
incomplete understanding of the Spiritist science. Contradictions
result from the nature of the spirits themselves, who, as already
stated, can only understand matters according to how evolved
they are; many of them know even less than certain incarnates.
Regarding a multitude of facts, they can provide only their
personal opinion, which may be correct to some degree while still
reflecting the earthly prejudices they have not yet abandoned.
Others fabricate their own theories about what they do not yet
understand, particularly regarding scientific matters and the origin
of things. Consequently, it should come as no surprise that they
are not always in agreement with one another.
       98. We may be surprised at finding contradictory
communications signed by the same name. According to the
circumstances, only low order spirits could differ in what they say,
because high order spirits never contradict one another. Whoever
is relatively inexperienced regarding the mysteries of the spirit
world should understand the ease with which certain spirits adorn
themselves with borrowed names in order to make what they
say more believable. Thus, we may safely conclude that if two
communications that are radically contradictory as to the depth
of the thought carry the same respectable name, one of the two is
necessarily apocryphal.
42
      See The Mediums’ Book, chap. XXIV: The Identity of Spirits; Revue Spirite, 1862, p. 82: Fait
     d’identité. – Auth.



                                               186

                               Elementary Notions of Spiritism


       99. Two ways may serve to settle our thoughts concerning
issues of doubtful identity: the first is to submit communications
to the severe test of reason, common sense and logic. This is
the recommendation given by all good spirits, but one that is
discouraged by deceitful spirits, who know very well that they
can only lose with a serious examination. That is why they avoid
discussion and want to be blindly believed.
       The second criterion of true identity lies in the agreement of
the teaching. When the same principle is taught in several places
by different spirits and mediums who do not know each other
and who are not under the same influence, we can conclude that
it entails more truth than one coming from only one source and
which contradicts the majority.43

                 The Consequences of Spiritism
      100. In light of the uncertainty concerning revelations
made by spirits, one might ask: So what good is the study of
Spiritism, after all?
      It is useful to materially prove the existence of the spirit world.
      Since the spirit world is composed of the souls of those
who used to live on the earth, it proves the soul’s existence and its
survival of the body.
      The souls who manifest reveal their joys and their sufferings
according to the way their earthly life was lived, which thus proves
the notion of future rewards and punishments.
      As souls or spirits describe their state and their situation,
they correct erroneous ideas made regarding the future life, and
especially the nature and duration of punishments.

43
      See The Mediums’ Book, chap. XXVII: Contradictions and Deceptions; Revue Spirite, Apr.
     1864, p. 99; The Gospel According to Spiritism: Introduction, pt. II, Authority of the Spiritist
     Doctrine. – Auth.



                                                 187

                               Chapter II


        Consequently, the future life goes from being a vague and
uncertain theory to being a consummate and positive fact, which
results in the need to labor as much as possible during our short,
present life on behalf of our everlasting future life.
        Let us imagine that a 20-year-old man is certain that he will
die at 25. What will he do during those five years? Will he labor for
the future? Surely not. He will make every effort to enjoy himself to
the utmost and would think it wrong to impose meaningless fatigue
and privation on himself. However, if he is certain that he is going
to live to be 80, he will act otherwise because he will understand the
need to sacrifice a few moments of repose in the present to ensure
repose in the future for several years. The same would be the case for
anyone for whom the future life is an uncertainty.
        Doubt about the future life naturally leads people to yield
completely to the pleasures of the present; hence the excessive
importance given to material wealth.
        The importance given to material wealth arouses covetousness,
envy and jealousy in those who have little vis-à-vis those who have
much. From covetousness to the desire to obtain at any cost what
their neighbor possesses, there is only one small step; hence the hatred,
disputes, lawsuits, wars and all the ills engendered by selfishness.
        With doubt about the future, people who are oppressed
during this life by sadness and misfortune see death as the only
end to their suffering. Hoping for nothing more, they think it is
rational to shorten it through suicide.
        Without hope in the future, it is quite natural for people to
be affected and become desperate from the disappointments they
experience. The violent jolts they feel as a result resonate in their
minds, the cause of most cases of insanity.
        Without the future life, the present one is of crucial importance
to people, the sole object of their concerns, and they relate everything
to it. That is why they want at any price to enjoy not only material


                                  188

                     Elementary Notions of Spiritism


wealth but honors; they aspire to stand out, to rise above others and
to eclipse their neighbor by means of ostentation and status; hence
the unbridled ambition and importance they give to titles and all
the futilities of self-centeredness, for which they would sacrifice even
their honor because they see nothing else beyond it.
       Certainty about the future life and its consequences
completely changes the order of people’s ideas and enables them
to see matters from a different perspective; the veil is lifted and
they discover an immense and splendid horizon. In light of the
infinite and the grandeur of the life beyond the grave, the present
life vanishes like a second before the centuries, like a grain of sand
before the mountain. Thus, everything else becomes small and
petty, and they marvel at the importance once given to matters
so ephemeral and childish; hence, in the events of life, a calm
tranquility appears, which is already happiness in comparison
to the worries and torments people impose on themselves when
trying to rise above others; the same applies for vicissitudes and
disappointments, to which they become indifferent. By removing
any hint of despair, it prevents numerous cases of insanity and
diverts the thought from suicide. With certainty about the future,
individuals can hope and resign themselves; with doubt about it,
they lose patience because they expect nothing beyond the present.
       From the examples of those who used to live, people are shown
that the sum of future happiness is the result of the moral progress
achieved and the good that has been done while on earth; that the
sum of future unhappiness is the result of the sum of the vices and
bad deeds; consequently, in all those who are well convinced of this
truth, there is a wholly natural inclination to do good and avoid evil.
       When the majority of people are imbued with this idea, when
they profess these principles and practice the good, the result will be
that the good will win out over evil in this world; that people will no
longer seek to harm one another; that they will govern their social


                                  189

                                Chapter II


institutions for the good of all and not for the privilege of the few; in
other words, they will understand that the law of charity taught by
Christ is the fount of happiness even while in this world, and they
will base their civil laws on the law of charity.
       The awareness of the spirit world that surrounds us and its
action upon the corporeal world reveals one of the powers of nature,
and consequently the key to a multitude of incomprehensible
phenomena both in the physical and mental realms.
       Once science recognizes this new power, unknown to it
even today, it will correct a multitude of errors that have arisen
from attributing everything to one sole cause: matter. The
acknowledgement of this new cause in nature’s phenomena will be
a lever for progress and will produce the effect of discovering an
entirely new agent. With the help of Spiritist law, science’s horizon
will broaden, just as it broadened with the help of the law of gravity.
       Once scholars from atop their cathedras start proclaiming
the existence of the spirit world and its actions on life’s phenomena,
they will instill in our youth the counterweight to materialist ideas,
instead of predisposing them to denying the future.
       In their lessons on classical philosophy, professors teach the
existence of the soul and its attributes according to the various schools
of thought, but without any material proof. Isn’t it strange that now
that such proofs have appeared, they are rejected and regarded as
superstitious by these same professors? Aren’t they telling their students:
We teach you the existence of the soul, but there is nothing that proves
it? When a scholar transmits a theory on a scientific matter, he or she
zealously seeks and happily gathers all the data that may prove the
theory true. So, how could a professor of philosophy, whose duty it
is to prove to his or her students that they have a soul, regard with
disdain the means of providing them with a patent demonstration?
       101. Let us say that spirits are incapable of teaching us
anything that we don’t already know or that we cannot find out


                                   190

                    Elementary Notions of Spiritism


about by ourselves; even then, the mere proof of the spirit world’s
existence should be enough to bring about a revolution in thought.
Now, a revolution in thought necessarily leads to a revolution in the
order of things, and it is this revolution that Spiritism is preparing.
       102. But spirits have done more than this. If their revelations
are surrounded by certain problems and demand detailed
precautions for them to be verified precisely, it is no less true that
enlightened spirits – when we know how to question them and
when they are permitted – can reveal unknown facts to us, provide
us with explanations of incomprehensible things and place us
on a more rapid path of progress. It is in this, especially, that the
complete and careful study of the Spiritist science is indispensable
in order not to ask of it what it cannot give; overstepping its
bounds is what exposes us to being deceived.
       103. The smallest causes can produce the largest effects;
thus it is that, from a small seed arises a huge tree; that the fall of
an apple leads to the discovery of the law that governs worlds; that
frogs twitching on a plate revealed the galvanic force; it was also
thus that, from the ordinary phenomenon of the turning tables
arose proof of the invisible world, and from such proof a doctrine
that in just a few years has crossed the world and can regenerate it
simply by providing evidence for the reality of the future life.
       104. In conformance with the axiom that there is nothing
new under the sun, Spiritism teaches little in way of absolutely new
truths. There are no absolute truths except those that are eternal;
since they are founded upon the laws of nature, such truths, taught
by Spiritism, have therefore existed throughout all ages. There, we
can find the seeds that a more complete study and more careful
observation have developed further. The truths taught by Spiritism
are thus consequences rather than discoveries.
       Spiritism has neither discovered nor invented spirits,
nor has it discovered the spirit world, which has been believed


                                 191

                             Chapter II


in throughout all ages; it has only demonstrated it by means of
physical phenomena and has shown it in its true light, thereby
freeing it from the prejudices and superstitious ideas that have
engendered doubt and disbelief.
       Comment: Although incomplete, these explanations are
enough to show the basis upon which Spiritism rests, the character
of the manifestations, and the degree of trust that they may inspire
according to the circumstances.




                                192

      Chapter III
             M
The Solution to a Few Problems by
 Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


        The Solution to a Few
      Problems by Means of the
          Spiritist Doctrine
                      The Plurality of Worlds
       105. Are the many worlds traveling through space peopled with
inhabitants as is the earth?
       All the Spirits have affirmed it and reason states that it must
be so. Since the earth occupies no special class in the universe,
either because of its position or size, there is nothing that would
justify believing that it alone is privileged enough to be inhabited.
Moreover, God could not have created those billions of globes
simply for the pleasure of our own eyes, especially since the vast
majority is beyond our sight.44
       106. If other worlds are inhabited, are all their inhabitants
similar to those of the earth? In other words, could these inhabitants
live amongst us and us amongst them?
       Their overall form might be more or less the same, but their
composition must be adapted to the environment in which they
live, just as fish are made to live in the water and birds in the air.
If the environment is different – as everything would lead us to
believe, and just as astronomical observations seem to show – their

44
      See The Spirits Book, no. 55; Revue Spirite, 1858, p. 65: Pluralité de mondes, by
     Flammarion. – Auth.



                                          195

                                        Chapter III


physical composition must be different also; hence, in their normal
state they probably could not live amongst one another with the
same bodies. All the Spirits have confirmed this to be a fact.
        107. Assuming that these worlds are inhabited, are they in the
same position as the earth from the moral and intellectual point of view?
        According to what the Spirits have taught, the various worlds are
at very different degrees of evolution; some are in the same condition
as the earth; others are even less evolved: the human beings on them
are even more brutish, more physical and more inclined toward
evil. On the other hand, there are worlds on which human beings
are morally, intellectually and physically more-evolved, where moral
evil is unknown, where the arts and sciences have attained a degree
of perfection incomprehensible to us, and where the inhabitants’
less physical composition is subject neither to suffering, disease, nor
infirmity. People live in peace without trying to harm one another,
and they do not experience the vexations, troubles, afflictions or needs
that assail earth’s people. Moreover, there are worlds that are more
evolved still, where the nearly fluidic corporeal envelope approaches
more and more the nature of the angels. In the progressive series of
the worlds, the earth is neither in the first nor the last category, but it
is one of the most material and least evolved.45

                                     The Soul
       108. Where is the seat of the soul?
       The soul is not, as is generally believed, located in any one
part of the body. Along with the perispirit, it forms a fluidic,
penetrable whole assimilating the entire body, with which it
comprises a complex being and from which death is no more than
a sort of split. One may visualize two like bodies interpenetrating
45
      See Revue Spirite, 1858, pp. 67, 108 and 223; ibid, 1860, pp. 318 and 320; The Gospel
     according to Spiritism, chap. III . – Auth.



                                            196

     The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


each other, joined during life and separated after death. In death,
one is destroyed while the other remains.
       During life, the soul acts more specially upon the organs of
thought and sentiment. It is simultaneously internal and external;
that is, it radiates outward. It can even leave the body, travel far
and manifest its presence somewhere else, as observation and
somnambulistic phenomena have shown.
       109. Is the soul created at the same time as the body or before?
       Apart from the existence of the soul, this question is one of
the most crucial, because its solution leads to the most important
consequences. It is the only key to a multitude of problems
unsolvable until now for lack of being considered.
       There are two possibilities: either the soul exists or does not
exist before the body’s formation – there can be no middle ground.
With the preexistence of the soul, everything is explained logically
and naturally; without it, it is even impossible to justify certain
dogmas of the Church. It is this very impossibility of justification
that has led so many thinking people to disbelief.
       The Spirits have resolved the question in the affirmative,
and neither the phenomena nor logic can leave any doubt about
it. However, once we accept the soul’s preexistence as a simple
hypothesis at least, we will see that most difficulties disappear.
       110. If the soul exists prior to the body, then before its union
with the body did it possess its individuality and self-awareness?
       Without individuality and self-awareness, the results would
be the same, as if it had not existed in the first place.
       111. Prior to its union with the body, had the soul achieved any
progress or had it been stationary?
       The fact of the soul’s prior progress is both the consequence
of observation of the phenomena and the Spirits’ teachings.
       112. Did God create all souls morally and intellectually equal
or did God create some more perfect and intelligent than others?


                                   197

                                            Chapter III


       If God had created some souls more perfect than others,
such favoritism would not be compatible with God’s justice. Since
all are God’s creatures, why would God exempt some from labor
while imposing it on others in order to achieve eternal happiness?
The inequality of souls at their origin would be a negation of
God’s justice.
       113. If all souls are created equal, how can the diversity of
aptitudes and natural predisposition amongst earth’s humankind
be explained?
       This diversity is the consequence of the progress the
soul accomplished before its union with the body. Souls more
advanced in intelligence and morality are those who lived longer
and progressed more prior to their incarnation.
       114. What is the state of the soul at its origin?
       Souls are created simple and ignorant, that is, without
knowledge or an understanding of good and evil, but with an
equal aptitude for all things. At their beginning, they are in a sort
of infancy with neither their own will nor perfect awareness of
their existence. Little by little, their free will develops along with
their ideas.46
       115. Did the soul accomplish its previous progress in the soul
state per se, or in a previous corporeal existence?
       Besides the Spirits’ teachings regarding this point, the study
of the differing degrees of humans’ advancement on the earth
demonstrates that the soul’s previous progress must have been
accomplished over a series of corporeal existences that varied in
number according to the degree they have reached. Such deduction
is the result of having observed the phenomena occurring before
our eyes every day.47


46
     See The Spirits’ Book, nos. 114 ff. – Auth.
47
     See The Spirits’ Book, nos. 166-222; Revue Spirite, Apr. 1862, pp. 97-106. – Auth.



                                                   198

     The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


  Human Beings during their Life on Earth
       116. At what moment does the union between the soul and
body occur?
       At conception, the spirit, although still in the errant state,
becomes connected by a fluidic tie to the body with which it is to
unite. This tie tightens as the body develops. From then on, the spirit
is overcome by a sort of confusion that continues to increase. At the
time of birth, this confusion is complete and the spirit loses its self-
awareness; it regains its ideas gradually, starting at the moment of the
child’s first breath. At this point, the union is complete and definitive.
       117. What is the intellectual state of the child’s soul at the
moment of its birth?
       The soul’s intellectual and moral state is the same as before its
union with the body; that is, the soul possesses all the ideas it had
acquired previously, but due to the confusion that accompanies its
change, its ideas are momentarily in a latent state. They gradually
awaken, but manifest only in proportion to the development of
the child’s organs.
       118. What is the origin of innate ideas, precocious dispositions,
and instinctive aptitudes for an art or science without having
undergone any formal instruction?
       Innate ideas can have only two possible sources: the creation
of some souls more perfect than others, in which case they would
have been created at the same time as the body, or the previous
progress accomplished prior to the union between the soul and
the body. Since the former is incompatible with God’s justice,
that leaves only the latter. Innate ideas are the result of knowledge
acquired during previous existences, and which remain in a state
of intuition to serve as the basis for acquiring new ideas.
       119. How can geniuses appear in social classes deprived of any
intellectual education?


                                   199

                                 Chapter III


       This fact shows that innate ideas are independent of the
environment in which people are educated. Both environment
and education develop innate ideas, but they do not provide them.
Persons of genius are incarnations of already-advanced spirits, who
have already progressed significantly. Thus, education may provide
the instruction they still lack, but it cannot provide genius where
there is none.
       120. Why are there children who are instinctively good in a
wicked environment and in spite of bad examples, whereas others are
instinctively evil in a good environment and in spite of good counsels?
       It is the result of already-accomplished moral progress, just
as innate ideas are the result of intellectual progress.
       121. Of two children of the same parents and educated under the
same conditions, why may one be intelligent and the other slow, one good
and the other evil? Why is it that the child of a person of genius is sometimes
a dullard and the child of a dullard a person of genius?
       This fact finds its support in the origin of innate ideas.
Moreover, it shows that the soul of such a child in no way proceeds
from the parents; otherwise, in virtue of the saying that the part
is of the same nature as the whole, the parents would transmit
their qualities and defects to their children, just as they transmit
the principle of their corporeal qualities. In procreation, only the
body proceeds from the body, whereas the souls are independent
of one another.
       122. If souls are independent of one another, where does the
mutual love of parents for their children come from?
       Spirits are brought together out of affinity, and birth into this
or that family does not happen by chance. Most often it depends
on the choice of the spirit who rejoins those whom it used to love
in the spirit world or during previous lifetimes. Furthermore,
parents have the mission to aid the progress of the spirits who
incarnate in their children; and to encourage them, God inspires


                                     200

         The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


them to mutual affection; however, they often fail at their mission
and are punished as a result.48
       123.Why are there bad parents and bad children?
       They are spirits who are brought together as a family not
out of affinity, but as a trial, and often as a punishment for what
they were in a previous existence. One parent is given a bad child
because he himself or she herself was perhaps a bad child; in order
to undergo the punishment of talion, the child is given a bad
parent because he or she was a bad parent.49
       124.Why do we find certain persons born into a lowly condition
possessed of instincts of dignity and greatness, while others, born into
the upper classes, display instincts of a lower nature?
       This is an example of an intuitive memory of their character
and the social position they occupied in a previous existence.
       125.What is the cause of the sympathies and antipathies
between persons who meet for the first time?
       They are most often persons who once knew and perhaps
loved each other in a previous existence, and who, upon meeting
once again, are attracted to each other.
       Instinctive antipathies also result from previous relationships.
       These two sentiments may have a different cause, however.
The perispirit radiates around the body a type of atmosphere
imbued with the good or bad qualities of the incarnate spirit. By
means of the contact of their spiritual fluids, two persons who
meet experience the resultant feeling, which may be either pleasant
or unpleasant. Their spiritual fluids tend either to intermingle or
to repel each other according to their similar or dissimilar nature.
       This is how the phenomenon of thought transmission may
be explained. Through the contact of their spiritual fluids, two

48
     See The Spirits’ Book, no. 379 on Childhood. – Auth.
49
      See Revue Spirite, 1861, p. 270: La peine du talion. – Auth. (See also Heaven and Hell, pt. 2,
     chap. VIII: Antoine B. – Tr).



                                                201

                                        Chapter III


souls understand each other somehow. They are in tune with each
other and comprehend each other without even speaking.
       126. Why don’t people remember their previous lives? Wouldn’t
such remembrance be necessary for their future progress?
       (See “Forgetfulness of the Past” – Dialogue with Visitor, above)
       127. What is the origin of the sentiment called the conscience?
       It is the intuitive remembrance of the progress accomplished
in previous lives and of resolutions made by the spirit before
incarnation – resolutions it does not always have the strength to
keep once incarnated.
       128. Do human beings have free will or are they subject to fatalism?
       If their conduct were subject to fatalism, they would have
no responsibility for the evil or merit for the good they do; hence,
any punishment would be unjust and any recompense senseless.
Humans’ free will is a consequence of God’s justice, the attribute
that gives them their dignity and lifts them above all other creatures.
This is so very true that the esteem they have for one another is
due to their free will. Those who lose it accidentally because of
sickness, insanity, chemical dependency or mental impairment are
pitied or treated with contempt.
       Materialism, which makes all the moral and intellectual
faculties depend on the physical body, reduces humans to the
status of being machines without free will, and consequently, with
no responsibility for the evil or merit for the good they do.50
       129. Did God create evil?
       God did not create evil but established laws, and these
laws are always good because God is supremely good. Those who
obeyed them faithfully would be perfectly happy. But since spirits
have free will, they do not always obey them; evil is the result of
their breaking these laws.

50
      See Revue Spirite, 1861, p. 76: La tête de Garibaldi, ibid, 1862, p. 97: Phrénologie
     spiritualiste. – Auth.



                                            202

     The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


        130. Are humans born good or evil?
        One must distinguish between the soul and the person. The
soul is created simple and ignorant, meaning neither good nor evil,
but because of its free will it is susceptible to taking either the good
path or the evil one; in other words, to obeying or breaking God’s
laws. The person is born either good or evil according to whether
he or she is the incarnation of an evolved or unevolved spirit.
        131. What is the origin of good and evil on the earth, and why
is there more evil than good?
        The origin of evil on the earth is the result of the imperfection
of the spirits incarnated on it. Because the earth is a less evolved
world, the predominance of evil derives from the fact that most
of the spirits that inhabit it are themselves less evolved or have
progressed little. On more highly evolved worlds, where only
purified spirits are allowed to incarnate, evil is either nearly or
completely unknown.
        132. What is the cause of the ills that afflict humankind?
        The earth may be considered as both a world of instruction
for little-evolved spirits and one of expiation for guilty spirits.
Humankind’s ills are the consequence of the moral imperfection
of incarnate spirits. Through the contact of their vices, they make
themselves mutually unhappy and punish one another.
        133. Why do bad individuals frequently prosper while good
ones are the target of all sorts of afflictions?
        For those who see nothing but the present life and who
believe it is the only one, this fact must seem a supreme injustice.
This is not the case, however, when one considers the plurality
of existences and the brevity of each when compared to eternity.
The study of Spiritism shows that the prosperity of bad people has
awful consequences for them in subsequent existences; that the
afflictions of individuals of the good are, on the contrary, followed
by a great and lasting happiness if they have borne their afflictions


                                   203

                               Chapter III


with resignation; for them, it is like one unfortunate day in a
lifetime of prosperity.
        134. Why are some born into destitution and others into opulence?
Why are there persons born blind, hearing and speech-impaired or
afflicted with incurable diseases, whereas others have every physical
advantage imaginable? Is this an effect of chance or of Providence?
        If it is an effect of chance, it cannot be one of Providence;
if it is the effect of Providence, people might ask: where is God’s
goodness and justice? Clearly, it is because they do not understand
the cause behind such ills that many are led to blame God. It is
understandable that those who become poverty-ridden or infirm
due to their imprudence or their excesses should be punished
wherein they have sinned; however, if the soul is created at the same
time as the body, what has it done to deserve such afflictions from
birth or to be exempt from them? If we acknowledge the justice of
God, we must acknowledge that these effects have a cause; if this
cause does not lie in this life, it must lie in a previous one because
in all things the cause must precede the effect. Hence, the soul must
have lived before and it must have deserved the expiation. Spiritist
studies have, in fact, shown us that more than one person born
into poverty was once rich and respected in a previous existence,
but made bad use of the wealth that God enabled him or her to
administer; that more than one person born into abjectness was
once proud and powerful; that quite often those who commanded
with harshness are submitted to the mistreatment and humiliation
that they forced others to bear.
        A life of pain is not always one of expiation; it is quite often
a trial chosen by the spirit itself, who sees it as a way to evolve
more rapidly if it bears it with courage. Wealth is also a trial more
perilous than poverty due to the temptations and abuses it arouses.
The examples of those who have lived also show that it is a trial
from which few manage to emerge victorious.


                                  204

         The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


       Differences in social positions would be all the more unjust
– when they do not result from our conduct in the present life – if
they didn’t have a means of compensation. It is the conviction of
that truth, acquired through Spiritism, which gives us the strength
to endure life’s vicissitudes and to accept our lot without envying
the lot of others.
       135. Why are there severely mentally impaired persons?
       Their situation would hardly be at all reconcilable with
God’s justice if the theory of a single existence were true. No
matter how miserable the situations individuals are born into
may be, they can rise above them by means of intelligence and
labor; mentally impaired persons, however, are destined from
birth to death to suffer brutality and contempt.51 There is no
possible compensation for them. So, why would their soul have
been created that way?
       Spiritist studies of the mentally impaired have shown that
their soul is as intelligent as the souls of the unimpaired; that such
infirmity is an expiation inflicted on spirits for having abused their
intelligence in a previous life, and that they suffer cruelly by feeling
imprisoned by bonds they cannot break and by the contempt to
which they are subjected, when they may have been lauded for
their intelligence in a previous existence.
       136. What state is the soul in during sleep?
       During sleep, only the body rests; the spirit does not sleep.
Experiments have shown that during this time the spirit enjoys its
complete freedom and the full use of its faculties. It takes advantage
of the body’s rest and the times in which its presence is not needed
in order to act freely and go wherever it wishes. During its lifetime,

51
      These were usually the circumstances at the writing of this book in 1859. – Tr. (This IS still
     true here and everywhere, probably less so in more advanced countries. Most severely
     mentally impaired people are segregated. You may want to mention that due to scientific
     research and the growth of societal values, severely mentally people (like that physicist on
     a wheel chair) is acknowledged and respected worldwide)



                                                205

                                             Chapter III


no matter how far it may travel from the body, the spirit remains
connected to it by a fluidic tie that serves to call it back whenever
its presence in the body is needed. This tie is broken only by death.
       137. What causes dreams?
       Dreams result from the spirit’s freedom during sleep and are
sometimes the remembrance of places and persons the spirit has
seen or visited while in that state.52
       138. Where do presentiments come from?
       They are the spirit’s vague and intuitive memories of what
it learned during times of freedom; sometimes, they are secret
warnings given by benevolent spirits.
       139. Why are there both primitive and civilized people?
       Apart from the preexistence of the soul, this question
would be insolvable, unless we were to believe that God created
primitive and civilized souls, which would be a denial of his
justice. Furthermore, reason refuses to believe that, after death,
the soul of the primitive either remains forever in its little-
evolved state or that it is in the same position as the soul of the
enlightened individual.
       If one accepts the idea that there is one starting point for
all souls – the only doctrine compatible with God’s justice – the
simultaneous presence of primitivism and civilization is a material
fact that demonstrates the progress that some have achieved and
that others are capable of achieving. The primitive’s soul thus will
attain the level of the civilized soul with time. However, since
primitives die every day, their souls cannot attain such a level
except through subsequent incarnations more and more perfected
and suitable for their advancement, and after going through all the
intermediary levels between the two extremes.
52
      See The Spirits’ Book: The emancipation of the soul, sleep, dreams, somnambulism, second
     sight, lethargy, etc., nos. 400 ff.; The Mediums’ Book: Evocations of living persons, no. 284;
     Revue Spirite, 1860, p. II: L’Esprit d’un côté et le corps de l’autre; ibid, 1860, p. 81: Etude sur
     l’Esprit des personnes vivantes. – Auth.



                                                  206

     The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


       140. Would it be possible, according to some people’s way
of thinking, that the soul incarnates only once but then goes on to
accomplish further progress in the spirit state or in other realms?
       This proposition would be acceptable if on the earth there
were only people of the same moral and intellectual level, in which
case we could say that the earth is meant for only one specific
level; the exact opposite seems obvious, however. In fact, it would
be incomprehensible that primitives could not become civilized
on earth, since there are many advanced souls incarnated on the
same globe. From this we must conclude that the possibility for
the plurality of earthly existences results from the very examples
we have right before our eyes. If it were otherwise, we would have
to explain: First, why would only earth have the monopoly on
incarnation? Second, if such a monopoly were a fact, then why are
there souls incarnated at every level of advancement?
       141. In the midst of civilized societies, why are there individuals
of a level of ferociousness similar to the most barbaric primitives?
       They are little-evolved spirits who have left their former
barbaric cultures to reincarnate in an environment unfamiliar to
them, and in which they feel out of place, just as a boor would feel
if suddenly brought into the environment of high society.
           Comment: It would be hard to believe, without denying God’s
           justice and goodness, that the soul of a hardened criminal could
           have the same point of departure in this life as an individual full of
           every virtue. If the soul were not previous to the body, the soul of
           the criminal would be as new as the soul of the moral individual;
           why then would one be good and the other evil?

       142. Where do the distinctive characteristics of the various
cultures come from?
       From spirits who share more or less the same tastes and inclinations
and who incarnate in a sympathetic environment – and often in the
same environment – where they can satisfy such inclinations.


                                     207

                                            Chapter III


        143. How do cultures progress and decay?
        If the soul were created at the same time as the body, the
humans of today would be as new and as primitive as the humans
of the Middle Ages. But why, then, are their habits more benign
and their minds more developed? If in the death of the body the
soul leaves the earth for good, we must ask further: What would
be the result of the work done to improve a culture if it had to be
recommenced with the new souls arriving each and every day?
        Spirits incarnate into a sympathetic environment and according
to the level of their advancement. For example, a person in one culture,
who has progressed sufficiently but who did not find in that culture
an environment corresponding to the level he or she has reached, will
incarnate in a more advanced culture. As a generation moves a step
forward, through sympathy it attracts new arrivals of more advanced
spirits who perhaps might have previously lived in that same country
and progressed. It is thus that, step by step, a nation advances. If the
majority of the new arrivals were of a less evolved nature, and if the
former inhabitants departing every day did not then return to a worse
environment, the culture would decay and end up dying out.
                 Comment: Such questions give rise to others which find their
                 solution in the same principle; for example, where does the
                 diversity of cultures on earth come from? Are there cultures that
                 rebel against progress? Is the black race capable of attaining the level
                 of the European?53 Is slavery54 useful to the progress of less evolved
                 cultures? How can the transformation of humankind take place?55

53
      Kardec asks this question in the context of Europe’s colonization of Africa in the 1800s, at
     the time this book was written. – Tr.
54
      See The Spirits’ Book, no. 829: “Every instance of subjection of one human being to another
     is contrary to the law of God. Slavery is an abuse of power and will disappear with progress
     little by little, as will all other abuses.” (See also nos. 830-832, ibid, on this subject.) The
     Spirits’ Book was published in 1857 while slavery was still legally practiced in many parts
     of the world, including the United States. Unfortunately, other “severe forms of trafficking
     in persons” continue in our times, as attested by the U.S. State Department annual report
     “Trafficking in Persons.” – Tr.
55
     See The Spirits’ Book: The Law of Progress, nos. 776 ff.; Revue Spirite, 1862, p.1: Doctrine des
     anges déchus, ibid, 1862, p. 97: Perfectibilité de la race nègre. – Auth.



                                                 208

         The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


                     Human Beings after Death
        144. How does the soul’s separation from the body occur? Does it
occur suddenly or gradually? The soul’s liberation occurs gradually
and at varying degrees of slowness according to individuals and the
circumstances of their deaths. The bonds that used to unite the soul to
the body are broken only little by little; the separation occurs less quickly
if the person’s life was more materialistic and sensually inclined.56
        145. What is the soul’s situation immediately after the death of
the body? Is it instantly aware of itself? In other words, what does it
see? What does it feel?
        At the moment of death, at first everything is confused.
The soul needs some time to get a hold of itself. It is dazed and
in the state of someone awakening from a deep sleep, trying to
understand his or her situation. As the influence of the matter
from which it has just freed itself wears off, and the sort of fog
that obscures its thoughts dissipates, the lucidity of ideas and the
memory of its past return.
        The duration of this state of confusion varies greatly; it may
last only a few hours or several days, months or even years. It is
shorter for those who during life identified with their future state
because they immediately understand their situation; it is longer
for those who lived more materialistically.
        The sensations that the soul feels at this time also vary greatly.
The confusion following death is not at all painful for morally
upright persons; it is calm and in every way resembles the sensation
that accompanies a peaceful awakening. For those whose conscience
is not clean and who are more bound to the corporeal than the
spiritual life, it is full of anxiety and distress, which increase as they
regain their self-awareness. They are overcome with fear and a sort
of dread at what they see, and especially of what they foresee.
56
     See The Spirits’ Book, no. 155. – Auth.



                                               209

                                              Chapter III


        The sensation that may be termed physical is one of great
relief and immense well-being; the spirit feels relieved of a burden
and very happy at no longer feeling the corporeal pain experienced
a few moments before; at feeling free, liberated, detached and alert,
as if it had been freed from heavy chains.
        In its new situation, the soul sees and hears what it saw and
heard before death, but it also sees and hears other things that
are beyond the coarse bodily organs. It experiences sensations and
perceptions unknown to us.57
                 Comment: These responses, as well as all those having to do with
                 the soul’s situation after death or during life, are not the result of a
                 theory or system but of direct studies of thousands of individuals
                 observed in every phase and period of their spirit existence, from
                 the lowest to the highest degree of the hierarchy, and according to
                 their habits during their earthly life, the kind of death, etc. When
                 speaking of the spirit life, it is often stated that no one knows what
                 happens there because no one has ever returned from it. That is a
                 mistake because it is precisely those who are there who have come to
                 instruct us, and God is allowing it more nowadays than ever before
                 as a final warning to disbelief and materialism.

       146. After the soul has left the body, does it see God?
       The soul’s perceptive faculties are proportional to its
purification; only highly purified souls may enjoy God’s presence.
       147. If God is everywhere, why can’t all spirits see him?
       God is everywhere because God radiates everywhere, and
one could say that the universe is immersed in divinity, just as we
ourselves are immersed in the sun’s light. But less evolved spirits
are surrounded by a sort of fog that hides it from their eyes, and
which dissipates only as they purify and dematerialize themselves.
From the visual point of view, low order spirits are, in relation to
God, like incarnates in relation to spirits: truly blind.

57
     See Revue Spirite, 1859, p. 224: Mort d’un spirite; ibid, 1860, p. 332: Le réveil de l’Esprit; ibid,
     1862, p. 129 and 171: Osèques de M. Sanson. – Auth.



                                                   210

     The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


       148. After death, is the soul aware of its individuality? What
evidence is there and how can we prove it?
       If souls did not retain their individuality after death, it would
be both for them and for us as if they did not exist at all, and the
moral consequences would be exactly the same. They would have
no distinctive characteristics and criminals would be on the same
level as morally upright individuals, which would mean that no
one would have any interest in doing good.
       In mediumistic manifestations, the soul’s individuality is
disclosed in a material manner, so to speak, by the language and
qualities characteristic to each soul. Since they all think and act
differently, some are good and others evil, some learned and others
ignorant, some want what others do not; this is obvious proof that
they are not merged into a homogenous whole. This goes without
mentioning the obvious proofs they have provided us of having
animated this or that particular individual while on earth. Thanks
to experimental Spiritism, proof of the soul’s individuality is no
longer a vague concept but a result of observation.
       The soul itself proves its individuality because its own
thoughts and will are distinct from those of others. It also proves it
by means of its fluidic envelope or perispirit, a sort of limited body
that makes it a separate being.
          Comment: Some people think they can escape the criticism of
          materialism by believing in a universal intelligent principle, a portion
          of which we absorb at birth and which comprises the soul, and which
          we give back after death to the common mass, into which our souls
          blend like drops of water in the ocean. This theory – a sort of transition
          – does not deserve the name spiritualism, because it is as hopeless as
          materialism. The common reservoir of the Universal Whole would be
          the same as nothingness since there would be no more individualities
          there.

      149. Does the kind of death influence the state of the soul?
      The state of the soul varies considerably according to the


                                      211

                                             Chapter III


kind of death, but especially according to the nature of its habits
during its earthly life. In natural death, the disengagement occurs
gradually and without shock, and frequently begins even before the
body’s life is extinguished. In violent death through suicide, capital
punishment or accident, the ties are broken all of a sudden; surprised
by this occurrence, it becomes greatly confused by the change that has
taken place in itself and cannot comprehend its situation. One fairly
constant phenomenon in such cases is that the spirit is not convinced
that death has occurred, and this delusion can last several months or
years. While in this state, it comes and goes, looking after its affairs
as if it were still in this world, but it is very perplexed when no one
responds when it speaks. This delusion does not apply exclusively to
violent deaths, however; it may be found in many individuals whose
life was absorbed by materialistic pleasures and interests.58
        150. Where does the spirit go after having left the body?
        It does not become lost in the immensity of the infinite as
is generally believed. It is in the errant59 state in the spirit world,
and most frequently it finds itself amongst those it used to know,
and especially amongst those it used to love, as it is able to travel
instantly over great distances.
        151. Does the soul retain its affections from earth?
        It retains all of its moral affections; it forgets only the
material affections that are no longer important to it. That is why
it joyously comes to see its relatives and friends once again, and is
happy that they have remembered it.60
        152. Does the soul retain any memory of what it did while on
the earth? Is it still interested in the endeavors it left unfinished?

58
      See The Spirits’ Book, no. 165; Revue Spirite, 1858, p. 166: Le suicidé de la Samaritaine; ibid,
     1858, p. 326: Un esprit au convoi de son corps; ibid, 1859, p. 184: Le Zouave de Magenta; ibid,
     1859, p. 319: Un Esprit qui ne se croit pas mort; ibid, 1863, p. 97: François Simon Louvet. – Auth.
59
     See The Spirits’ Book, no. 224. – Tr.
60
     See Revue Spirite, 1860, p. 202: Les amis ne nous oublient pas dans l’autre monde; II - ibid,
     1862, p. 132. – Auth.



                                                  212

         The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


       That depends on how evolved it is and the nature of its
endeavors. Dematerialized spirits care little about material matters
and are happy to be free of them. As for the endeavors they
had begun, according to their importance and usefulness, they
sometimes inspire others with the thought of finishing them.
       153. In the spirit world, does the soul once again meet the
relatives and friends who preceded it?
       Not only does it meet them, but it also meets many others
it used to know in its previous existences. Usually, those for whom
it held the most affection come to welcome it on its return to the
spirit world, and they help it free itself from its earthly bonds.
However, being denied meeting their loved ones once again is
sometimes a punishment for guilty spirits.
       154. In the other life, what is the intellectual and moral state of
children who died at a very young age? Are their faculties still as child-
like as they were while incarnate? The incomplete development of
the organs of such children did not enable their spirits to manifest
completely; once freed from their envelope, their faculties are as
they were prior to incarnating. Since their spirits spent only a few
moments physically alive, their faculties could not have changed.
                Comment: In spirit communications, the spirit of a child can
                therefore speak as that of an adult because it could be a highly
                advanced spirit. If it sometimes assumes child-like language, it does
                so in order not to deprive its mother of the enchantment of a fragile,
                delicate being adorned with all the grace of innocence.61
                The same question may be asked regarding the intellectual state of
                the souls of mentally impaired and insane persons after death; the
                answer lies in the aforementioned.

      155. After death, what is the difference between the souls of
learned individuals and unlearned ones, and between the souls of
primitives and civilized persons?

61
     See Revue Spirite, 1858, p. 17: Mère! Je suis là! – Auth.



                                                 213

                                               Chapter III


        Approximately the same difference as between them during
life, for entering the spirit world does not endow the soul with all
the knowledge it lacked while on the earth.
        156. Do souls progress intellectually and morally after death?
        They progress more or less so, according to their will; some
progress significantly, but they need to put into practice during the
corporeal life what they have acquired in knowledge and morality.
Souls who remain stationary return to an existence similar to
the one they left, whereas those who have progressed merit an
incarnation of a higher level.
        Since progress is proportional to the spirit’s will, there are
spirits who for a long time retain the tastes and inclinations they
had during life, and who pursue the same ideas.62
        157. Is a person’s fate in the future life irrevocably sealed after death?
        The irrevocable sealing of a person’s fate after death would
be a complete negation of God’s goodness and justice because
there are many who did not depend on their own efforts to
educate themselves sufficiently – not to mention mentally
impaired and primitive individuals, and the countless children
who die before having experienced life. Even among educated
persons there are many who might think they are sufficiently
perfected to be exempt from doing anything more; but is this
not manifest proof that God gives of his goodness, allowing a
person to do the next day what he or she did not do the day
before? If fate is irrevocably sealed, why do people die at such
differing ages, and why does not God, out of divine justice,
allow everyone time to do the best possible or to repair the
evil they have done? How can one be sure that a blameworthy
person who died at thirty years of age would not have repented
and have become a moral person if he or she had lived to be
62
     See Revue Spirite, 1858, p. 82: La reine d’Oude; ibid, p. 145: L’Esprit et les héritiers; ibid, p. 186:
     Le tambour de la Béresina; ibid, 1859: p. 344: Un ancien charretier; ibid, 1860, p. 325: Progrès
     des Esprits; ibid, 1861, p. 126: Progrès d’un Esprit pervers. – Auth.



                                                    214

         The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


sixty? Why would God deny him or her such an opportunity
when God gives it to others? By itself, the fact of the diversity
of life’s duration and the moral state of most people proves the
impossibility – if one believes in God’s justice – that the soul’s
fate is irrevocably sealed after death.
       158. In the future life, what is the fate of children who died at
a very young age?
       This question is one of those that best demonstrates the
justice and need of the plurality of existences. A soul who lived
only a few moments and did neither good nor evil would merit
neither reward nor punishment. According to Christ’s maxim
that all are rewarded or punished according to their deeds, it would
be both illogical and contrary to God’s justice to believe that,
without having worked for it, such a soul would be called to
enjoy the perfect bliss of the angels, or that it could be deprived
of such; nevertheless, it must have some kind of fate. A combination
of the two throughout eternity would also be an injustice. An
existence interrupted at its beginning cannot thus have any
consequences for the soul. Its current fate is the result of what it
deserved from its previous existence; its future fate will be what
it deserves in its later existences.
       159. Do souls have occupations in the spirit life? Do they
concern themselves with matters other than their joys or sufferings?
       If souls were concerned only with themselves throughout
eternity, that would be selfishness, and God, who condemns
selfishness, would not approve in the spirit life what is punishable
in the corporeal one. Souls or spirits have occupations in keeping
with their degree of advancement while at the same time they seek
to learn and improve themselves.63
       160. What do the sufferings of the soul consist of after death?
Are guilty souls tortured in material flames?
63
     See The Spirits’ Book, no. 558: Occupations and Missions of Spirits. – Auth.



                                               215

                            Chapter III


      The church nowadays realizes perfectly well that the
fire of hell is mental and not physical; however, it does not
define the nature of the sufferings. Spirit communications
have brought them before our eyes. Through them, we can
determine what these sufferings are, and we can be convinced
that even though they are not the result of material fire – which
in effect could not burn non-material souls – they are no less
horrifying in certain cases. Such sufferings are not uniform
and vary infinitely according to the nature and degree of the
wrongs committed, and it is nearly always these very wrongs
that serve as punishment. It is thus that certain murderers
are forced to remain at the place of their crime and to see
their victims continuously in front of them; that persons of
sensualistic and materialistic tastes retain these same tastes, and
the impossibility of physically satisfying them is true torture;
that misers believe they are suffering from the cold and the
privations they endured while alive because of their miserliness;
that other misers remain close to the hoards they buried and
experience unending anxiety out of the fear that they might
get stolen; in other words, there is not one wrong, one moral
imperfection, one evil act that does not have its counterpart
and natural consequences in the world of spirits; hence, there is
no need for a determined and circumscribed place: everywhere
the wicked spirit goes, it carries its own hell with it.
      Besides spiritual punishments, there are physical
punishments and trials that the not-yet-purified spirit must
endure in new incarnations, where it is placed in a position
to bear what it made others bear: being humiliated if it had
been proud, poverty stricken if it had misused its wealth, made
unhappy by its child if it had been a bad child itself, etc. As
we have stated, the earth is a place of exile and expiation – a
purgatory – for spirits of that nature. It will depend on each one


                               216

         The Solution to a Few Problems by Means of the Spiritist Doctrine


not to have to return, seeking to improve itself enough to deserve
going to a better world.64
        161. Is prayer beneficial for suffering souls?
        Prayer is recommended by all good spirits; moreover, it is
asked for by imperfect spirits as a means of relieving their suffering.
The soul who is prayed for experiences relief because it is a display
of interest, and the unfortunate soul is always relieved when it
encounters caring hearts that show compassion for its pain. Also,
prayer stimulates repentance and the desire to do what it must to
be happy; thus, prayer can shorten its punishment, if, on its part,
the suffering soul seconds it through its own goodwill.65
        162. What do the pleasures of blissful souls entail? Do such
spirits spend eternity in contemplation?
        Justice demands that the reward be proportional to the
merit, just as the punishment to the gravity of the wrong; hence,
there are infinite degrees in the pleasures of the soul from the
moment it enters the path of the good until it attains perfection.
        The blissfulness of good spirits entails the knowledge of all
things and not having any hatred, jealousy, envy, ambition or any of
the other passions that make human beings unhappy. The love that
unites them is for them the source of supreme bliss. They do not
experience the needs, suffering or anxieties of physical life. A state
of unending contemplation would be a senseless and monotonous
happiness proper for a selfish spirit, since its existence would be
one of unlimited uselessness. Spirit life, on the contrary, is one of
64
      See The Spirits’ Book, no. 237: Perceptions, Sensations and Sufferings of Spirits; ibid, Part
     Four: Hopes and Consolations; Future Punishments and Rewards; Revue Spirite, 1858, p.
     79: L’assassin Lemaire; ibid, 1858, p. 166: Le suicidé de la Samaritaine; ibid, 1858, p. 331:
     Sensations des Esprits; ibid, 1859, p. 275: Le père Crépin; ibid, 1860, p. 61: Estelle Régnier;
     ibid, 1860, p. 247: Le suicidé de la rue Quincampoix; ibid, 1860, p. 316: Le Châtiment;
     ibid, 1860, p. 325: Entrée d’un coupable dans le monde des Esprits; ibid, 1860, p. 384:
     Châtiment de l’égoïste; ibid, 1861, p. 53: Suicide d’un athée; ibid, 1861, p. 270: La peine
     du talion. – Auth.
65
      See The Spirits’ Book, no. 664; Revue Spirite, 1859, p. 315: Effects de la prière sur les Esprits
     souffrants. – Auth.



                                                  217

                                          Chapter III


ceaseless activity because of the missions that spirits receive from
the Supreme Being as his agents in the governance of the universe;
missions that are in keeping with their advancement and that they
are happy to fulfill since they furnish them with opportunities to
make themselves useful and to do the good.66
                Comment: We invite the adversaries of Spiritism and those who do
                not accept reincarnation to provide a more logical solution to the
                problems discussed above by using a principle other than that of the
                plurality of existences.




66
      See The Spirits’ Book, no. 558: Occupations and Missions of Spirits; Revue Spirite, 1860,
     p. 321 and 322: Les purs Esprits; Le séjour des bienheureux; ibid, 1861, p. 179: Madame
     Gourdon. – Auth.



                                              218



