Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 2   3/7/2009 18:00:19

                                        THE GOSPEL
                         ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 1                3/7/2009 18:00:19

                                  THE GOSPEL
                     ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM

                                             WITH

                      THE EXPLANATION OF THE MORAL
                     MAXIMS OF CHRIST IN CONCORDANCE
                              WITH SPIRITISM
                        AND THEIR APPLICATIONS TO
                              THE DIFFERENT
                          CIRCUMSTANCES OF LIFE


                                              BY

                                        ALLAN KARDEC


                  Unshakable faith is only the kind that
                   can stand face to face with reason
                         in all human epochs.




                                 INTERNATIONAL SPIRITIST COUNCIL




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 3                              3/7/2009 18:00:19

               ISBN 978-85-98161-70-9

               B.N.

               Original French:
               L’ÉVANGILE SELON LE SPIRITISME
               (Paris, 1864)

               Translated by DARREL W. KIMBLE and ILY REIS

               1st Edition 2008 – published by the INTERNATIONAL SPIRITIST COUNCIL,
               Brasília, (BR) – 1st impression 200

               002-O; 12/2008

               Cover design by: LUCIANO CARNEIRO HOLANDA

               Layout: CLAUDIO CARVALHO

               Copyright 2008 by
               INTERNATIONAL SPIRITIST COUNCIL
               Av. L-2 Norte – Q. 603 – Conjunto F (SGAN)
               70830-030 – Brasília (DF) – Brazil

               All rights of reproduction, copy, communication to the public and economic use of this
               work are reserved exclusively for the International Spiritist Council (ISC). No part of
               this publication may be reproduced, stored on a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
               any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilm, Internet
               usage, CD-ROM, DVD, recording or otherwise, without prior and express authorization
               from the copyright owner and the publisher of this book according to the terms of law
               9.610/98, which governs such copyrights.



                            CIP-BRASIL. CATALOGAÇÃO-NA-FONTE
                      SINDICATO NACIONAL DOS EDITORES DE LIVROS, RJ.
                 K27g


                         Kardec, Allan, 1804-1869
                              The Gospel according to Spiritism: with the explanation
                         of the moral maxims of Christ in concordance with Spiritism
                         and their applications to the different circumstances of life /
                         by Allan Kardec; [translated by Darrel W. Kimble and Ily Reis].
                         – Brasília, DF (Brazil): International Spiritist Council, 2008
                               568p. : 21cm

                              Translated from: L’Évangile selon le Spiritisme

                              ISBN 978-85-98161-70-9

                              1. Jesus Cristo - Interpretações espíritas. 2. Espiritismo.
                      I. Conselho Espírita Internacional. I. Título.

                 08-5338.                              CDD 133.9
                                                       CDU 133.7
                 04.12.08     08.12.08                                           010077




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 4                                                                3/7/2009 18:00:20

               Contents

               Preface ................................................................................. 13


               Introduction ......................................................................... 15
                      I – The objective of this work. – II – The authority of
                      the Spiritist Doctrine. –Universal test of the Spirits’
                      teachings. – III – Historical facts. – IV – Socrates
                      and Plato: Precursors of the Christian idea and
                      Spiritism.


               CHAPTER I – I HAVE NOT COME TO DESTROY THE LAW .. 51
                      The three revelations: Moses; Christ; Spiritism: 1-7.
                      – The alliance between science and religion: 8. –
                      The Spirits’ Teachings: The new era: 9-11.


               CHAPTER II – MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD . 65
                      The future life: 1-3. – The kingship of Jesus: 4. –
                      The point of view: 5-7. – The Spirits’ Teachings: An
                      earthly kingship: 8.


               CHAPTER III – THERE ARE MANY DWELLINGS IN MY
               FATHER’S HOUSE .......................................................... 75
                      The different states of the soul in the errant state:
                      1 and 2. – The different categories of inhabited
                      worlds: 3-5. – Earth’s destiny. – The cause of earthly
                      miseries: 6 and 7. The Spirits’ Teachings: Highly
                      evolved and less evolved worlds: 8-12. – Worlds of
                      trial and expiation: 13-15. – Regenerative worlds:
                      16-18. – The progression of worlds: 19.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 5                                                                         3/7/2009 18:00:20

               CHAPTER IV – NO ONE CAN SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD
               UNLESS HE IS BORN AGAIN ..........................................   91
                      Resurrection and reincarnation: 1-17. – Family
                      ties strengthened by reincarnation but severed by
                      a single existence: 18-23. – The Spirits’ Teachings:
                      Limits on incarnation: 24. – The need for incarnation:
                      25 and 26.


               CHAPTER V – BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED ............... 109
                      The justice of afflictions: 1-3. – Current causes
                      of afflictions: 4 and 5. – Prior causes of afflictions:
                      6-10. – Forgetfulness of the past: 11. – Reasons for
                      resigning oneself: 12 and 13. – Suicide and insanity:
                      14-17. – The Spirits’ Teachings: To suffer well or
                      badly: 18. – Evil and its remedy: 19. – Happiness
                      is not of this world: 20. – The loss of loved ones.
                      Premature deaths: 21. – If he had been a good man,
                      he would have died: 22. – Voluntary suffering: 23. –
                      True misfortune: 24. – Melancholy: 25. – Voluntary
                      trials. True sackcloth: 26. – Should we put an end
                      to our neighbor`s trials? 27. – Is it permissible to
                      shorten the life of a patient who is suffering with no
                      hope of a cure?: 28. – Sacrificing one’s own life: 29
                      and 30. – Making one’s own suffering profitable for
                      others: 31.


               CHAPTER VI – THE CONSOLING CHRIST ....................... 149
                      The easy yoke: 1 and 2. – The promised Consoler:
                      3 and 4. – The Spirits’ Teachings: The coming of the
                      Spirit of Truth: 5-8.


               CHAPTER VII – BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT ...... 157
                      What should be understood by ‘poor in spirit’:
                      1 and 2. – Whoever exalts himself shall be humbled:




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 6                                                    3/7/2009 18:00:20

                      3-6. – Mysteries hidden from the learned and wise:
                      7-10. – The Spirits’ Teachings: Pride and humility:
                      11 and 12. – The mission of the intelligent person
                      on the earth: 13.


               CHAPTER VIII – BLESSED ARE THE PURE OF HEART ... 175
                      Let the children come to me: 1-4. – Sinning in
                      thought. Adultery: 5-7. – True purity. Unclean
                      hands: 8-10. – Scandals. If your hand is a cause for
                      scandal, cut it off: 11-17. – The Spirits’ Teachings:
                      Let the children come to me: 18 and 19. – Blessed
                      are they whose eyes are closed: 20 and 21.


               CHAPTER IX – BLESSED ARE THE MEEK AND
               PEACE-LOVING ........................................................ 193
                      Insults and violence: 1-5. – The Spirits’ Teachings:
                      Affability and meekness: 6. – Patience: 7. – Obedience
                      and resignation: 8. – Anger: 9 and 10.



               CHAPTER X – BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL ................ 203
                      Forgive so that God will forgive you: 1-4. –
                      Reconciliation with one’s adversaries: 5 and 6. –
                      The sacrifice most pleasing to God: 7 and 8. – The
                      speck and the plank in one’s eye: 9 and 10. – Do not
                      judge so that you yourself might not be judged. Let
                      him who is without sin cast the first stone: 11-13.
                      – The Spirits’ Teachings: Forgiveness of offenses:
                      14 and 15. – Indulgence: 16-18. – Is it permissible
                      to reprehend others; to notice the imperfections of
                      others; to divulge the evil of others?: 19-21.


               CHAPTER XI – LOVING ONE’S NEIGHBOR AS ONESELF .. 221
                      The greatest commandment: 1-4. – Render unto
                      Caesar what is Caesar’s: 5-7.– The Spirits’ Teachings:




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 7                                                      3/7/2009 18:00:20

                      The law of love: 8-10. – Selfishness: 11 and 12. – Faith
                      and charity: 13. – Charity toward criminals: 14. –
                      Should one risk one’s own life for a criminal?: 15.


               CHAPTER XII – LOVE YOUR ENEMIES ........................... 239
                      Render good for evil: 1-4. – Discarnate enemies: 5
                      and 6. – If someone strikes your right cheek, offer
                      him the other also: 7 and 8. – The Spirits’ Teachings:
                      Vengeance: 9. – Hatred: 10. – Dueling: 11-16.


               CHAPTER XIII – DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW
               WHAT YOUR RIGHT HAND IS DOING ............................. 259
                      Do     good       without   ostentation:   1-3.   –   Hidden
                      misfortunes: 4.– The widow’ mite: 5 and 6. – Invite
                      the poor and the lame. Give without expecting
                      recompense: 7 and 8.– The Spirits’ Teachings:
                      Material charity and moral charity: 9 and 10.–
                      Beneficence: 11-16. – Compassion: 17. – Orphans:
                      18. – Beneficence repaid with ingratitude; 19. –
                      Exclusive beneficence: 20.


               CHAPTER XIV – HONOR YOUR FATHER AND
               MOTHER .................................................................. 289
                      Filial devotion: 1-4. – Who is my mother and who are
                      my brothers?: 5-7. – Corporeal kinship and spiritual
                      kinship: 8. – The Spirits’ Teachings: Children’s
                      ingratitude and family ties: 9.


               CHAPTER XV – WITHOUT CHARITY THERE IS NO
               SALVATION ................................................................ 305
                      What is needed in order to be saved. Parable of the
                      Good Samaritan: 1-3. – The greatest commandment:
                      4 and 5. – The need for charity according to Paul: 6
                      and 7. – Without the Church there is no salvation.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 8                                                           3/7/2009 18:00:20

                      Without the truth there is no salvation: 8 and 9. –
                      The Spirits’ Teachings: Without charity there is no
                      salvation: 10.


               CHAPTER XVI – YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND
               MAMMON ....................................................................... 317
                      The Salvation of the rich: 1 and 2. – Guard yourselves
                      against avarice: 3.– Jesus at Zachaeus’ house: 4.
                      – Parable of the evil rich man: 5. – Parable of the
                      talents: 6. – The providential usefulness of riches.
                      The trials of riches and poverty: 7. – The inequality
                      of riches: 8. The Spirits’ Teachings: True ownership:
                      9 and 10. – The use of riches: 11-13. – Detachment
                      from earthly possessions: 14.– The transmission of
                      wealth: 15.


               CHAPTER XVII – BE PERFECT ........................................ 343
                      The characteristics of perfection: 1 and 2. – Moral
                      persons: 3. – Good Spiritists: 4. – Parable of the
                      sower: 5 and 6. – The Spirits’ Teachings: Duty: 7.
                      – Virtue: 8. – Superiors and subordinates: 9. – The
                      individual in the world: 10. – Caring for the body
                      and the spirit: 11.


               CHAPTER XVIII – MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE
               CHOSEN ......................................................................... 363
                      Parable of the wedding feast: 1 and 2. – The narrow
                      door: 3-5. – Not all those who say “Lord! Lord!” will
                      enter the kingdom of heaven: 6-9. – Much will be
                      asked of him who has received much: 10-12. – The
                      Spirits’ Teachings: To him who already has, more
                      will be given: 13-15. – Christians shall be recognized
                      by their deeds: 16.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 9                                                                 3/7/2009 18:00:20

               CHAPTER XIX – FAITH MOVES MOUNTAINS .................. 379
                      The power of faith: 1-5. – Religious faith. The state of
                      unshakable faith: 6 and 7. – Parable of the withered
                      fig tree: 8-10. – The Spirits’ Teachings: Faith: the
                      mother of hope and charity: 11. – Divine faith and
                      human faith: 12.


               CHAPTER XX – WORKERS OF THE LAST HOUR ............. 391
                      The Spirits’ Teachings: The last shall be first: 1-3. –
                      The mission of Spiritists: 4. – Workers of the Lord: 5.


               CHAPTER XXI – THERE WILL BE FALSE CHRISTS AND
               FALSE PROPHETS .......................................................... 401
                      The tree is known by its fruit: 1-3. – The mission of
                      prophets: 4. – Prodigies performed by false prophets:
                      5. – Do not believe all spirits: 6 and 7. – The Spirits’
                      Teachings: False prophets: 8. – The characteristics
                      of the true prophet: 9. – False prophets in the spirit
                      world: 10. – Jeremiah and the false prophets: 11.


               CHAPTER XXII – DO NOT SEPARATE WHAT GOD HAS
               JOINED .......................................................................... 419
                      The indissolubility of marriage: 1-4. – Divorce: 5.


               CHAPTER XXIII – STRANGE MORALS ............................. 425
                      Whoever does not hate his father and mother:
                      1-3. – Forsaking father, mother and children: 4-6. –
                      Leaving to the dead the care of burying their dead:
                      7 and 8. – I have not come to bring peace, but
                      division: 9-18.


               CHAPTER XXIV – DO NOT HIDE YOUR LAMP UNDER A
               BUSHEL ......................................................................... 439
                      A lamp under a bushel. Why Jesus speaks in
                      parables: 1-7. – Do not go to the Gentiles: 8-10. –




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 10                                                                 3/7/2009 18:00:20

                      The healthy do not need a doctor: 11 and 12. – The
                      courage of faith: 13-16. – Bear your cross. Whoever
                      wants to save his life will lose it: 17-19.


               CHAPTER XXV – SEEK AND YOU SHALL FIND ............... 451
                      Help yourself and heaven will help you: 1-5. –
                      Observe the birds in the sky: 6-8. – Do not wear
                      yourself out for the possession of gold: 9-11.


               CHAPTER XXVI – GIVE FREELY WHAT YOU HAVE
               RECEIVED FREELY .................................................... 461
                      The gift of healing: 1 and 2. – Paid prayers: 3 and
                      4. – The merchants expelled from the temple: 5
                      and 6. – Mediumship free of charge: 7-10.


               CHAPTER XXVII – ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE .......... 469
                      The characteristics of prayer: 1-4. – The effectiveness
                      of prayer: 5-8. – The action of prayer. The
                      transmission of thought: 9-15. – Intelligible prayers:
                      16 and 17. – Prayers for the dead and for suffering
                      spirits: 18-21. – The Spirits’ Teachings: How to pray:
                      22. – The joy of prayer: 23.


               CHAPTER XXVIII – A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST
               PRAYERS ................................................................. 489
                      Preamble: 1.
                      I – GENERAL PRAYERS
                      The Lord’s Prayer: 2 and 3. – Spiritist meetings: 4-7.
                      – For mediums: 8-10.


                      II – PRAYERS FOR ONESELF
                      To one’s guardian angels and protector spirits:
                      11-14. – To keep evil spirits away: 15-17. – To ask
                      for a fault to be corrected: 18 and 19. – To ask




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 11                                                         3/7/2009 18:00:20

                      for strength to resist a temptation: 20 and 21. –
                      Thanksgiving for victory over a temptation: – To ask
                      for counsel: 24 and 25. – During life’s afflictions: 26
                      and 27. Thanksgiving for a favor received: 28 and
                      29. The act of submission and resignation: 30-33.
                      – At a moment of imminent danger: 34 and 35. –
                      Thanksgiving for having escaped a danger: 36 and
                      37. – At the time of sleep: 38 and 39. – Upon sensing
                      the approach of death: 40 and 41.


                      III – PRAYERS FOR OTHERS
                      For someone in affliction: 42 and 43. – Thanksgiving
                      for a benefit granted to someone else: 44 and 45.
                      – For our enemies and those who wish us ill: 46
                      and 47. – Thanksgiving for a benefit granted to our
                      enemies: 48 and 49. – For the enemies of Spiritism:
                      50-52. – Prayer for a newborn child: 53-56. – For a
                      dying person: 57 and 58.


                      IV – PRAYERS FOR THOSE WHO ARE NO LONGER
                      ON THE EARTH
                      For someone who has just died: 59-61. – For persons
                      for whom we have held affection: 62-63. – For
                      suffering souls who ask for prayers: 64-66. – For a
                      deceased enemy: 67-68. – For a criminal: 69 and 70.
                      – For a suicide: 71 and 72. – For repentant spirits: 73
                      and 74. – For hardened spirits: 75 and 76.


                      V – PRAYERS FOR THE SICK AND FOR THE
                      OBSESSED
                      For the sick: 77-80. – For the obsessed: 81-84.


               Explanatory Note ................................................................. 561




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 12                                                                  3/7/2009 18:00:20

               Preface




                      Like an immense army setting out upon receiving its
               orders, the Spirits of the Lord – who are the powers of
               heaven – have fanned out over the entire face of the earth.
               Like falling stars, they have come to illumine the way and
               open the eyes of the blind.

                      Verily I tell you that the time has come in which all
               things must be reestablished according to their true meaning
               in order to dissipate the darkness, to confound the proud
               and to glorify the righteous.

                      The great voices of heaven resound like trumpets,
               and the choirs of angels have assembled together. Men
               and women, we invite you to the divine concert; may your
               hands take up the lyre; may your voices be as one, and
               like a sacred hymn expand and vibrate from one end of the
               universe to the other.

                      Men and women, brothers and sisters whom we love,
               we are here beside you; love one another also and say from




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 13                                    3/7/2009 18:00:20

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               the bottom of your hearts in obedience to the will of your
               Father who is in heaven: “Lord! Lord!” and you shall enter
               the kingdom of heaven.



                                                          SPIRIT OF TRUTH

               Note:
               The above instruction, communicated through
               mediumistic means, summarizes both the true
               character of Spiritism and the objective of this
               work; thus, it has been placed here as the preface.
               – Auth.




                                               14




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 14                                  3/7/2009 18:00:20

               Introduction




               I – THE OBJECTIVE OF THIS WORK



                      The subject matter contained in the Gospels may be
               divided into five parts: the ordinary events in the life of
               Christ, the miracles, the prophecies, the words that served
               for establishing the dogmas of the Church, and the moral
               teachings. Although the first four have been the object of
               controversy, the last has remained unassailable. Before
               this divine code, disbelief itself bows down; it is the ground
               upon which all sects can meet; the banner under which
               all may take shelter, whatever their beliefs may be, for it
               has never been the object of religious dispute, which has
               always and in all places originated from matters of dogma;
               moreover, in arguing over such matters, sects would find
               in the moral teachings their own condemnation, because
               most of them are more attached to the mystical aspect
               than to the moral, which demands the reform of the self.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 15                                      3/7/2009 18:00:20

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               For humankind in particular, this code is a rule of conduct
               embracing all circumstances of private and public life,
               the principle for all social relations founded on strictest
               justice. It is, finally and above all, the infallible path to
               the happiness to come, a corner of the veil lifted regarding
               the future life. It is this part that is the sole object of this
               endeavor.

                      Everyone admires Gospel morality; everyone proclaims
               its sublimity and necessity, but many do so based
               trustingly on what they have heard said about it, or on
               the faith originating from a few maxims that have become
               proverbial; however, few know it in depth, and even fewer
               understand it and know how to deduce its consequences.
               In many cases, the reason for this lies in the difficulty
               that reading the Gospel presents, which for most is quite
               unintelligible. The allegorical form and the intentional
               mysticism of the language make it something that most
               read to quiet their conscience and to fulfill a sense of duty,
               just as they read prayers without understanding them,
               that is, unfruitfully. The moral precepts scattered here
               and there throughout, mixed in with the throng of other
               narratives, go unnoticed, thus making it impossible to
               understand them as a whole, or rendering them the object
               of separate reading and meditation.

                      It is true that treatises have been written on Gospel
               morality, but adaptation to the modern literary style has
               robbed the moral precepts of their initial simplicity, which
               at the same time lends them their appeal and authenticity.
               The same has happened with the isolated maxims reduced



                                               16




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 16                                        3/7/2009 18:00:20

                                            INTRODUCTION



               to their simplest proverbial expression; they are no more
               than aphorisms, which in this case, have lost part of their
               value and interest due to the lack of the incidents and
               circumstances in which they were given.

                      In order to avert such incongruity, we have gathered
               together in this work the passages that may comprise
               a universal moral code per se, apart from sectarian
               distinction. In the Gospel citations, we have preserved
               everything that has been useful for the development of the
               thought, eliminating only matters that are irrelevant to
               the matter at hand. Furthermore, we have scrupulously
               respected the original translation by Sacy, as well as
               his divisions by verse. However, instead of holding to an
               impossible chronological order, which would have had no
               real advantage for such subject matter, the maxims have
               been methodically grouped and classified according to
               their nature so that they follow from one another as far as
               possible. The indication of the chapter and verse numbers
               permits reference to the common classification whenever
               deemed proper.

                      This was not to be only a material endeavor, which in
               and of itself would have been of only secondary usefulness;
               the essential objective was to put it within reach of everyone
               by explaining obscure passages and developing all their
               consequences with a view to applying them to the various
               situations of life. This is what we have attempted to do
               with the help of the good Spirits1 who assist us.

               1
                As in the other works of the Codification, when we use the term “the
               Spirits” with a capital “S”, the text is referring to the group of high order
               spirits who were involved in revealing the Spiritist Doctrine. – Tr.


                                                    17




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 17                                                     3/7/2009 18:00:20

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



                    Many points of the Gospel, the Bible and the sacred
               authors in general are unintelligible, and many even seem
               absurd for lack of a key to comprehending their true
               meaning; this key is to be found entirely within Spiritism – as
               those who have seriously studied it have become convinced,
               and as they will realize even more so later on. Spiritism
               may be found everywhere in antiquity and in every epoch
               of humankind; its vestiges may be found far and wide in
               writings, in creeds and on monuments. It is for this reason
               that, if it has opened up new horizons for the future, it has
               shed a no less vivid light on the mysteries of the past.

                    As a supplement to each precept, we have added certain
               teachings chosen from among those that were dictated by
               the Spirits in various countries through different mediums.
               If these teachings had originated from only one source,
               they might have suffered a personal or environmental
               influence, whereas the diversity of their origins proves that
               the Spirits deliver their teachings everywhere, and that no
               one is privileged in this respect.1

               1
                  On each topic, we certainly could have provided a larger number of
               communications obtained in a multitude of other cities and Spiritist
               centers besides those we cite; however, before anything else, we wished
               to avoid the monotony of needless repetitions and to limit our choice to
               those which, because of their depth and form, most specifically fell within
               the framework of this book, reserving for later publication those that
               could not find a place herein.
                   As for the mediums, we have abstained from naming them; for the
               most part, they have not been acknowledged at their own request, and
               consequently, it would not be proper to make exceptions. Moreover,
               the mediums’ names would not have added any value to the Spirits’
               work; it would be only a satisfaction of vanity, which is of no interest
               to truly authentic mediums. They understand that because their role
               is purely passive, the value of the communications in no way enhances
               their personal merit, and that it would be puerile to flatter themselves
               for an intellectual endeavor to which they loaned only their mechanical
               concourse. – Auth.


                                                   18




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 18                                                   3/7/2009 18:00:20

                                         INTRODUCTION



                      This work is for everyone’s use; all may find in it the
               means to conform their conduct to the morals of Christ.
               Moreover, Spiritists will find in it applications that concern
               them specifically. Thanks to the communications that
               have been permanently established between humans
               and the invisible world, the law of the Gospel – taught to
               all nations by the Spirits themselves – will no longer be
               a dead letter, for all persons will understand it and will
               be incessantly encouraged to put it into practice through
               the counsels of their spirit guides. The Spirits’ teachings
               are truly voices from heaven that have come to enlighten
               humans and invite them to practice the Gospel.



               II – THE AUTHORITY OF THE SPIRITIST DOCTRINE.
               UNIVERSAL TEST OF THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS



                      If the Spiritist Doctrine were a purely human concept,
               it would have as a guarantee only the enlightenment of the
               one who had conceived it; now, no one in this world would
               make the ill-founded claim of possessing the absolute truth
               by him or herself. If the Spirits who have revealed it had
               manifested to only one person, nothing would guarantee
               its origin, for it would be necessary to believe the word of
               whoever stated that he or she had received their teachings.
               Admitting perfect sincerity on his or her part would at most
               convince a circle of acquaintances; he or she might have
               followers but would never succeed in rallying everyone.



                                              19




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 19                                      3/7/2009 18:00:20

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



                      God willed for the New Revelation to reach humankind
               through the quickest and most authentic way possible;
               that is why God has entrusted the Spirits with taking it
               from one pole to the other and manifesting themselves
               everywhere without giving anyone the exclusive privilege
               of hearing their word. One person may be deceived or may
               even deceive him or herself, but that will not happen when
               millions see and hear the same thing: it is a guarantee for
               each and for all. Furthermore, one individual can be made
               to disappear, but multitudes cannot be; books can be
               burned, but the Spirits cannot be; hence, if all the books
               were burned, the source of the Doctrine would not be any
               less inexhaustible for the very reason that it is not of the
               earth; it has appeared everywhere and thus everyone can
               partake of it. In the absence of individuals to spread it,
               there will always be the Spirits, who reach everyone and
               whom no one can reach.

                      Thus, in reality, the Spirits themselves are the ones
               who do the disseminating with the help of innumerable
               mediums, whom they are arousing everywhere. If there
               were but one interpreter, no matter how favored he or
               she might be, Spiritism would barely be known; such an
               interpreter, whatever social class he or she belonged to,
               would have been the object of prejudice on the part of many;
               not every nation would have accepted him or her, whereas
               the Spirits, communicating everywhere to all peoples,
               to all sects and to all parties, have been accepted by all.
               Spiritism has no nationality; it lies outside all particular
               creeds, and has not been imposed by any class of society,
               since any person may receive instruction from his or her


                                               20




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 20                                    3/7/2009 18:00:20

                                         INTRODUCTION



               relatives and friends from beyond the grave. It had to be
               this way so that it could call all humankind to fraternity;
               if it had not placed itself on neutral ground, it would have
               maintained dissensions instead of placating them.

                      This universality in the Spirits’ teaching is what
               comprises Spiritism’s power, and it is also the cause of
               its rapid spread. While the voice of one single individual,
               even with the help of the press, would require centuries
               to reach everyone, thousands of voices are making
               themselves heard simultaneously at all points of the earth,
               proclaiming the same principles and transmitting them to
               both the most unlearned and the most learned so that no
               one may be disinherited. This is an advantage that none of
               the doctrines that have appeared until today have enjoyed.
               If, therefore, Spiritism is a truth, it will fear neither the
               ill will of humans, moral revolutions nor the physical
               disturbances of the globe, because none of these things
               can affect the Spirits.

                      However, this is not the sole advantage resulting
               from such an exceptional position; Spiritism finds in it a
               powerful guarantee against all schisms that might arise,
               whether from the ambition of a few or whether from the
               contradiction of certain spirits. Such contradictions are
               surely an obstacle, but one that carries the medication
               alongside the malady.

                      It is known that, as a consequence of the differences
               that exist in their capabilities, spirits are far from being in
               possession of the whole truth individually; that it is not
               given to all to grasp certain mysteries; that their knowledge



                                              21




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 21                                       3/7/2009 18:00:20

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               is proportional to their purification; that ordinary spirits
               do not know any more than humans and even less than
               some; that amongst them, as amongst the latter, there are
               presumptuous and pseudo-learned spirits who think they
               know what they in fact do not, and theorizers who take their
               own ideas for the truth; in short, that spirits of the highest
               order – those who are completely dematerialized – are the
               only ones divested of earthly ideas and prejudices. However,
               it is also known that deceitful spirits have no scruples in
               cloaking themselves with names they have borrowed in
               order to render their utopian ideas acceptable. The result
               is that, for everything that is outside the exclusively moral
               teaching, the revelations that each one may obtain will have
               an individual character lacking authenticity; that such
               revelations must be considered as the personal opinions
               of this or that spirit, and that it would be imprudent to
               accept them or thoughtlessly promulgate them as absolute
               truths.

                      The first test is undoubtedly that of reason, to which it
               is necessary to submit, without exception, everything that
               comes from spirits; any theory in obvious contradiction to
               common sense, strict logic and the hard evidence that one
               possesses in spite of any respectable name that may have
               signed the communication, must be rejected. However, this
               test is incomplete in many cases due to the insufficiency
               of the knowledge of certain persons and the tendency of
               many to take their own judgment to be the sole arbiter
               of the truth. In such a case, what do those who do not
               have absolute faith in themselves do? They take the advice
               of the greatest number and the opinion of the majority


                                               22




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 22                                        3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



               as their guide. Thus it should be with respect to the
               teachings of spirits, who themselves furnish us the means.

                      Concordance among spirits’ teachings is therefore the
               best test, but it is further necessary for such concordance
               to occur under certain conditions. The least secure of
               all is when the medium him or herself questions several
               spirits about a point in doubt. It is quite obvious that if
               the medium is under the control of an obsession or is
               dealing with a deceitful spirit, then this spirit may tell
               the medium the same thing using different names; nor is
               there any sufficient guarantee in the conformity that may
               be obtained through mediums of one particular Spiritist
               center, because they may be suffering the same influence.

                      The only true guarantee for spirits’ teachings is in the
               overall agreement amongst revelations made spontaneously
               through a large number of mediums unknown to one other
               and in several places.

                      One must understand that we are not here dealing
               with communications of secondary interest, but with those
               related to the very principles of the Doctrine. Experience
               has shown that, when a new principle is to be revealed,
               it is taught spontaneously in different places at the same
               time in an identical manner, if not as to form at least as to
               essence. Thus, if it pleases a spirit to formulate an eccentric
               theory based on its own ideas and outside the truth, one
               may be sure that such a theory will remain circumscribed
               and will fall before the unanimity of instructions given
               everywhere else. We have already had many examples of


                                              23




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 23                                       3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               this. It is this unanimity that has caused the fall of all the
               partial theories that appeared at the beginning of Spiritism,
               when each person explained the phenomena in his or her
               own way, and before the laws that govern the relations
               between the visible and invisible worlds were understood.

                      Such is the basis upon which we support ourselves
               when formulating a principle of the Doctrine; it is not
               because it is in agreement with our own ideas that we
               present it as true; we in no way set ourselves up as the
               supreme arbiter of the truth, nor do we say to anyone:
               “Believe in such a matter because we tell you to.” Our
               opinion is nothing in our own eyes except a personal one
               that might be correct or erroneous, for we are no more
               infallible than anyone else. It is not because a principle
               has been taught to us that it is the truth, but because it
               has received the sanction of concordance.

                      In our position of having received communications from
               close to a thousand authentic Spiritist centers scattered
               over diverse points of the globe, we are also in a position
               to observe the principles upon which this concordance is
               established; it is this observation that has guided us up to
               this day, and it is also that which will guide us in the new
               areas that Spiritism has been called to explore. It is thus
               that, carefully studying the communications received from
               various places – both from France and abroad – we have
               recognized by the very special nature of the revelations
               that there has been a tendency to enter upon a new path
               and that the time has come to take a step forward. These
               revelations – at times made with veiled words – have



                                               24




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 24                                      3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



               frequently gone unperceived by many of those who have
               received them; many others believe they are the only ones
               to have received them. Taken in isolation, they would have
               no value to us – only coincidence confers authenticity
               upon them; later, when the time comes to give them to
               the light of publicity, each person will then remember
               having received teachings with the same meaning. This is
               the general movement which we have observed, which we
               have studied with the assistance of our spirit guides, and
               which has helped to judge the appropriateness of doing
               something or abstaining from it.

                      This universal test is a guarantee for the future unity
               of Spiritism and will annul all contradictory theories. It
               is in this universal test that in the future the criterion
               for truth will be sought. What determined the success of
               the Doctrine formulated in The Spirits’ Book and in The
               Mediums’ Book was that everywhere individuals were able
               to receive confirmation directly from the Spirits as to what
               those books contain. If the Spirits were to come from all sides
               to contradict them, then after some time these two books
               would have suffered the same fate as all other delusional
               conceptions. The support of the press itself would not have
               saved them from shipwreck, whereas, deprived of such
               support, they have spread rapidly nonetheless because
               they have had the support of the Spirits, whose goodwill
               has greatly compensated for the ill will of men and women.
               Thus it will be with all ideas that emanate from spirits or
               humans, and which cannot bear up under this test, whose
               power is incontestable.




                                              25




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 25                                       3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



                    Therefore, let us suppose that it pleased certain spirits
               to dictate a book under some title, a book with a contrary
               meaning; let us further suppose that with hostile intent
               and the purpose of discrediting the Doctrine, apocryphal
               communications were malevolently instigated. What
               influence could these writings have if they were disproved
               at every point by the Spirits? It is the acquiescence of
               the latter that one would need to be assured of before
               publishing a theory in their name. From the theory of one
               sole individual to a theory of many there is the distance
               from a single unit to the infinite. What influence could all
               the arguments of detractors have on the opinion of the
               masses, when millions of friendly voices from space have
               come into every corner of the world – even into family
               homes – to forcefully rebuff them? From this aspect, has
               not experience already confirmed the theory? What has
               become of all those publications that supposedly should
               have wiped out Spiritism? Which of them has been able
               so far to restrain its forward progress? Until now, the
               matter has not been considered from this point of view –
               unquestionably one of the most serious; each person has
               counted on him or herself alone, without counting on the
               Spirits.

                    The principle of concordance is, moreover, a guarantee
               against any alterations that may be inflicted on Spiritism
               by sects that would like to appropriate it to their own
               advantage and accommodate it to their own means.
               Anyone who might try to divert it from its providential
               objective would fail for the simple reason that the Spirits,
               through the universality of their teachings, will cause any
               modification that departs from the truth to fall.



                                               26




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 26                                      3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



                      From all this a crucial truth results: it is that whoever
               might want to set him or herself against the current of
               established and sanctioned ideas might cause a small
               localized and momentary disturbance, but would never
               dominate the whole in the present, and even less in the
               future.

                      Moreover, the teachings given by spirits on as-yet
               unclarified points of the Doctrine would not be law as
               long as such teachings remain isolated; they must not,
               therefore, be accepted except with all reserve and for
               information purposes.

                      Hence the need for the greatest prudence in their
               publication, and in the case in which it is deemed necessary
               to publish them, it would be important not to present them
               except as more or less probable individual opinions, but
               having in all cases the need for confirmation. It is this
               confirmation that must be obtained before a principle
               is presented as absolute truth unless one wants to be
               accused of frivolousness or thoughtless credulity.

                      Highly evolved spirits proceed with extreme wisdom
               in their revelations; they do not address the great issues
               of the Doctrine except gradually, to the degree that our
               intelligence is capable of comprehending truths of a higher
               order and when circumstances are propitious for the
               release of a new idea. That is why that at the beginning
               they did not say everything and why they still have not said
               everything today, nor have they given in to the impatience
               of hasty individuals who would like to harvest the fruit
               before it is ripe. Thus, it would be futile for them to rush the



                                              27




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 27                                        3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               time assigned to each thing by Providence, because then
               truly serious Spirits would positively refuse to offer their
               assistance. However, frivolous spirits concern themselves
               little with the truth and respond to anything. It is for this
               reason that, on the issue of premature questions, there
               are always contradictory answers.

                      The above-stated principles are not the result of any
               personal theory, but are the unavoidable consequences of
               the conditions in which spirits manifest themselves. It is
               obvious that if one spirit says one thing somewhere, while
               millions of spirits say the opposite everywhere else, the
               presumption of the truth cannot lie with the one who is
               alone or nearly alone in its opinion; hence, to claim to be
               right against all others would be as illogical on the part of
               one spirit as it would be on the part of one human. Truly
               wise spirits, if they do not feel sufficiently knowledgeable
               about an issue, never resolve it in an absolute manner;
               they state that they are addressing it only from their own
               point of view and that they themselves advise waiting for
               its confirmation.

                      However great, beautiful or just an idea may be, it
               is impossible for it to unite all opinions at the start. The
               conflicts that result from it are the unavoidable consequence
               of the movement that is taking place; conflicts are even
               necessary to enable the truth to stand out more, and it
               is useful for them to occur at the beginning so that any
               erroneous ideas may be more quickly flushed out. Spiritists
               who harbor any fear in this regard should therefore be
               perfectly reassured. All isolated claims will fall due to the



                                               28




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 28                                     3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



               force of things before the great and powerful criterion of
               the universal test.

                      It is not around the opinion of any one individual that
               others will rally, but around the unanimous voice of the
               Spirits; it is not one individual – and no more us than
               anyone else – who will found Spiritist orthodoxy; neither
               is it one spirit coming to impose itself upon whomever it
               wishes; it is the universality of the Spirits, communicating
               throughout the earth at God’s orders; this is the essential
               character of the Spiritist Doctrine – its power and authority.
               God has willed for the divine law to be seated upon an
               unshakable base and that is why God did not rest it upon
               the fragile head of only one person.

                      It is before that powerful Areopagus1, which knows
               no conspiracies, jealous rivalries, sects or nations, that
               all opposition, all ambition and all claims of individual
               supremacy will be crushed. We ourselves would be shattered
               if we wished to replace those sovereign decrees with our
               own ideas. Only God will decide all contentious matters,
               silence dissidence and give reason – or not – to whomever
               it may concern. Faced with this imposing accord of all the
               voices of heaven, what is the opinion of one individual or
               spirit? Less than a drop of water that loses itself in the
               ocean; less than a child’s voice drowned out by a storm.

                      Universal opinion – the supreme judge – is what
               pronounces the last word; it is formed from all individual
               opinions; if one of them is true, it only has relative weight
               1
                The supreme tribunal of ancient Athens that met on this hill. (Random
               House Webster’s College Dictionary, 1991). – Tr.


                                                29




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 29                                              3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               on the scales; if it is erroneous, it cannot prevail over all
               the others. In this generalized process, individualities
               are nil, and that ends up being a new defeat for human
               pride.

                      The harmonious course has already been outlined;
               hence, this century will not pass away before it shines in
               all its splendor in such a way as to settle all uncertainty,
               because from now onward powerful voices will have
               received the mission of making themselves heard in order
               to unite all humankind under the same banner, once the
               field has been sufficiently plowed. In the meantime, those
               who waver between two opposing theories can observe in
               which direction general opinion is forming. This is the sure
               indication of the position in which the majority of spirits
               state themselves to be on the various points upon which
               they communicate; it is a no less certain sign as to which
               of the two theories will prevail.



               III – HISTORICAL FACTS



                      In order to understand certain passages in the Gospels,
               it is necessary to know the significance of several words
               that are frequently used in them, and which characterize
               the state of the customs and the Jewish society of the time.
               Since they do not have the same meaning for us, these
               words have frequently been misinterpreted, and for that
               reason have led to a sort of uncertainty. The understanding
               of their significance, on the other hand, explains the true



                                               30




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 30                                      3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



               meaning of certain maxims that at first sight might appear
               strange.

                      Samaritans. After the split-up of the ten tribes,
               Samaria became the capital of the dissident kingdom of
               Israel. Destroyed and rebuilt several times, it was, under
               Roman rule, the administrative seat of Samaria, one of
               the four divisions of Palestine. Herod, called the Great,
               adorned Samaria with opulent monuments, and to please
               Augustus, gave it the name Augusta, in Greek ‘Sebaste’.

                      The Samaritans were almost always at war with the
               kings of Judah. A profound aversion, dating back to the
               separation, was perpetuated between the two peoples,
               who shunned all mutual relations. In order to make the
               schism deeper and to avoid having to go to Jerusalem to
               celebrate religious festivals, the Samaritans built their
               own temple and adopted certain reforms. They accepted
               only the Pentateuch, which contained the Law of Moses,
               but rejected all the other books that were added afterward.
               Their sacred writings were written in Hebrew characters of
               highest antiquity. In the eyes of orthodox Jews, they were
               heretics and were consequently despised, anathematized
               and persecuted. The antagonism between the two peoples
               thus had as its sole principle the divergence of religious
               opinions, although their beliefs had the same origin. The
               Samaritans were the Protestants of their time.

                      Even today, Samaritans may be found in a few regions
               of the Middle East, particularly in Nablus and Jaffa. They
               observe the Law of Moses more strictly than other Jews
               and only marry amongst themselves.



                                              31




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 31                                   3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



                       Nazarites. Name given to Jews who took vows under
               ancient law, whether for life or whether for a time, to keep
               themselves perfectly pure. They were committed to chastity,
               abstinence from alcohol and the preservation of their hair.
               Samson, Samuel and John the Baptist were Nazarites.

                       The Jews gave this name to the first Christians1,
               alluding to Jesus of Nazareth.

                       This was also the name of a heretical sect of the first
               centuries of the Christian era, and which, in the same
               manner as the Ebionites, from whom it adopted certain
               principles, mixed Mosaic practices with Christian dogmas.
               The sect disappeared in the fourth century.

                       Publicans. In ancient Rome, this was the name given
               to those who were lease holders of public taxes. They were
               in charge of collecting taxes and income of every sort,
               whether in Rome itself or in other parts of the Empire.
               They were analogous to the “fermiers généraux et traitants”
               in the old system in France, which still exists in certain
               regions. The risks they ran made most others close their
               eyes to the wealth they frequently acquired and which for
               many was the product of levies and scandalous profits.
               The name publican was later extended to all who were
               in charge of administering public monies, and also to
               their subaltern agents. Today, the term has taken on a
               pejorative meaning to denote financiers and agents with
               few business scruples. It is sometimes stated, “Greedy as
               a publican” or “Rich as a publican,” referring to a fortune
               of a dishonest origin.

               1
                   The first Christians were actually called Nazarenes. – Tr.


                                                     32




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 32                                          3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



                      Under Roman rule, taxation was what the Jews
               found hardest to accept and it caused them the greatest
               aggravation, giving rise to several revolts and turning
               into a religious issue, since it was regarded as contrary
               to the Law. A powerful party was even formed, headed by
               a certain Judas the Gaulonite, having as its principle the
               refusal of paying taxes. Thus, the Jews despised taxes and
               consequently all those who were in charge of collecting them.
               Hence their aversion toward publicans of all categories,
               amongst whom could be found many decent individuals,
               but who, due to their occupation, were despised along with
               all who associated with them. Distinguished Jews believed
               they jeopardized themselves by having any close relations
               with them.

                      Tax Collectors. These were lower-class tax collectors,
               who were mainly in charge of collecting duties at the city
               gates. Their functions corresponded approximately to
               those of customs officials or toll collectors. They endured
               the same loathing extended to publicans in general. This
               is why in the Gospel we frequently find the name publican
               connected to sinners. This label did not imply only dissolute
               or disreputable individuals. It was a term of scorn,
               synonymous with bad company, individuals unworthy of
               mixing with decent people.

                      Pharisees (from the Hebrew parasch, meaning
               division, separation). Tradition formed an important part
               of Jewish theology. It consisted in the compilation of the
               successive interpretations given to the meaning of the
               Scriptures, and which became articles of dogma. Amongst



                                              33




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 33                                     3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               scholars, tradition was the object of unending arguments,
               most frequently concerning simple issues as to words or
               form, similar to the theological disputes and subtleties
               of scholasticism during the Middle Ages. Different sects
               resulted from all this, with each claiming to have a
               monopoly on the truth, and as almost always happens,
               cordially detesting one another.

                      Among these sects, the most influential was that of
               the Pharisees, whose head was Hillel, a Jewish scholar
               born in Babylonia and founder of a famous school where
               it was taught that faith arouse only from the Scriptures.
               The Pharisees’ origin dated back to 180 to 200 BC. The
               Pharisees were persecuted at various times, notably under
               Hyrcanus, high priest and king of the Jews, Aristobulus1,
               and Alexander, king of Syria. However, after Alexander
               restored their honors and their assets, they reacquired their
               power, which they retained until the downfall of Jerusalem
               in 70 A.D., at which time their name disappeared as a
               result of the Diaspora.

                      The Pharisees took an active part in religious
               controversies. Servile observers of outward worship
               practices and ceremonies, ardent zealots for proselytism
               and enemies of anybody with new ideas, they feigned great
               strictness of principles. However, behind the appearances of
               meticulous devotion, they hid dissolute habits, much pride
               and, above all, an excessive passion for control. Religion
               for them was more of a means to rise through the ranks
               than an object of authentic faith. They possessed only the
               1
                The eldest of the five sons of king John Hyrcanus of the Hebrew
               Hasmonean Dynasty. – Tr.


                                               34




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 34                                        3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



               appearances and ostentation of virtue. Nevertheless, they
               exerted a great influence on the people, in whose eyes they
               were regarded as holy. That is why they were so powerful
               in Jerusalem.

                      They believed – or at least professed to believe
               – in Providence, the immortality of the soul, eternal
               punishment and the resurrection of the dead (see chap.
               IV, no. 4.). Jesus, who above all else valued simplicity and
               the qualities of the heart, and who preferred in the law
               the spirit, which gives life, to the letter, which kills, strove
               throughout his mission to unmask their hypocrisy, and as
               a result made them his fierce enemies. This is the reason
               why they allied themselves with the chief priests in order
               to incite the people against him and put him to death.

                      Scribes. The name at first given to the secretaries
               of the Judean kings and to certain superintendents of
               the Jewish army. Later, the designation was applied
               specifically to the scholars who taught the Law of Moses
               and interpreted it for the people. They had a cause in
               common with the Pharisees, with whom they shared their
               principles and their antipathy toward free thinkers. This is
               why Jesus included them in the same reproach.

                      Synagogue (from the Greek Synagoguê meaning
               assembly, congregation). In Judea, there was only one
               temple, that of Solomon, in Jerusalem, where the great
               ceremonies of Jewish worship were celebrated. Every year,
               the Jews would go there on a pilgrimage for the principal
               festivals such as Passover, the Feast of Dedication and
               the Feast of Tabernacles. It was on such occasions that
               Jesus made a number of journeys to Jerusalem. The


                                              35




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 35                                        3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               other cities did not have temples, but only synagogues:
               buildings where the Jews would gather on the Sabbath to
               offer public prayers under the leadership of the elders, the
               scribes, or the doctors of the Law. There were also readings
               taken from the sacred books, which were explained and
               commented on; everybody could take part in them, and
               that is why Jesus, although not a priest, taught in the
               synagogues on Sabbath days.

                      After the downfall of Jerusalem and the Diaspora, the
               synagogues in the cities they inhabited served as temples
               for the celebration of the cult.

                      Sadducees. A Jewish sect that was formed around 248
               B.C., named after Saddoc, its founder. The Sadducees did
               not believe in the immortality of the soul, the resurrection,
               or good and evil angels. Nonetheless, they believed in God;
               but expecting nothing after death, they served God only with
               the objective of temporal recompense, to which, according
               to them, divine providence was limited. Furthermore, the
               satisfaction of the senses was, in their view, the essential
               objective of life. As for the Scriptures, they held to the
               text of the ancient Torah, accepting neither tradition nor
               any interpretation. They placed good deeds and the pure
               and simple observance of the Law above outward worship
               practices. They were the materialists, the deists, the
               sensualists of the time. This sect was few in number, but
               it entailed important persons and became a political party
               constantly opposed to the Pharisees.

                      Essenes. A Jewish sect founded around 150 B.C.
               during the time of the Maccabees. Its members lived in a



                                               36




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 36                                     3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                            INTRODUCTION



               type of monastery and formed amongst themselves a sort
               of moral and religious association. They were distinguished
               by their pacifist customs and austere virtues; they taught
               the love of God and one’s neighbor, the immortality of the
               soul, and they believed in the resurrection. They lived in
               celibacy, condemned slavery and war, held all their assets
               in common, and devoted themselves to agriculture. Unlike
               the sensual Sadducees, who denied immortality, and the
               Pharisees, who were rigid in their outward practices and in
               whom virtue was only apparent, the Essenes took no part
               in the quarrels dividing the other two sects. Their genre of
               life approached that of the first Christians, and the moral
               principles they professed have led some people to believe
               that Jesus had belonged to this sect before the beginning
               of his public mission. What is certain is that he must have
               known about it, but nothing proves that he was affiliated
               with it, and all that has been written in this respect is
               hypothetical.1

                       Therapeuts (from the Greek thérapeutaï, thérapeueïn,
               to serve, to care for, meaning, servants of God or healers).
               Jewish sectarians and contemporaries of Christ, established
               principally in Alexandria, Egypt. They had great relations
               with the Essenes, whose principles they professed; like
               the Essenes, they devoted themselves to practicing all
               the virtues. Their nourishment was of extreme frugality.
               Devoted to celibacy, contemplation and the solitary life,
               they comprised a true religious order. Philon, a platonic

               1
                   The Death of Jesus, supposedly written by an Essene brother, is a com-
               pletely apocryphal book, written with the objective of serving an opinion,
               and which contains in itself proof of its modern origin. – Auth.


                                                    37




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 37                                                  3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               Jewish philosopher from Alexandria, was the first to refer
               to the Therapeuts, considering them a sect of Judaism.
               Eusebius, St. Jerome and other Church Fathers thought
               they were Christians. Whether they were Jews or Christians,
               it is obvious that, like the Essenes, they formed a link of
               union between Judaism and Christianity.



               IV – SOCRATES AND PLATO: PRECURSORS OF THE
               CHRISTIAN IDEA AND SPIRITISM



                      Even though Jesus must have been familiar with the
               sect of the Essenes, it would be erroneous to conclude
               that he drew his doctrine from it, and that if he had lived
               in another environment, he would have professed other
               principles. Great ideas never appear suddenly. Those
               that have the truth as their basis always have precursors
               who partially prepare the way for them. Later, when the
               time has come, God sends someone with the mission of
               summarizing, coordinating and completing the scattered
               elements to form them into a body. In this way, the idea,
               not having arrived abruptly, finds minds fully disposed to
               accept it. Such occurred with the Christian idea, which
               was foreseen several centuries before either Jesus or
               the Essenes, and of which Socrates and Plato were the
               principle precursors.

                      Socrates, like Christ, wrote nothing himself, or at
               least left nothing written. Like Christ, he died the death
               of criminals, a victim of fanaticism, for having attacked
               established beliefs and for having placed true virtue above


                                               38




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 38                                   3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



               hypocrisy and the illusion of forms; in other words, for
               having combated religious prejudices. Like Jesus, who was
               accused by the Pharisees of corrupting the people with his
               teachings, Socrates was also accused by the Pharisees of
               his time – since they have always existed in all epochs
               – for corrupting the youth by proclaiming the dogma of
               the unity of God, the immortality of the soul and the
               future life. Just as we know about the doctrine of Jesus
               only through the writings of his disciples, we know about
               the doctrine of Socrates only through the writings of his
               disciple Plato. We believe it useful to summarize here the
               most prominent points in order to show their concordance
               with the principles of Christianity.

                      To those who will consider this parallel to be a
               profanation and claim there could be no parity between
               the doctrine of a pagan and that of Christ, we will respond
               that Socrates’ doctrine was not pagan since its objective
               was to combat paganism; that Jesus’ doctrine, purer and
               more complete than Socrates’, has nothing to lose with the
               comparison; that the grandeur of Christ’s divine mission
               would not be diminished because of it; that, furthermore,
               it is a historical fact which cannot be denied. Humankind
               has reached a point in which the light radiates by itself
               from under the bushel; it is mature enough to face it – so
               much the worse for those who do not dare open their eyes.
               The time has come to examine matters broadly and from
               a higher level, and no longer from the trivial and narrow
               point of view of the interests of sects and castes.



                                              39




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 39                                   3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



                      Moreover, these citations will prove that if Socrates and
               Plato foresaw the Christian idea, the fundamental principles
               of Spiritism may also be found in their doctrine.



               A SUMMARY OF THE DOCTRINE OF SOCRATES AND
               PLATO



                      I. The human being is an incarnate soul. Before its
               incarnation, it existed in union with the primordial types,
               the ideas of the true, the good and the beautiful. Upon
               incarnating, it separates from them, and remembering its
               past, it is tormented to various degrees by the desire to
               return to it.

                      One could not more clearly enunciate the distinction
               and independence between the intelligent principle and
               the material principle. Furthermore, this represents the
               doctrine of the preexistence of the soul, the vague intuition
               it retains of another world to which it aspires, its survival
               after the body, its exit from the spirit world in order to
               incarnate, and its reentry into that world after death; in
               short, it is the seed for the doctrine of the fallen angels.

                      II. The soul wanders and becomes confused when it
               uses the body in order to consider any object. It feels giddy,
               as if it were intoxicated, because it is connected to things
               that are by their very nature subject to change. On the other
               hand, whenever it contemplates its own essence, it turns
               toward that which is pure, eternal and immortal, and being
               of the same nature, it remains connected there for as long as


                                               40




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 40                                        3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



               possible. Its erroneous ways then cease, for it is united to
               that which is immutable, and this state of the soul is what
               is called wisdom.

                      Hence, humans who consider things from below, in
               a mundane fashion and from a materialistic point of view
               delude themselves. In order to evaluate them correctly, it
               is necessary to see them from above, i.e., from the point
               of view of the spirit. The truly wise must therefore in some
               way isolate the soul from the body in order to see with
               the eyes of the spirit. This is what Spiritism teaches. (See
               chap. II, no. 5)

                      III. While we have our body, and as long as our soul
               is immersed in this corruption, we will never possess the
               object of our desires: the truth. In fact, the body brings
               forth in us a thousand obstacles due to our need to care
               for it. Moreover, it fills us with desires, appetites, fears, a
               thousand chimeras and a thousand follies, so that, while in
               it, it is impossible to be wise, even for an instant. However,
               since it is not possible to know anything purely while the
               soul is united to the body, one of two things will happen:
               either we will never know the truth, or we will only come to
               know it after death. Freed from the insanity of the body, we
               then will converse – hopefully – with individuals likewise
               freed, and we will know for ourselves the essence of things.
               That is why true philosophers prepare themselves to die,
               and why death in no way seems fearsome to them. (See
               Heaven and Hell, pt. 1, chap. II; pt. 2, chap. I)

                      Here, we have the principle of soul’s faculties being
               obscured by means of the corporeal organs and the



                                              41




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 41                                       3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               expansion of its faculties after death. However, this applies
               only to the souls of the already-purified elect; the same
               does not occur with impure souls.

                      IV. The impure soul in this state is weighed down and
               is once again pulled to the visible world through the horror
               of that which is invisible and immaterial. It then wanders
               – it is said – around mausoleums and graves, near which
               at times terrible ghosts have been seen, which must be
               the images of souls who have left the body without being
               completely pure, and who have retained something of the
               material form, making the eye able to perceive them. These
               are not the souls of the good but rather of the wretched, who
               are forced to wander around such places, where they bear
               the punishment of their former life and where they continue
               to roam until the appetites inherent to the material form they
               were given lead them to another body. And then, of course,
               they return to the same habits which during their former life
               were the object of their predilections.

                      Not only is the principle of reincarnation clearly
               expounded here, but the state of souls who are still
               under the control of matter is described just as Spiritism
               demonstrates during evocations. Moreover, it is stated
               that reincarnation in a material body is a consequence of
               the soul’s impurity, whereas purified souls are free of it.
               Spiritism says nothing else; it only adds that the soul who
               has made good resolutions during the errant state, and
               who possesses acquired knowledge, brings fewer defects,
               more virtues and more intuitive ideas on being reborn
               than it had possessed in its preceding existence. Hence,



                                               42




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 42                                      3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



               each existence represents for it both intellectual and moral
               progress. (See Heaven and Hell, pt. 2, Examples)

                      V. After our death, the spirit (daïmon) who had been
               assigned to us during life leads us to a place where all
               those who must be taken to Hades are gathered in order
               to be judged. After having remained in Hades for the time
               required, souls are re-conducted to this life for numerous
               and long periods.

                      This is the doctrine of guardian angels or protector
               spirits, and of successive reincarnations after intervals of
               varying lengths in the errant state.

                      VI. Daimons fill the space that separates the sky from
               the earth; they are the link that unites the Great Whole with
               itself. Since divinity never enters into direct communication
               with human beings, it is by means of daimons that the
               gods relate to and converse with them, whether during the
               waking state or during sleep.

                      The word daïmon, which gave origin to demon, was not
               taken in the evil sense during antiquity, as it is amongst
               moderns. It did not mean evil beings exclusively, but all
               spirits in general, among whom were highly evolved spirits
               called gods, and less evolved spirits – demons per se – who
               communicated directly with humans. Spiritism also states
               that spirits populate space; that God only communicates
               with human beings through the intermediary of pure
               spirits entrusted with transmitting the divine will; and
               that spirits communicate with humans during the waking
               state and during sleep. Replace the word daimon with the


                                              43




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 43                                     3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               word spirit, and you have the Spiritist Doctrine; replace it
               with the word angel and you have the Christian Doctrine.

                      VII. The constant preoccupation of philosophers (as
               understood by Socrates and Plato) is to take greater care of
               the soul and less care of this life, which is only an instant
               from the perspective of eternity. If the soul is immortal,
               would it not be wise to live with a view to eternity?

                      Both Christianity and Spiritism teach the same
               thing.

                      VIII. If the soul is immaterial, then after this life it must
               go to a world that is equally invisible and immaterial, the
               same way that the body upon its decomposition returns to
               matter. It is important only to clearly distinguish the pure,
               truly immaterial soul – which, like God, nourishes itself with
               knowledge and thought – from the soul that is to various
               degrees tainted by material impurities that hinder its
               ascendancy toward the divine, retaining it in places of its
               earthly journey.

                      Socrates and Plato, as one can see, understood
               perfectly the different degrees of the soul’s dematerialization.
               They insist on the varieties of situations that result in its
               greater or lesser purity. What they said through intuition,
               Spiritism proves through the numerous examples it sets
               before us. (See Heaven and Hell, pt. 2)

                      IX. If death were the complete dissolution of a person,
               it would be a great gain for evil ones, because after their
               death they would all at once be free from their bodies, souls
               and vices. Only those who have adorned their soul, not with


                                                44




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 44                                            3/7/2009 18:00:21

                                         INTRODUCTION



               an improper ornament but with a proper one, may peacefully
               await the hour of their departure to the other world.

                      In other words, this means that materialism, which
               proclaims nothingness after death, would be the annulment
               of all final moral responsibility, and consequently, an
               incentive to evil; that such evil has everything to gain from
               nothingness; that only individuals who have rid themselves
               of their vices and have enriched themselves with virtues
               can peacefully await the awakening in the other life. By
               the examples it sets before us daily, Spiritism shows us
               how painful the passage from one life to the other and the
               entrance into the future life is for evil souls. (See Heaven
               and Hell, pt. 2, chap. I)

                      X. The body retains the well-marked vestiges of the
               care it has received or of the accidents it has experienced;
               the same occurs with the soul. When it is delivered from
               the body, it carries the obvious traces of its character, its
               sentiments, and the marks that each action of its life has
               left on it. Thus, the greatest misfortune that can occur to a
               person is to go to the other world with a soul loaded with
               crimes. You see, Calicles, that neither you, Pollux nor Gorgias
               could prove that we must lead another life that will be useful
               when we find ourselves on the other side. From so many
               diverse opinions, the only one that remains unshakeable is
               that it is better to receive than to commit an injustice, and
               that before anything else we must apply ourselves not to
               seem virtuous but to be so. (Dialogues of Socrates with his
               disciples when he was in prison).


                                              45




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 45                                       3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



                      Here, another crucial point is encountered, confirmed
               today by experience, according to which the unpurified soul
               retains the ideas, tendencies, character and passions that
               it had while on the earth. This maxim: It is better to receive
               than to commit an injustice, is it not entirely Christian? It is
               the same thought that Jesus expresses by this illustration:
               “If someone strikes you on one cheek, turn to him the other
               as well.” (See chap. XII, nos.7, 8)

                      XI. One of two things applies: either death is absolute
               destruction or it is the passage of a soul to another place.
               If everything is to be extinguished, then death is like one
               of those rare nights that we have without dreaming and
               without any self-awareness. However, if death is only a
               change of habitation, the passage to a place where the dead
               must meet, what happiness at reencountering those whom
               we have known! My greatest pleasure would be to examine
               up close the dwellers of that habitation and to distinguish
               there, as here, between those who are wise and those who
               believe they are, but are not. It is time, however, for us to
               part: I to die, you to live. (Socrates to his judges)

                      According to Socrates, those who have lived upon the
               earth meet again after death and recognize one another.
               Spiritism shows us the continuation of the relationships
               they had, in such a way that death is neither an interruption
               nor a cessation of life with no solution of continuity, but a
               transformation.

                      Had Socrates and Plato known the teachings that
               Christ would give five hundred years later, and those which
               the Spirits provide nowadays, they would not have spoken


                                               46




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 46                                        3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                         INTRODUCTION



               in any other manner. There is nothing surprising about
               this if one remembers that great truths are eternal and that
               advanced spirits had to have known them before coming
               to earth, to which they brought them; that Socrates, Plato
               and the other great philosophers of their time could have
               later been among those who aided Christ on his divine
               mission, and who were chosen precisely because, more
               than anyone else, they were capable of comprehending his
               sublime teachings; that, in short, today they may be part
               of the great host of spirits charged with coming to teach
               these same truths to humankind.

                      XII. One should never return injustice for injustice, nor
               do evil to anyone, whatever may be the evil they have done
               to us. Few, however, will accept this principle and those
               who are divided on this can only despise one another.

                      Is this not the principle of charity, which teaches us
               not to return evil for evil and to forgive our enemies?

                      XIII. It is by its fruit that the tree is known. It is
               necessary to qualify every action according to what it
               produces: to call it evil when evil comes from it; good when
               the good is born from it.

                      The maxim: “The tree is known by its fruit” is textually
               repeated many times in the Gospel.

                      XIV. Wealth is a great danger. All who love wealth love
               neither themselves nor what they are, but something that
               is even more foreign to them than that what they are. (See
               chap. XVI)


                                              47




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 47                                        3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



                      XV. The most beautiful prayers and the most beautiful
               sacrifices please the Divinity less than a virtuous soul who
               puts forth the effort to resemble it. It would be a grave thing
               if the gods were to have more consideration for our offerings
               than for our soul. This way, even the guiltiest could render
               themselves favorable. But no, there are no truly just and
               wise except those who through their words and deeds
               redeem what they owe to the gods and men. (See chap. X,
               nos. 7, 8)

                      XVI. I call depraved that commonplace lover who loves
               the body more than the soul. Love is everywhere in nature,
               which invites us to exercise our intelligence; it is found even
               in the movements of the heavenly bodies. It is love that
               adorns nature with its rich cover; it puts on its finery and
               sets its dwelling where it finds flowers and fragrances. It is
               also love that gives peace to humans, tranquility to the sea,
               silence to the winds and sleep to pain.

                      Love, which must unite humankind through a fraternal
               tie, is a consequence of Plato’s theory on universal love as
               a law of nature. Socrates’ affirmation that, “Love is neither
               a god nor a mortal, but a great daimon,” that is, a great
               spirit presiding over universal love, was imputed to him as
               a crime above all else.

                      XVII. Virtue cannot be taught; it comes as a gift from
               God to those who possess it.

                      This is approximately the Christian doctrine regarding
               grace; however, if virtue is a gift from God, then it is a favor,



                                               48




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 48                                         3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                         INTRODUCTION



               and we may ask why it is not granted to everyone; on the
               other hand, if it is a gift, then there is no merit on the part
               of those who possess it. Spiritism is more explicit. It states
               that those who possess virtue have acquired it through
               their own efforts during successive existences by gradually
               ridding themselves of their imperfections. Grace is the
               power that God bestows on all men and women of goodwill
               so that they may rid themselves of evil and practice the
               good.

                      XVIII. It is a natural disposition in each of us to perceive
               our own defects much less than those of others.

                      The Gospel states, “You see the speck that is in your
               neighbor’s eye, but you do not see the plank that is in your
               own.” (See chap. X, nos. 9, 10)

                      XIX. If physicians fail in treating most ailments, it is
               because they treat the body without treating the soul, and
               since the whole is not in a good state, it is impossible for
               any one part of it to be well.

                      Spiritism provides the key to the relationship between
               the soul and the body, and proves that there is a constant
               reaction of one upon the other. Thus, it opens up a new
               pathway to science, and by showing it the true cause of
               certain illnesses, it provides it with the means of combating
               them. Once science begins taking into account the spiritual
               element in the body’s economy, it will fail less frequently.

                      XX. All humans, starting from infancy, do much more
               evil than good.


                                                49




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 49                                           3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



                      These words by Socrates touch on the serious issue
               of the predominance of evil on the earth, an issue that
               is unsolvable without the knowledge of the plurality of
               worlds and the destiny of the earth, upon which only a
               small fraction of humanity dwells. Only Spiritism provides
               it with a solution, which is developed below in chapters II,
               III and V.

                      XXI. There is wisdom in not believing that you know
               what you do not know.

                      This is addressed to those persons who frequently
               criticize that about which they do not know the first
               word. Plato completes this thought of Socrates by saying,
               “Let us first try to render them more honest in words, if
               possible; if not, let us not concern ourselves with them; let
               us seek nothing but the truth. Let us endeavor to educate
               ourselves, but not offend each other.” This is how Spiritists
               should act regarding their detractors of good or bad faith.
               If Plato were alive today, he would find things almost as
               they were in his time and would be able to use the same
               language. Socrates too would encounter individuals who
               would mock his belief in spirits and would judge both him
               and his disciple Plato insane.

                      It was for having professed these principles that
               Socrates was first ridiculed, then later accused of sacrilege
               and condemned to drink hemlock. All this renders it
               certain that great new truths, arising against the personal
               interests and prejudices they upset, cannot be established
               without a struggle or without making martyrs.




                                               50




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 50                                     3/7/2009 18:00:22

               CHAPTER I



               I have not come to
               destroy the law
                        xThe three revelations: Moses; Christ; Spiritism

                        xThe alliance between science and religion


                        THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                        x The new era




                      1. “Do not think that I have come to destroy the law or the
                      prophets; I have not come to destroy them but to fulfill them;
                      for I say to you in truth that heaven and earth shall not pass
                      away before everything in the law is perfectly fulfilled up to
                      one single iota and one single dot.” (Mt. 5:17, 18)1


               1
                 We have translated the biblical texts directly from Kardec’s text – which
               employed Sacy’s French translation – rather than use the King James
               Version, whose older English style makes it difficult to understand at
               times, or a more modern translation, which might involve copyright
               issues. Moreover, it will ensure consistency between the scripture passages
               and Kardec’s text when he refers back to them. Finally, in translating the
               scripture texts we have opted to retain the non-inclusive language of
               Sacy. – Tr.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 51                                                   3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                                 CHAPTER I



               MOSES



               2. There are two distinct parts to the Mosaic Law: the
               Law of God, promulgated on Mount Sinai, and the civil or
               disciplinary law, established by Moses. One is invariable;
               the other, appropriate for the customs and character of the
               people, changes with the times.

                      The Law of God is formulated in the ten following
               commandments:

                         I.   I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt,
                              out of the house of bondage. You shall have no other,
                              foreign gods before me. You shall make neither a graven
                              image nor any figure of anything that is above in the
                              heavens or below on earth, nor of anything that is in the
                              waters under the earth. You shall not bow down to them
                              nor shall you render them supreme worship.

                        II. You shall not take the name of the Lord your God in
                              vain.

                        III. You shall remember to sanctify the Sabbath Day.

                       IV. You shall honor your father and your mother so that you
                              may live long in the land that the Lord your God will
                              give you.

                        V. You shall not kill.

                       VI. You shall not commit adultery.

                      VII. You shall not steal.



                                                    52




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 52                                                3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                I HAVE NOT COME TO DESTROY THE LAW



                      VIII. You shall not covet false testimony against your
                             neighbor.

                        IX. You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife.

                         X. You shall covet neither your neighbor’s house, nor his
                             servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any of the things
                             that belong to him.

                      This law is for all times and all nations, and therefore
               has a divine character. All the others were laws established
               by Moses, who had to use fear in order to restrain a
               naturally troublesome and undisciplined people, among
               whom he had to combat the deep-rooted abuses and
               prejudices acquired during their slavery in Egypt. In order
               to give authority to his laws, he had to attribute to them
               a divine origin, as did other lawgivers of early peoples.
               Human authority had to be based on God’s authority, but
               only the idea of a terrible God could impress ignorant men
               and women in whom moral sense and the sentiment of a
               refined justice were still little developed. It is quite obvious
               that the One who prescribed the commandments, “You
               shall not kill; you shall not cause harm to your neighbor,”
               could not be self-contradictory by making extermination
               a duty. The Mosaic Laws per se thus had an essentially
               transitory character.



               CHRIST



               3. Jesus did not come to destroy the law, that is, God’s
               law. He came to fulfill it, that is, to develop it, to give it its


                                                   53




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 53                                             3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                         CHAPTER I



               true meaning and to adapt it to the degree of humankind’s
               advancement. That is why that in this law may be found
               the principle of duty to God and one’s neighbor, which
               comprises the basis of his doctrine. On the contrary, as for
               the laws of Moses per se, Jesus modified them profoundly
               either in form or in substance. He constantly combated the
               abuse of outward practices and erroneous interpretations,
               and he could not make them undergo a more radical
               reform than that of reducing them to these words: “Love
               God above all things and your neighbor as yourself,” and
               in stating, “This is the whole of the law and the prophets.”

                      By these words, “Heaven and earth shall not pass
               away before everything is fulfilled up to one single iota,”
               Jesus meant that it would be necessary for God’s Law to
               receive its fulfillment, that is, to be practiced all over the
               earth, in all of its purity, with all of its development and
               all of its consequences, for what good would it have done
               to have established this law if it were to have remained the
               privilege of only a few people or even of one sole nation? As
               children of God, all humans are, without distinction, the
               object of the same solicitude.

               4. Jesus’ role, however, was not simply that of a moralistic
               lawgiver with no other authority than his own word. He
               came to fulfill the prophecies that had announced his
               coming; his authority derived from the exceptional nature
               of his spirit and his divine mission. He came to teach
               humans that true life is to be found not on the earth but
               in the kingdom of heaven; to teach them the way that leads
               there, the means of reconciling themselves to God and to



                                            54




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 54                                        3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                I HAVE NOT COME TO DESTROY THE LAW



               forewarn them regarding the progress of future things for
               the fulfillment of human destiny. Nonetheless, he did not
               say everything, and on many points he limited himself to
               sowing the seed of truths that he himself declared could
               not yet be comprehended. He spoke of all things, but in
               terms explicit in varying degrees. In order to understand
               the hidden meaning of certain words it would be necessary
               for new ideas and knowledge to come to provide humans
               the key, and such ideas could not come before the human
               mind had acquired a certain degree of maturity. Science
               would have to contribute strongly toward the emergence
               and development of these ideas; therefore, it would be
               necessary to give science time to progress.



               SPIRITISM



               5. Spiritism is the new science that has come to reveal
               to humans, by means of irrefutable proofs, the existence
               and nature of the spirit world and its relations with the
               corporeal world. It shows us that world no longer as
               something supernatural, but instead as one of the living
               and incessantly active forces of nature, as the source of a
               multitude of phenomena hitherto incomprehensible, and
               for that reason, relegated to the domain of the fantastic and
               extraordinary. It is to such relations that Christ alludes on
               several occasions, and that is why many things that he
               said have remained unintelligible or wrongly interpreted.
               Spiritism is the key that enables everything to be easily
               explained.


                                               55




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 55                                     3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                         CHAPTER I



               6. The law of the Old Testament is personified in Moses; that
               of the New Testament is personified in Christ. Spiritism is
               the third revelation of God’s Law, but it is not personified
               in any particular individual; rather, it is the product of a
               teaching given not by one person but by the Spirits – who
               are the voices of heaven – at all points of the earth and
               through a countless multitude of intermediaries. It is a
               sort of collective being entailing a group of beings from
               the spirit world, each one coming to bring to humans the
               tribute of its knowledge in order to enable them to know
               about that world and the fate that awaits them in it.

               7. In the same way that Christ said, “I have not come to
               destroy the law but to fulfill it,” Spiritism says, “I have not
               come to destroy the Christian law but to fulfill it.” It teaches
               nothing contrary to what Christ taught, but develops,
               completes and explains in clear terms for everybody what
               he stated only in allegorical form. Spiritism has come to
               fulfill at the foretold time what Christ announced and
               to prepare the fulfillment of future things. It is therefore
               the work of Christ, who himself is presiding – as he also
               announced – over the regeneration that is occurring,
               and who is preparing the reign of the kingdom of God on
               earth.



               THE ALLIANCE BETWEEN SCIENCE AND RELIGION



               8. Science and religion are the two levers of human
               intelligence: one reveals the laws of the material world,



                                             56




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 56                                        3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                I HAVE NOT COME TO DESTROY THE LAW



               and the other the laws of the moral world. But neither, having
               the same principle, which is God, can contradict the other.
               If they were to negate each other, one would necessarily be
               wrong and the other right, because God could not possibly be
               willing to destroy God’s own work.1 The incompatibility that
               is thought to exist between these two orders of ideas arises
               from an erroneous observation and an excess of exclusivity
               on one side and the other. This has resulted in a conflict from
               which both disbelief and intolerance have emerged.

                       The time has come in which Christ’s teachings must
               receive their completion; in which the veil, cast intentionally
               over some parts of these teachings, must be lifted; in which
               science ceases to be exclusively materialistic and takes
               into account the spiritual element; and in which religion
               ceases to misinterpret the organic and immutable laws
               of matter. These two forces, supporting each other and
               advancing together, will lend each other mutual support.
               Then religion, no longer having to endure the discredit of
               science, will acquire unshakable power because it will be
               in accord with reason and will no longer be able to oppose
               the irresistible logic of the facts.

                       Science and religion were unable to understand each
               other until today, because, each examining matters from
               its own exclusive point of view, they mutually rejected
               each other. Something was needed to fill the gap that
               separated them, a mark of union that would bring them
               close to each other. This mark of union resided in the
               knowledge of the laws that govern the spirit world and its
               relations with the corporeal, laws as immutable as those
               1
                   See footnote, p. 62. – Tr.


                                                57




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 57                                       3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                              CHAPTER I



               governing the movement of the heavenly bodies and the
               existence of beings. Once they were proven by experience,
               these relations caused a new light to dawn: faith turned
               toward reason, reason found nothing illogical in faith and
               materialism was defeated. But in this, as in everything else,
               there are persons who remain behind until they are swept
               along by the movement of the whole, which crushes them
               if they try to resist it instead of surrendering to it. It is a
               whole moral revolution that is occurring at this time and
               is molding people’s spirits. After being prepared for over
               more than eighteen centuries, this revolution is nearing
               its fulfillment, and it will mark a new era for humankind.
               The consequences of this revolution are easy to foresee; as
               for social relations, it must bring inevitable changes that
               no person has the power to oppose because they are in the
               designs of God and result from the law of progress, which
               is a law of God.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               THE NEW ERA


               9. God is one, and Moses is the spirit whom he sent on
               a mission to make him1 known not only to the Hebrews
               but to pagan peoples as well. The Hebrew people were the

               1
                In the sections containing the Spirits’ teachings, we have opted to retain
               the masculine pronouns referring to God because the Spirits frequently
               mention God, the Father and the Lord in the same paragraph or sentence
               and in reference to the same subject. Thus, it would have made it impos-
               sible to use only the noun God in place of the masculine pronoun, as we
               will continue to do in the text sections by Kardec and as we have done in
               the other books of the Codification except where noted. – Tr.


                                                   58




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 58                                                   3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                I HAVE NOT COME TO DESTROY THE LAW



               instrument that God used to deliver the divine revelation
               through Moses and the prophets, and the vicissitudes of
               these people were meant to impress the eyes and bring
               down the veil that had hidden the Divinity from humankind.

                      God’s commandments given through Moses contained
               the seed of the broadest Christian morality. However, biblical
               commentaries have restricted their meaning, because,
               put into practice in all their purity, they would not have
               been understood; nevertheless, the Ten Commandments
               remained the shining frontispiece, the beacon that should
               have illumined humankind on the road it was to travel.

                      The morality taught by Moses was appropriate for
               the state of advancement of the people it was called to
               regenerate, and these people, semi-primitive with regard
               to the perfection of their soul, would not have understood
               that it was possible to worship God by means other than
               burnt offerings, or that they should forgive an enemy.
               Their intelligence, noteworthy from the materialistic point
               of view and even from that of the arts and sciences, was
               morally quite backward, and they would never have been
               converted under the rule of an entirely spiritual religion;
               they needed a semi-material representation, like the one
               the Hebrew religion offered them. Hence, burnt offerings
               spoke to their senses, whereas the idea of God spoke to
               their spirit.

                      Christ was the initiator of the purest and most sublime
               morality: the evangelical Christian morality that is to renew
               the world, bring men and women together and make them
               brothers and sisters; that is to enable charity and love



                                               59




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 59                                      3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                         CHAPTER I



               for one’s neighbor to blossom forth in all human hearts
               and create a common solidarity amongst all humans; a
               morality, in short, that is to transform the earth and make
               it a dwelling place for spirits more highly evolved than
               those inhabiting it today. It is the law of progress, to which
               nature is subject and which is self-fulfilling, and Spiritism
               is the lever that God is employing to enable humankind to
               advance.

                      The time has come in which moral ideas must be
               developed so that the progress contained in the designs
               of God may be realized. These ideas must follow the same
               route that the ideas of liberty – their forerunners – traveled.
               However, one should not believe that this development will
               occur without struggle. No. In order to reach maturity, these
               ideas need to be discussed and argued over so that they
               may attract the attention of the masses. Once attention is
               fixed on them, the beauty and sanctity of Christ’s morality
               will touch people’s minds, and they will become interested
               in a science that provides them with the key to the future
               life and opens to them the doors to eternal happiness.
               It was Moses who opened the way; Jesus continued the
               work; Spiritism shall finish it.

                                          An Israelite Spirit (Mulhouse, 1861)


               10. One day, God, out of his inexhaustible charity, allowed
               humankind to see the truth dissipate the darkness. That
               day was the advent of Christ. After that living light, the
               darkness returned. The world, after the alternatives of
               truth and obscurity, became lost once again. Then, just


                                             60




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 60                                       3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                I HAVE NOT COME TO DESTROY THE LAW



               like the prophets of the Old Testament, the Spirits began
               to speak and to warn you: The world is being shaken on its
               very foundations; the thunder shall resound; stand firm!

                      Spiritism is of a divine order since it rests upon the
               very laws of nature, and you can be certain that everything
               of a divine order has a great and useful purpose. Your
               world has lost its way, and science, developing at the cost
               of moral order and leading you only to material well-being,
               has reverted to profiting the spirit of darkness. Christians,
               you know that the heart and love must walk hand in hand
               with science. The reign of Christ, alas! After eighteen
               centuries, and in spite of the blood of so many martyrs,
               that reign has not yet come. Christians, turn toward the
               Master, who wishes to save you. Everything is easy for
               those who believe and love. Love fills them with ineffable
               joy. Yes, my children, the world is being shaken; the good
               Spirits have told you this more than enough times. Bend
               under the foretelling breeze of the storm so that you are
               not knocked over; that is, prepare yourselves and do not
               be like the foolish virgins who were taken by surprise at
               the arrival of the bridegroom.

                      This revolution that is being prepared is more moral
               than material. The great Spirits, the divine messengers,
               inspire faith so that all of you, enlightened and fervent
               workers, may make your humble voices heard, for you are
               only a grain of sand; but without grains of sand there would
               be no mountains. Hence the words “We are so small” hold
               no meaning for you. To each his or her mission, to each
               his or her labor. Do not ants build their republic, and do



                                               61




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 61                                     3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                                CHAPTER I



               not imperceptible animalcules1 raise continents? The new
               crusade has begun. Apostles of universal peace and not of
               war, modern Saint Bernards, look and march ahead. The
               law of worlds is the law of progress.

                                                                Fenelon (Poitiers, 1861)

               11. Saint Augustine is one of the greatest divulgers of
               Spiritism. He manifests himself almost everywhere. We
               find the reason for this in the life of this great Christian
               philosopher, who belongs to the mighty phalanx of the
               Church Fathers, to whom Christianity owes its most solid
               bases. Like many others, he was uprooted from paganism,
               or rather, from the most profound impiety, by the splendor
               of the truth. When, in the midst of his excesses, he felt in
               his soul that strange vibration calling him back to himself,
               enabling him to understand that happiness lay elsewhere
               than in debilitating and fleeting pleasures; when, finally,
               on his own way to Damascus he too heard the holy voice
               exclaim, “Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?” he
               exclaimed, “My God! My God! Forgive me! I believe; I am a
               Christian!” And from then on he became one of the firmest
               supporters of the Gospel. In the famous Confessions that
               this eminent spirit left us, one may read the simultaneously
               characteristic and prophetic words he uttered after having
               lost St. Monica: “I am convinced that my mother will return
               to visit me and give me counsel, revealing to me what awaits
               us in the future life.” What a lesson in these words, and
               what a brilliant foresight of the future doctrine! This is why
               today, seeing that the hour has come to divulge the truth
               that he had predicted, he has become its ardent propagator

               1
                   A minute or microscopic animal. (Webster’s, op.cit.) – Tr.


                                                     62




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 62                                                 3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                I HAVE NOT COME TO DESTROY THE LAW



               and has multiplied himself, so to speak, in order to answer
               all who call upon him.
                                          Erastus, disciple of St. Paul (Paris 1863)


               Comment: Has St. Augustine therefore come to destroy
               what he himself built? Certainly not, but like so many
               others, he sees with the eyes of the spirit what he could
               not see as a man. His unconstrained soul sees a new light
               and understands what it could not understand before. New
               ideas have revealed to him the true meaning of certain
               words. While on earth, he judged matters according to the
               knowledge he possessed, but when a new light shone upon
               him, he was able to judge things more wholesomely. It was
               thus that he had to change his mind regarding incubus
               and succubus1 spirits, as well as the anathema that he
               had launched against the theory of the antipodes2. Now
               that Christianity has appeared to him in all its purity, he
               can think differently about certain points than when he
               was alive, but without ceasing to be a Christian disciple.
               Without renouncing his faith, he can make himself the
               propagator of Spiritism, because he sees in it the fulfillment
               of things foreseen. As a herald of Spiritism today, he leads
               us to a more careful and logical interpretation of the texts.
               The same is occurring with other spirits who have found
               themselves in a similar position.

               1
                 Incubus and Succubus: evil spirits, male and female respectively, who
               lie with persons in their sleep to have intercourse. – Tr.
               2
                 Theory of the Antipodes: St. Augustine thought there was no reason to
               believe that humans lived on the opposite side of the earth, walking with
               their feet opposite ours. Due to the lack of knowledge of the spherical
               form of the earth, St. Augustine’s opinion was commonly held before
               science proved it otherwise. – Tr.


                                                  63




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 63                                                 3/7/2009 18:00:22

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 64   3/7/2009 18:00:22

               CHAPTER II


               My kingdom is not of
               this world
                        x The future life

                        x The kingship of Jesus

                        x The point of view


                        THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                        x An earthly kingship




                      1. Then Pilate, returning to enter the palace, and having
                      made Jesus come to him, asked him, “Are you the king of the
                      Jews?” Jesus responded to him, “My kingdom is not of this
                      world. If my kingdom were of this world, my people would
                      have fought to prevent my falling into the hands of the Jews.
                      But my kingdom is not here.”

                      Pilate said to him, “Then you are a king?” Jesus replied, “You
                      have said it; I am a king. I was not born, nor did I come
                      into this world except to bear witness to the truth. Whoever
                      belongs to the truth hears my voice.” (Jn. 18:33, 36, 37)




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 65                                             3/7/2009 18:00:22

                                         CHAPTER II



               THE FUTURE LIFE


               2. With these words, Jesus clearly refers to the future
               life, which he presents, in every circumstance, as the end
               where humankind will end up and as the object of people’s
               principal concerns while on earth. All of his maxims refer
               to this great principle. Indeed, without the future life, the
               greater part of his moral precepts would have no reason for
               being. That is why those who do not believe in the future
               life, imagining that he is speaking only of the present life,
               either do not understand them or find them puerile.

                      This doctrine, therefore, can be considered as the
               focal point of Christ’s teaching and it is placed toward
               the beginning of this book because it must be the goal of
               all persons. Only this doctrine can justify the anomalies of
               earthly life and harmonize them with the justice of God.

               3. The Jews had only very imprecise ideas regarding the
               future life. They believed in angels, whom they regarded as
               the privileged beings of creation, but they did not know that
               human beings could someday become angels and share in
               their bliss. According to them, observing God’s laws was
               rewarded with earthly possessions, the supremacy of their
               nation and victory over their enemies. Public calamities
               and defeats were punishment for their disobedience. Moses
               could not have said more than he did to an uneducated
               people comprised mostly of shepherds, and who needed
               to be touched, before anything else, by the things of this
               world. Later, Jesus came to reveal to them that there is
               another world, where God’s justice follows its course. It



                                            66




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 66                                     3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                  MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD



               is this world that he promises to those who observe God’s
               commandments and where the good ones will find their
               recompense. That world is his kingdom; it is there that he
               is to be found in all his glory and to where he will return
               upon leaving the earth.

                      However, adapting his teaching to the state of people
               at that time, Jesus did not believe he should give them
               complete enlightenment, which would dazzle them without
               edifying them, for they would not comprehend it. Thus, he
               limited himself to presenting the future life in principle, as
               a law of nature from which no one could escape. Therefore,
               every Christian strongly believes in the future life, but the
               idea that many hold about it is vague and incomplete, and
               therefore erroneous on various points. For a great many,
               it is only a belief without absolute certainty; hence doubt
               and even disbelief.

                      Spiritism has come to complete, on this point as well
               as many others, the teaching of Christ now that humans
               have matured enough to comprehend the truth. With
               Spiritism, the future life is no longer a simple article of
               faith, a hypothesis. It is a material reality demonstrated
               by the facts; eye-witnesses have come to describe this
               reality in all its phases and in all its peripeties in such
               a way that not only is doubt no longer possible, but the
               most commonplace intelligence can depict it in its true
               appearance just as one could depict a country about which
               one had read a detailed description. And this description
               of the future life is so circumstantiated, the conditions of
               the happy or unhappy existence of those who are there


                                                67




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 67                                      3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                         CHAPTER II



               are so logical, that one must state in spite of oneself that
               it could not be otherwise, and that the true justice of God
               is contained therein.



               THE KINGSHIP OF JESUS


               4. Everyone understands that Jesus’ kingdom is not of
               this world, but might he not also have a kingship on the
               earth? The title of king does not always imply the exercise
               of temporal power; it is given by unanimous consensus to
               those whose genius places them on the forefront of any
               order of idea, who dominate the times in which they live
               and influence the progress of humankind. It is in this
               sense that it is stated, “The king or prince of philosophers,
               artists, poets, writers, etc.” Does not this royalty, born
               of personal merit and consecrated by posterity, often
               display an ascendancy that is greater than that held by
               the crown? This ascendancy is imperishable, whereas the
               other is the plaything of vicissitudes. This ascendancy is
               always blessed by future generations, whereas the other
               is sometimes cursed. Earthly sovereignty ends with life;
               moral sovereignty continues to govern, especially after
               death. From this aspect, is Jesus not a more powerful
               king than many sovereigns of earth? It was with good
               reason therefore that he said to Pilate, “I am a king, but
               my kingdom is not of this world.”




                                            68




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 68                                     3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                  MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD



               THE POINT OF VIEW


               5. The clear and precise idea that one holds of the future
               life provides an unshakable faith in the future. This faith
               carries enormous consequences for the moralization of
               human beings, because it completely changes the point of
               view from which they consider earthly life. For those who
               through their thought place themselves in the spirit life,
               which is limitless, corporeal life is no more than a passage,
               a brief stay in an ungrateful country. The vicissitudes and
               tribulations of life are no more than incidents which they
               bear with patience because they know that they are only
               of short duration, and that they must be followed by a
               happier state. Death no longer has anything terrifying
               about it and it is no longer a door to nothingness, but
               rather the deliverance that opens to the exile the entryway
               to a dwelling place of happiness and peace. Knowing they
               are in a temporary, not final situation, they accept the
               worries of life with more indifference, which results in a
               composure of spirit that mitigates their afflictions.

                      Due to the mere doubt regarding the future life, people
               direct all their thoughts toward the earthly life. Uncertain
               of the future, they give everything to the present. By
               not foreseeing possessions that are more precious than
               those of earth, they are like children who can see nothing
               beyond their toys; there is nothing they will not do to
               obtain them. The loss of even the least of their possessions
               causes pungent hurt. A disappointment, a frustrated
               hope, an unsatisfied ambition, an injustice of which they
               are the victim, wounded pride or vanity are also torments


                                                69




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 69                                      3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                         CHAPTER II



               that make their life a perennial agony, and in this way
               they intentionally cause themselves true torment at every
               moment. Taking their point of view from earthly life, at
               whose center they place themselves, everything around
               them assumes vast proportions. The evil that reaches
               them, as well as the good that falls on others – everything
               takes on a great importance in their eyes. The same occurs
               with those who are inside a city, where everything seems
               big; the individuals who occupy high positions seem
               like monuments. However, upon ascending a mountain,
               individuals and things both seem quite small.

                      This is what happens with those who contemplate
               earthly life from the point of view of the future life: like
               the stars in the firmament, humankind is lost in the
               immensity. They then perceive that great and small things
               are all mixed together like ants atop a mound of earth;
               that proletarians and potentates are of the same stature,
               and they lament those ephemeral individuals who hand
               themselves over to such worry in order to win a place which
               will elevate them so little, and which they must occupy for
               such a short time. It is thus that the importance attributed
               to earthly things is always in reverse proportion to faith in
               the future life.

               6. If everybody thought in this manner, one might say
               that, with no one being any longer concerned with the
               things of the earth, everything would be endangered. No;
               people instinctively look after their own well being, and
               although certain that they will remain for only a short time
               in a place, they still want to feel as good or as comfortable



                                            70




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 70                                     3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                  MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD



               as possible. There is no one who, upon finding a thorn
               under his or her hand, will not remove it in order not to get
               pricked. Well then, the search for well-being forces people
               to improve everything, possessed as they are of the instinct
               for progress and self-preservation, both being contained in
               the laws of nature. Therefore, they labor out of necessity,
               enjoyment and duty, thereby fulfilling the designs of
               Providence, which has placed them on the earth for such
               a purpose. Only those who consider the future attribute
               a relative importance to the present, and they are easily
               consoled in their failings by thinking of the destination
               that awaits them.

                      Accordingly, God does not condemn earthly pleasures
               but rather their abuse at the expense of matters of the
               soul. Moreover, it is against such abuse that those who
               apply Jesus’ words, “My kingdom is not of this world,” are
               protected.

                      Those who identify themselves with the future life are
               like a rich person who loses a small sum without being
               disturbed by it; those who concentrate their thoughts on
               the earthly life are like a poor person who loses everything
               he or she owns and becomes desperate.

               7. Spiritism broadens one’s thought and opens up new
               horizons. Instead of this narrow and small-minded view
               that concentrates on the present life, which makes the
               instant that one passes on the earth the unique and
               fragile pivot of the eternal future, Spiritism shows that this
               life is only one link in the harmonious and magnificent
               whole of the Creator’s work. Spiritism also demonstrates



                                                71




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 71                                      3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                         CHAPTER II



               the solidarity that interconnects all the existences of one
               being, all beings of the same world, and all beings of all
               worlds. It thus provides a basis and a reason for universal
               fraternity, whereas the doctrine of the creation of the
               soul at the moment of the birth of each body renders all
               beings strangers to one another. This solidarity among the
               parts of the same whole explains what is inexplicable if
               only one part is considered. It is this whole that at the
               time of Christ people would not have comprehended, and
               that is why he reserved such knowledge for another time.


               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               AN EARTHLY KINGSHIP


               8. Who better than I can understand the truth of these words
               of our Lord, “My kingdom is not of this world?” I lost myself
               in pride while on the earth. Who, then, could understand
               the insignificance of earth’s kingdoms if not I? What of my
               earthly kingdom did I bring back here with me? Nothing;
               absolutely nothing. And as if to make my lesson more
               terrible, it did not even accompany me to the tomb! I was
               a queen amongst men; as a queen I thought I would enter
               the kingdom of heaven. Such delusion! Such humiliation,
               when, instead of being received as a sovereign, I saw above
               me – far above me – beings whom I had deemed quite small
               and whom I had despised because they were not of noble
               blood! Oh! How I then understood the barrenness of the
               honors and grandeurs that I so eagerly sought on earth!



                                            72




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 72                                     3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                  MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD



                        In order to prepare oneself for a place in this kingdom,
               self-denial, humility, charity in all its heavenly forms, and
               benevolence toward all are required. You are not asked
               who you were or what position you occupied, but what
               good you did, the tears you wiped away.

                        O Jesus! You said that your kingdom is not of this
               world because one must suffer in order to reach heaven,
               and the steps of a throne cannot lead us to it; only the most
               trying paths of life do. Therefore, seek your path through
               the briars and thorns and not amongst the flowers.

                        People run after earthly things as if they were able to
               keep them forever, but here there are no more illusions.
               They soon perceive that they had only been chasing a
               shadow and that they had neglected the only possessions
               that were solid and durable, the only ones they could use
               in the heavenly home, the only ones that give them access
               to it.

                        Have pity on those who have not gained the kingdom
               of heaven. Help them with your prayers, for prayer brings
               people closer to the Most High; it is the link of union
               between heaven and earth. Do not forget that!

                                                     A queen of France (Havre, 1863)




                                                73




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 73                                             3/7/2009 18:00:23

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 74   3/7/2009 18:00:23

               CHAPTER III


               There are many dwellings
               in my Father’s house
                         x The different states of the soul in the errant state1

                         xThe different categories of inhabited worlds

                         xEarth’s destiny. The cause of earthly miseries


                         THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                         xHighly evolved and less evolved worlds

                         xWorlds of trial and expiation

                         xRegenerative worlds

                         xThe progression of worlds




                       1. “Let not your hearts be troubled. You believe in God, believe
                       also in me. There are many dwellings in my Father’s house; if

               1
                   Or erraticity: Intervals between reincarnations while the spirit is in the
               spirit world awaiting a new destiny. See The Spirits’ Book, questions 223-
               233. – Tr.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 75                                                      3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                            CHAPTER III



                      it were not so I would have told you, for I am going to prepare
                      the place, and after I have gone and have prepared the place
                      for you, I will return and will take you with me, so that there
                      where I am you may be also.” (Jn. 14:1-3)



               THE DIFFERENT STATES OF THE SOUL IN THE
               ERRANT STATE


               2. The Father’s house is the universe; the different
               dwellings are the worlds that revolve in infinite space,
               offering to incarnate spirits stations appropriate to their
               advancement.

                      Regardless of the diversity of worlds, these words
               may also be understood as referring to the happy or
               unhappy situation of the spirit in the errant state. The
               spirit’s environment, its point of view regarding things,
               the sensations it experiences and its perceptions will
               vary infinitely, depending on its degree of purification
               and how detached it is from material ties. While some
               spirits cannot leave the sphere in which they live, others
               can travel through space and go to other worlds. While
               certain guilty spirits wander in darkness, the blessed ones
               enjoy a resplendent light and the sublime spectacle of the
               infinite. Finally, while the evil spirit, tormented by remorse
               and lamentation, frequently alone, without consolation
               and separated from the objects of its affection, groans
               under the duress of mental suffering, the righteous spirit,
               reunited with those whom it loves, enjoys the delights of an
               indescribable bliss. There are therefore many mansions,
               although they are neither circumscribed nor localized.


                                                 76




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 76                                              3/7/2009 18:00:23

                      THERE ARE MANY DWELLINGS IN MY FATHER’S HOUSE



               THE DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF INHABITED
               WORLDS


               3. From the teaching given by the Spirits, one comes to
               understand that the various worlds are in conditions very
               different from one another as to the degree of advancement
               or the lower order status of their inhabitants. Among them
               are those whose inhabitants are physically and morally
               even less evolved than those of earth; others’ inhabitants
               are of the same level, whereas others’ are more highly
               evolved to differing degrees in every respect. On lower order
               worlds, existence is completely material, the passions
               reign supreme and moral life is almost non existent. To the
               degree that moral life is developed, the influence of matter
               diminishes in such a way that, on more advanced worlds,
               life is entirely spiritual, so to speak.

               4. On intermediate worlds, there is a mixture of good and
               evil, with the predominance of one or the other, according
               to the degree of advancement. Although it is not possible
               to make an absolute classification of the various worlds,
               one can, nevertheless, due to their status and destiny, and
               based on the more accentuated differences, divide them
               in a general way as follows: primitive worlds, intended for
               the first incarnations of the human soul; worlds of trial
               and expiation, where evil dominates; regenerative worlds,
               where souls who still have something to expiate may absorb
               new strength by resting from the fatigue of struggle; happy
               worlds, where the good outweighs evil; and heavenly or
               divine worlds, the habitations of purified spirits, where



                                              77




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 77                                     3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                         CHAPTER III



               the good reigns completely. Earth belongs to the trial and
               expiation category, and that is why humans on it are the
               target of so many miseries.

               5. Spirits who incarnate on any one world are not connected
               to it forever, nor do they complete on it all the progressive
               phases they must traverse in order to attain to perfection.
               When on one particular world they have reached the degree
               of advancement it offers, they go to a more advanced one,
               and so on until they have reached the state of pure spirits.
               These various worlds are the stations on which they find
               elements of progress proportional to their advancement.
               It is a recompense for them to go to a world of a higher
               order, just as it is a punishment to prolong their stay on
               an unhappy world or to be relegated to one that is even
               unhappier than the one they are forced to leave if they
               have been obstinate in evil.



               EARTH’S DESTINY. THE CAUSE OF EARTHLY MISERIES


               6. Surprised at finding on earth so much wickedness and
               evil passion, so many miseries and infirmities of every
               sort, one might come to the conclusion that the human
               species is a very sad thing indeed. This judgment arises
               from the limited point of view of those who hold it, and it
               gives an erroneous idea of the whole. One must remember
               that not all of humankind is to be found on the earth,
               but only a tiny fraction of it. Actually, the human species
               entails all beings endowed with reason, who populate


                                              78




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 78                                     3/7/2009 18:00:23

                      THERE ARE MANY DWELLINGS IN MY FATHER’S HOUSE



               the innumerable worlds of the universe; hence, what is
               earth’s population when compared to the total population
               of all those worlds? Much less than that of a tiny village
               when compared to a great empire. The material and moral
               situation of earth’s humankind is nothing surprising
               considering earth’s destination and the nature of those
               who inhabit it.

               7. One would form a very erroneous idea of the inhabitants
               of a large city if they were judged by the populace of its
               infamous and sordid quarters. In a hospital, one sees
               only the sick or maimed; in a penitentiary, one sees all
               sorts of turpitudes and vices in one place; in unhealthy
               regions, most of the inhabitants are pale, weak and sickly.
               Well then, imagine the earth as being a sordid district, a
               hospital, a penitentiary and an unhealthy region – because
               it is all of these at once – and you will understand why
               afflictions outweigh joys. This happens because one does
               not send healthy persons to a hospital, or those who have
               practiced no evil to houses of correction; nor can hospitals
               or houses of correction be places of delight.

                      Hence, in the same way that in a city the whole
               population is not in hospitals or prisons, the whole of
               humankind is not on the earth. And just as one leaves the
               hospital when one has been cured and the prison when
               one has served one’s time, humans leave the earth for
               happier worlds when they have been healed of their moral
               infirmities.




                                            79




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 79                                    3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                              CHAPTER III



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               HIGHLY EVOLVED AND LESS EVOLVED WORLDS


               8. The catagorizing of worlds as either less evolved or
               highly evolved is more relative than absolute. A world is
               less evolved or highly evolved in relation to those that are
               above or below it on the scale of progression.

                       Taking the earth as a point of comparison, one can form
               an idea of the state of a less evolved world by supposing its
               inhabitants to be at the degree of the primitive or barbaric1
               cultures that may still be found on earth’s surface, and
               which are remnants of earth’s primitive state. On the
               least evolved worlds, the beings that inhabit them are,
               to a certain extent, rudimentary. They have the human
               form but are devoid of any beauty. Their instincts are not
               tempered by any sentiment of refinement or benevolence,
               or by any notions of right or wrong. Brute force is the only
               law. With no industry or inventions, they spend life in
               conquest of food. Nevertheless, God does not abandon any
               of his creatures; in the darkest depths of their mind lies the
               latent, sometimes more, sometimes less developed, vague
               intuition of a Supreme Being. This instinct is enough to
               render some more advanced than others and to prepare
               their ascension to a more complete life, for they are not
               degraded beings but children who are growing up.

                       In between the lowest and highest degrees there are
               innumerable levels, and in the pure, dematerialized spirits
               shining in glory it is difficult to recognize those who used

               1
                   See “Explanatory Note” p. 567 – Pub.


                                                   80




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 80                                       3/7/2009 18:00:23

                      THERE ARE MANY DWELLINGS IN MY FATHER’S HOUSE



               to animate such primitive beings, in the same way that in
               the adult person it is difficult to recognize the embryo.

               9. In worlds that have reached a highly evolved degree,
               the conditions of moral and material life are very different
               from those on earth. The corporeal form, as everywhere
               else, is always the human form, but embellished, perfected
               and, above all, purified. The body possesses nothing of
               earthly materiality, and consequently is subject neither to
               the needs, the diseases, nor the deteriorations that the
               predominance of matter engenders. The senses, more
               refined, have perceptions that the denseness of the organs
               stifle on this world. The specific lightness of the body
               enables rapid and easy locomotion; instead of dragging
               itself laboriously over the ground, it glides – so to speak
               – over the surface or sails through the air with no other
               effort than that of the will, in the way in which angels are
               portrayed, or in which the ancients imagined the manes1
               on the Elysian Fields. Depending on their wishes, humans
               retain the features of their past migrations and appear to
               their friends as they were known to them, but illuminated
               by a divine light and transfigured by inner impressions
               that are always of an elevated nature. Instead of pallid
               faces stricken by suffering and passion, intelligence and life
               radiate from that splendor, which painters have portrayed
               by the halo or aureole of the saints.

                      The little resistance that matter poses to highly
               advanced spirits renders the development of bodies more

               1
                 The spirits of the dead in ancient Greco-Roman belief (Webster’s, op.
               cit). – Tr.


                                                 81




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 81                                               3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                         CHAPTER III



               rapid and infancy short or almost non-existent. In the
               absence of worries and troubles, life is proportionally much
               longer than on earth. In principle, longevity is proportional
               to the degree of advancement of each world. Death holds
               none of the horrors of decomposition. Far from being an
               object of dread, it is regarded as a happy transformation,
               because on such worlds the doubt as to the future does
               not exist. During life, the soul, not being enclosed within
               compact matter, radiates and enjoys a lucidity that places
               it in an almost permanent state of emancipation and allows
               for the free transmission of thought.

               10. On such blissful worlds, relationships between nations
               are always friendly and are never disturbed by the ambition
               of dominating their neighbor, or by war, which is its
               consequence. There are no masters, slaves or privileges of
               birth; only moral and intellectual ascendancy establish the
               differences of conditions and confer supremacy. Authority
               is always respected, for it is conferred only on those who
               have merit and it is always exercised with justice. Humans
               do not try to raise themselves above others, but only above
               themselves by striving for perfection. Their objective is to
               reach the class of the pure spirits, and this unceasing
               desire is not a torment but a noble ambition that makes
               them study ardently in order to become like them. All the
               tender and elevated sentiments of human nature are found
               there, augmented and purified. Hatred, petty jealousies
               and the menial covetousness of envy are unknown. A bond
               of love and fraternity unites all humans; the strongest help
               the weakest. Their possessions vary to a greater or lesser



                                             82




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 82                                     3/7/2009 18:00:23

                      THERE ARE MANY DWELLINGS IN MY FATHER’S HOUSE



               degree according to what they have acquired by means of
               their intelligence, but no one suffers for lack of necessities,
               since no one is undergoing expiation. In other words, evil
               does not exist.

               11. On your world, you need evil in order to sense the good;
               night to admire the light; sickness to appreciate health. On
               highly evolved worlds such contrasts are not necessary.
               Eternal light, eternal beauty and eternal serenity of the
               soul provide an eternal joy that is disturbed neither by
               the anxieties of material life nor contact with evil persons,
               who have no access there. This is what the human spirit
               finds most difficult to comprehend; ingenious at painting
               the torments of hell, it could never represent the delights
               of heaven. Why not? Because, being little-evolved, it has
               borne only pain and misery, and not having glimpsed the
               heavenly splendor, it can only speak of what it knows.
               As the human spirit evolves and purifies itself, however,
               the horizon becomes resplendent and it comprehends the
               good that lies ahead as well as the evil that has been left
               behind.

               12. Nevertheless, such fortunate worlds are not privileged,
               for God is not partial toward any of his children. He gives to
               all the same rights and faculties to ascend to such worlds.
               God makes all start from the same point and endows no
               one with more than the others. The highest positions are
               accessible to all, and it is their responsibility to win them
               through labor, to reach them as soon as possible or to
               linger through centuries and centuries in the underworlds
               of humankind. (Summary of the teaching of all the Spirits.)



                                             83




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 83                                       3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                              CHAPTER III



               WORLDS OF TRIAL AND EXPIATION


               13. What more can I tell you about worlds of expiation than
               what you already know, since all you have to do is consider
               the earth that you inhabit? The superior intelligence of a large
               number of its inhabitants indicates that it is not a primitive
               world meant for the incarnation of spirits who have just left
               the hands of the Creator. The innate qualities they bring with
               them are proof that they have already lived and achieved a
               certain amount of progress. However, the numerous vices
               to which they are inclined are also an indication of great
               moral imperfection. This is why God has placed them on an
               ungrateful earth: so that they may expiate on it their wrongs
               through pain-filled labor and the miseries of life until they
               have merited going to a happier world.

               14. Nevertheless, not all the spirits that incarnate on the
               earth are sent there in expiation. The so-called primitive1
               peoples are spirits who have just left infancy, and who
               are there for an education, so to speak, and to develop
               themselves through contact with more-advanced spirits.
               Next come the semi-civilized peoples, comprised of the
               same spirits in more advanced stages of progress. Generally
               speaking, these are the indigenous peoples of earth, who
               have evolved little by little through long centennial periods.
               Some of them have been able to reach the intellectual
               advancement of more enlightened peoples.

                       Spirits undergoing expiation are foreigners there, if
               we may so express ourselves. They have already lived on

               1
                   See “Explanatory Note” p. 567 – Pub.


                                                   84




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 84                                        3/7/2009 18:00:23

                       THERE ARE MANY DWELLINGS IN MY FATHER’S HOUSE



               other worlds, from which they were banished because
               they persisted in evil, and because they were a cause
               of disturbance to the good inhabitants. They have been
               relegated to living for a time among less advanced spirits,
               and since they carry with them their developed intelligence
               and the seed of acquired knowledge, they have the mission
               of helping them advance. That is why punished spirits are
               found in the midst of the most intelligent peoples. Having
               more sensitivity, the miseries of life are bitterer to them
               because sufferings bruise them more deeply than they
               bruise the primitive peoples, whose moral sense is more
               obtuse.1

               15. Consequently, the earth portrays one of the types of
               expiatory worlds, whose variety is infinite, although they
               all possess the common characteristic of serving as a place
               of exile for spirits who rebel against the law of God. There,
               such spirits must struggle simultaneously against the
               wickedness of humankind and the inclemency of nature,
               a two-fold and arduous endeavor that at the same time
               develops the qualities of both heart and intelligence. It is
               thus that God, in his divine goodness, enables punishment
               itself to revert to the advantage of the spirit’s progress.

                                                          St. Augustine (Paris, 1862)



               REGENERATIVE WORLDS

               16. Among the stars that twinkle in the blue canopy of
               the firmament, how many worlds there are like yours,
               designated by the Lord for trial and expiation! But there

               1
                   See “Explanatory Note” p. 567 – Pub.


                                                   85




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 85                                              3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                         CHAPTER III



               are also some that are more miserable and some that
               are better; and there are those of transition, which may
               be called regenerative. Each planetary vortex, moving in
               space around a common center, draws along with it its
               own worlds: primitive, exile, trial, regenerative and blissful.
               We have already spoken to you of those worlds where the
               newborn soul is placed, when, still ignorant of good and
               evil, it can progress toward God, lord of itself, in possession
               of its free will. You have already been informed regarding
               the ample faculties given to the soul so that it may practice
               the good. But alas! There are those who succumb, and
               God, not desiring their annihilation, permits them to go to
               those worlds where, from incarnation to incarnation, they
               purify and regenerate themselves, and return worthy of
               the glory that has been reserved for them.

               17. Regenerative worlds serve as a transition between
               worlds of expiation and worlds of bliss. The repentant soul
               finds peace and repose on them, and ends up purifying
               itself. Of course, on such worlds humans are still subject
               to the laws that govern matter; their humanity still
               experiences your sensations and desires but is free of the
               muddled passions that enslave you; on regenerative worlds
               there is no longer the pride that renders your heart silent,
               the envy that tortures it and the hatred that suffocates it.
               The word love is written on every brow, a perfect equity
               governs social relationships, and all acknowledge God,
               endeavoring to evolve toward him by following his laws.

                      Nonetheless, on them there is still not perfect bliss,
               but the dawning of happiness. Human beings there are
               still of flesh, and therefore subject to the vicissitudes from



                                             86




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 86                                       3/7/2009 18:00:23

                      THERE ARE MANY DWELLINGS IN MY FATHER’S HOUSE



               which only completely dematerialized beings are freed.
               There are still trials to endure, but they do not have the
               pungent anguish of expiation. Compared to the earth, these
               worlds are very happy, and many of you would be satisfied
               to settle on them, for they are the calm after the storm, the
               convalescence after a cruel disease. Since humans there
               are less absorbed by material things, they foresee the
               future better than you do. They comprehend the joys that
               the Lord promises to those who render themselves worthy,
               when death has once again reaped their bodies in order to
               bestow upon them true life. It is then that the delivered soul
               hovers above all horizons; there are no longer the material
               and coarse senses, but the senses of a pure and celestial
               perispirit breathing emanations from God, in aromas of
               love and charity that emanate from his heart.

               18. But alas! On those worlds humans are still fallible and
               the spirit of evil has not completely lost its empire. Not
               to advance is to retreat, and if individuals are not firm
               on the pathway of the good, they may fall back to worlds
               of expiation where new and more fearsome trials await
               them.

                      So at night, at the time of repose and prayer,
               contemplate that blue canopy and the innumerable spheres
               that shine above your heads, and ask yourselves which
               ones lead to God. Ask him for a regenerative world to open
               up to receive you after your expiation on the earth.

                                                   St. Augustine (Paris, 1862)




                                            87




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 87                                       3/7/2009 18:00:23

                                         CHAPTER III



               THE PROGRESSION OF WORLDS


               19. Progress is one of the laws of nature. All animate and
               inanimate beings of creation are submitted to it by the
               goodness of God, who wills for everything to grow and
               prosper. Death, which to humans appears to be the end
               of things, is only a means of reaching a more perfect state
               through transformation, since everything dies in order to
               be reborn, and nothing suffers annihilation.

                      At the same time that living beings progress morally,
               the worlds they inhabit progress materially. Whoever
               could follow a world in its different phases, from the
               instant in which the first atoms destined to constitute it
               began to agglomerate, would see it traveling an incessantly
               progressive scale, but by degrees imperceptible to each
               generation, and offering its inhabitants a dwelling more
               agreeable as they themselves advance on the path of
               progress. Thus, the progress of human beings, animals
               (their helpers), plants and the forms of habitations progress
               in parallel; nothing in nature remains stationary. How
               grand this idea is and how worthy of the magnificence of
               the Creator! On the other hand, how small and unworthy
               of the Creator’s power is the idea that focuses his kindness
               and providence on the imperceptible grain of sand that is
               the earth and restricts humankind to the few humans who
               inhabit it!

                      The earth, according to that law, was once materially
               and morally in a state inferior to today, and under this dual


                                             88




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 88                                     3/7/2009 18:00:23

                      THERE ARE MANY DWELLINGS IN MY FATHER’S HOUSE



               aspect it will reach a more elevated degree. It has arrived at
               one of its periods of transformation, in which, from being
               an expiatory world, it will become a regenerative one; then
               humans will be happy because God’s law will reign on it.

                                                   St. Augustine (Paris, 1862)




                                            89




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 89                                       3/7/2009 18:00:23

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 90   3/7/2009 18:00:24

               CHAPTER IV



               No one can see the
               kingdom of God unless
               he is born again
                        x Resurrection and reincarnation

                        x Family ties strengthened by reincarnation, but
                           severed by a single existence


                        THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                        x Limits on incarnation

                        x The need for incarnation




                      1. Jesus, having come to the outskirts of Caesarea Philippi,
                      asked his disciples and said to them, “What do men say
                      regarding the Son of Man? Who do they say I am?” They
                      answered him, “Some say you are John the Baptist; others,
                      Elijah, others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.” Jesus said
                      to them, “And you, who do you say I am?” Simon Peter said
                      to him, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.” Jesus




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 91                                             3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                            CHAPTER IV



                      responded to him, “You are blessed, Simon, son of Jonah,
                      because it was neither flesh nor blood that has revealed
                      this to you, but my Father who is in heaven.” (Mt. 16:13-17;
                      Mk. 8:27-30)

                      2. Meanwhile, when Herod the Tetrarch heard about
                      everything that Jesus was doing, his spirit was perplexed,
                      because some were saying that John had come back to life
                      from among the dead; others that Elijah had appeared, and
                      others that one of the ancient prophets had come back to life.
                      Herod then said, “I had John beheaded, so who is this of
                      whom I have heard such great things?” And he desired to see
                      him. (Mk. 6:14-15; Lk. 9:7-9)

                      3. (After the transfiguration) His disciples asked him, saying
                      “Why, then, do the scribes say that it is necessary for Elijah
                      to come first?” But Jesus answered them, “It is true that
                      Elijah must come and reestablish all things. But I declare to
                      you that Elijah has already come, and they did not recognize
                      him, but treated him as they wished. It is likewise that they
                      shall cause the Son of Man to suffer.” Then his disciples
                      understood that it was John the Baptist about whom he had
                      spoken to them. (Mt. 17:10-13; Mk. 9:10-12)




               RESURRECTION AND REINCARNATION


               4. Reincarnation was part of the Jewish dogmas under the
               name resurrection. Only the Sadducees, who thought that
               everything ended with death, did not believe in it. Jewish
               ideas on this point, like many others, were not clearly
               defined because they had only vague and incomplete
               notions regarding the soul and its connection with the


                                                 92




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 92                                             3/7/2009 18:00:24

                         NO ONE CAN SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD UNLESS
                                      HE IS BORN AGAIN


               body. They believed that a person who had lived could live
               again, without comprehending the exact manner in which
               it could happen. They designated by the word resurrection
               what Spiritism more correctly calls reincarnation. Actually,
               resurrection supposes the return to life of the body that
               died, which science has demonstrated to be materially
               impossible, especially when the elements of that body were
               dispersed and absorbed long ago. Reincarnation is the
               return of a soul, or spirit, to corporeal life, but in another
               body newly formed for it and having nothing in common
               with the old one. The word resurrection might thus be
               applied to Lazarus but not to Elijah or the other prophets.
               Hence, if, according to their belief, John the Baptist was
               Elijah, John’s body could not have been Elijah’s, since
               John had been seen as a child and his mother and father
               were known. John, then, could be Elijah reincarnated but
               not resuscitated.

                      5. Now, there was a man among the Pharisees named
                      Nicodemus, a senator of the Jews, who went at night to meet
                      Jesus and said to him, “Rabbi, we know you have come from
                      God to instruct us as a doctor; for no one could perform the
                      miracles you are doing if God were not with him.”

                      Jesus answered him, “Verily, verily I say to you: no one can
                      see the Kingdom of God unless he is born again.”

                      Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man who is already old
                      be born? Can he enter his mother’s womb in order to be born
                      a second time?”

                      Jesus responded, “Verily, verily I say to you: If a man is
                      not born again of water and the spirit, he cannot enter the
                      Kingdom of God. Whatever is born from flesh is flesh, and


                                                93




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 93                                           3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                            CHAPTER IV



                      whatever is born from the spirit is spirit. Do not be surprised
                      that I have said to you that it is necessary for you to be born
                      again. The spirit blows wherever it wishes and you hear its
                      voice, but you do not know where it comes from or where it
                      is going. The same occurs with every man who is born of the
                      spirit.”

                      Nicodemus responded to him, “How can this be?” Jesus said
                      to him, “You are a teacher in Israel and yet you are unaware
                      of these things! Verily, verily I say to you that we say only
                      what we know and that we testify only to what we have
                      seen; yet you have not accepted our testimony. But if you do
                      not believe me when I speak about things of the earth, how
                      will you believe me when I speak to you about the things of
                      heaven?” (Jn. 3:1-12)

               6. The thought that John the Baptist was Elijah and that
               the prophets could live again on the earth may be found in
               many passages of the Gospels, especially in those indicated
               above (nos. 1-3). If this belief had been in error, Jesus
               would not have failed to combat it just as he combated
               so many others; far from it – he sanctioned it with all his
               authority and set it as a principle and necessary condition
               when he said: “No one can see the Kingdom of Heaven if
               he is not born again.” And he insisted, adding, “Do not be
               surprised that I have said that IT IS NECESSARY for you to
               be born again.”

               7. The words “If a man is not born again of water and of the
               spirit” have been interpreted in the sense of regeneration
               through the waters of baptism, but the original text simply
               stated “Not born again of water and of the spirit,” whereas
               in some translations the words of the spirit have been



                                                 94




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 94                                              3/7/2009 18:00:24

                         NO ONE CAN SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD UNLESS
                                      HE IS BORN AGAIN


               replaced by of the Holy Spirit, which no longer implies the
               same thought. This crucial point stands out in the first
               commentaries written on the Gospels and will someday be
               confirmed beyond a doubt.1

               8. In order to understand the real meaning of these words, one
               must also pay attention to the significance of the word water,
               which has not been employed in its proper acceptation.

                    The ancients’ knowledge regarding the physical
               sciences was highly imperfect, because they believed that
               the earth had arisen from the waters, and that is the reason
               they regarded water as the absolute generative element.
               That is why it is stated in Genesis that, “The Spirit of God
               hovered over the waters; it hovered over the surface of the
               waters; ... Let there be a firmament in the midst of the
               waters; ... Let the waters that are under the heavens be
               gathered together into one place, and let the dry element
               appear; ... Let the waters produce living animals that swim
               in the water and birds that fly above the earth and under
               the firmament.”

               1
                 Osterwald’s translation is in accordance with the original text. It reads:
               “Not born again of water and of the spirit.” That of Sacy reads: “of the
               Holy Spirit”; that of Lamennais: “of the Holy Spirit.” – Auth.
                   To Kardec’s footnote we today can add that modern translations have
               restored the original text by rendering the phrase “spirit” instead of “Holy
               Spirit”. We have also examined Brazilian, English, and Ferreira de Almei-
               da’s Esperanto translations and they all read only “the spirit.”
                   Besides these modern translations, we found confirmation in a Latin
               one by Theodoro de Beze from 1642, which reads, “… genitus ex aqua et
               Spiritu…” “… et quod genitum est ex Spiritu, spiritus est.”
                   It is beyond a doubt that the word “Holy” is an interpolation, as stated
               by Kardec. – Publisher’s note.
                   The biblical text in Kardec’s version, despite being that of Sacy, does
               not render the term as “Saint-Esprit” (Holy Spirit) and we have held to
               Kardec’s rendition. – Tr.


                                                   95




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 95                                                    3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                            CHAPTER IV



                      According to this belief, water became the symbol of
               the material nature, just as spirit was the symbol of the
               intelligent nature. The words, “If a man is not born again
               of water and of the spirit,” or “in water and in the spirit,”
               thus mean, “If humans are not born again with their body
               and their soul.” This is the sense in which these words
               were originally understood.

                      Moreover, such an interpretation is justified by these
               words: “Whatever is born of the flesh is flesh and whatever
               is born of the spirit is spirit.” Here, Jesus makes a positive
               distinction between spirit and body. “Whatever is born of
               the flesh clearly indicates that only the body proceeds from
               the body and that the spirit is independent of it.

               9. “The spirit blows wherever it wishes and you hear its
               voice but you do not know where it comes from or where it is
               going” may be understood either as the Spirit of God, who
               gives life to whomever God wishes, or the human soul. In
               this latter acceptation, “you do not know where it comes
               from or where it is going” means that no one knows what
               the spirit had been or what it will be. If the spirit or soul
               were created at the same time as the body, one would know
               where it came from because one would know its beginning.
               In any case, this passage is the consecration of the principle
               of the pre-existence of the soul, and consequently, the
               plurality of existences.

                      10. Now, since the time of John the Baptist until the present,
                      the kingdom of heaven has been taken by violence, and violent
                      are those who obtain it, for up until John, all the prophets and
                      the law thus prophesied. And if you wish to understand what



                                                 96




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 96                                               3/7/2009 18:00:24

                         NO ONE CAN SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD UNLESS
                                      HE IS BORN AGAIN


                      I have said, he himself is Elijah who must come. Let him
                      hear who has ears to hear. (Mt. 11:12-15.)

               11. If the principle of reincarnation as expressed in John
               could be strictly interpreted in a purely mystical sense,
               the same could not apply to this passage from Matthew,
               which is unmistakable: “HE HIMSELF is Elijah, who must
               come.” Here there is neither symbol nor allegory – it is a
               positive affirmation. “Since the time of John the Baptist
               until the present, the kingdom of heaven has been taken
               by violence.” What do these words mean, since John the
               Baptist was still alive at that time? Jesus explains them,
               saying, “If you want to understand what I have told you,
               he himself is Elijah, who must come.” Hence, since John
               was none other than Elijah himself, Jesus was alluding
               to the time when John was living under the name of
               Elijah. “Until the present, the kingdom has been taken by
               violence” is another allusion to the violence of the Mosaic
               Law, which ordered the extermination of the infidels to win
               the Promised Land, the Paradise of the Hebrews, whereas
               according to the new law, heaven is won by charity and
               kindness.

                      Then he added, “Let him hear who has ears to hear.”
               These words, so frequently repeated by Jesus, clearly state
               that not everyone was in a condition to understand certain
               truths.

                      12. “Those of your people who have been made to die shall
                      live again. Those who have been slain around me shall live
                      again. Awaken from your sleep and sing the praises of God,
                      you who dwell in the dust, because the dew that falls upon




                                                97




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 97                                         3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                              CHAPTER IV



                       you is a dew of light, and because you shall destroy the earth
                       and the kingdom of the giants.”(Is. 26:19)

               13. This passage from Isaiah is also quite explicit: “Those
               of your people who have been made to die shall live again.”
               If the prophet had intended to speak of the spirit life, if
               he had wanted to say that those who had been made to
               die were not dead in spirit, he would have said: “live still,”
               and not “will live again.” In the sense of the spirit, these
               words would be a contradiction since they would imply an
               interruption in the life of the soul. In the sense of moral
               regeneration, however, they would be the negation of
               eternal punishment, since in principle they establish that
               all those who are dead will live again.

                       14.“But when a man has died once, when his body,
                       separated from his spirit, has been consumed, what does he
                       become? Having died once, can he live again? In this war
                       in which I find myself every day of my life, I wait for my
                       transformation to come.” (Job 14:10, 14. Translation by Le
                       Maistre de Sacy)

                       When a man dies, he loses all his strength and expires;
                       afterward, where is he? If a man dies, will he live again?
                       Will I wait all the days of my struggle until that one in which
                       some kind of transformation comes to me? (id. Protestant
                       translation by Osterwald)

                       When a man has died, he lives forever; the days of my earthly
                       existence ending, I will wait, because to it I shall return. (id.
                       Version of the Greek Church)1

               1
                   Since Kardec is quoting from three historic translations, we have ren-
               dered them as closely as possible according to their original form. – Tr.


                                                    98




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 98                                                     3/7/2009 18:00:24

                         NO ONE CAN SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD UNLESS
                                      HE IS BORN AGAIN


               15. The principle of the plurality of existences is clearly
               expressed in these three versions. It cannot be assumed
               that Job wanted to speak of regeneration through the
               waters of baptism, which he of course did not know about.
               “But when a man has died once, could he live again?” The
               idea of dying once and living again implies dying and living
               again several times. The Greek Church version is even
               more explicit, if that is possible. “The days of my earthly
               existence ending, I will wait, because to it I shall return,”
               which means, I shall return to earthly existence. This is as
               clear as if someone were to say: “I’m leaving my house, but
               I shall return to it.”

                      “In this war in which I find myself every day of my life,
               I wait for my transformation to come.” Job obviously wanted
               to speak of the struggle he bore against the miseries of life.
               He awaits his transformation; meaning, he had resigned
               himself. In the Greek version, I will wait seems especially to
               apply to a new existence, “the days of my earthly existence
               ending, I will wait, because to it I shall return.” Job seems
               to place himself after death in the interval that separates
               one existence from another and says that there he will
               await his return.

               16. Hence, there is no doubt that under the name
               resurrection, the principle of reincarnation was one of the
               fundamental beliefs of the Jews; that it was confirmed by
               Jesus and the prophets formally, from which it follows
               that to deny reincarnation is to deny the words of Christ
               himself. Someday, his words will comprise an authority
               regarding this point – like many others – when they are
               meditated upon without preconceived ideas.



                                              99




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 99                                        3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                            CHAPTER IV



               17. However, to this authority that arises from the religious
               point of view is added the philosophical point of view of
               the proofs that result from observing the facts. When one
               wants to go from the effects to the cause, reincarnation
               emerges as an absolute necessity, a condition inherent to
               humanity; in other words, as a law of nature. It reveals
               itself by its results in a way that is material – so to speak
               – like a hidden motor reveals itself by the movement. Only
               the doctrine of reincarnation can tell human beings where
               they came from, where they are going and why they are on
               the earth, and justify all the anomalies and all the apparent
               injustices that life presents.1

                      Without the principle of the pre-existence of the soul
               and the plurality of existences, most of the maxims in the
               Gospel are unintelligible, and that is why they have given
               way to such contradictory interpretations. This principle is
               the key that must restore them to their true meaning.



               FAMILY TIES STRENGTHENED BY REINCARNATION,
               BUT SEVERED BY A SINGLE EXISTENCE


               18. Family ties are not destroyed by reincarnation, as certain
               persons believe; on the contrary, they are strengthened
               and become tighter. It is the opposite principle that does
               destroy them.

               1
                 For the development of the doctrine of reincarnation, see The Spirits’
               Book, chaps. IV and V; What is Spiritism? chap. II, by Allan Kardec, and
               also La Pluralité des Existences by Pezzani – French publisher’s note.


                                                 100




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 100                                               3/7/2009 18:00:24

                         NO ONE CAN SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD UNLESS
                                      HE IS BORN AGAIN


                      In the spirit world, spirits form groups or families
               united by affection, sympathy and similar inclinations.
               These spirits, happy at being together, seek out one another.
               Incarnation separates them only momentarily, because
               after their reentry into the errant state they meet again
               like friends who have returned from a journey. Frequently,
               they even follow one another into incarnation, wherein
               they are reunited in the same family or the same circle,
               working together for their mutual advancement. If some
               are incarnate while others are not, they are nevertheless
               united by thought. Those who are free watch over those
               who are captive; the more advanced try to help the less
               advanced to progress. After each existence, they will have
               taken a step on the path toward perfection. Less and less
               attached to matter, their affection is more alive due to the
               fact that since their spirit has become more purified, it
               is no longer troubled by selfishness or the clouds of the
               passions. They can therefore pass through an unlimited
               number of corporeal existences without any harm affecting
               their mutual affection.

                      It is to be understood that we are here referring to
               real affection from soul to soul, the only affection that
               survives the destruction of the body, because beings of
               this world who are united to one another only through the
               senses have no reason to look for each other in the world
               of spirits. There are no lasting affections except spiritual
               ones; physical affections die out with the cause that gave
               rise to them; but that cause no longer exists in the world
               of spirits, whereas the soul exists forever. As for persons
               united by the sole reason of self-interest, they really do not


                                            101




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 101                                     3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                             CHAPTER IV



               mean anything to each other – death separates them both
               in heaven and on earth.

               19. The union and affection that exist between family
               members are an indication of a former sympathy1 that has
               brought them together. One also says of someone whose
               character, tastes, and inclinations have no similarity to
               those of their closest relatives, that he or she is not of that
               family. Saying this declares a greater truth than one might
               suppose. God allows such incarnations of antipathetic or
               foreign spirits within families with the dual objective of
               serving as a trial for some and as a means of advancement
               for others. The evil ones better themselves little by little
               through contact with the good ones and the care they
               receive from them. Their character becomes milder, their
               habits more purified and antipathies are erased. It is thus
               that the fusion amongst different categories of spirits is
               established, as occurs on the earth amongst ethnicities
               and cultures.

               20. The fear of the unending increasing of kinship as a
               consequence of reincarnation is a selfish fear, which
               demonstrates that one does not feel a sufficiently broad
               love to carry it over to a large number of individuals.
               Does a father who has many children love them all any
               less than he would if he had only one? But selfish people
               may rest at ease because such fear is without foundation.
               From the fact that one man has had ten incarnations it

               1
                 Sympathy: “Harmony of or agreement in feeling, as between persons
               or on the part of one person with respect to another. The harmony of
               feeling existing between persons of like tastes or opinion, or of congenial
               dispositions.” (Webster’s, op. cit.) – Tr.


                                                  102




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 102                                                  3/7/2009 18:00:24

                         NO ONE CAN SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD UNLESS
                                      HE IS BORN AGAIN


               does not follow that in the spirit world he will encounter
               ten fathers, ten mothers, ten wives and a proportional
               number of children and new relatives. There he will always
               re-encounter only the same objects of his affection, those
               who had been connected with him while on earth under
               various relationships, or perhaps even the same ones.

               21. Let us now look at the consequences of the “non-
               reincarnation” doctrine. This doctrine necessarily annuls
               the pre-existence of the soul. Since souls are created at
               the same time as the body, there are no previous links
               between them. They are complete strangers to one another.
               The father is a stranger to his child. The kinship between
               families is thus reduced solely to corporeal kinship without
               any spiritual link. There is therefore no reason to glorify
               oneself for having had such and such famous personages as
               ancestors. With reincarnation, ancestors and descendants
               may have known each other, lived together, loved each
               other, and find themselves reunited later on in order to
               tighten their bonds of sympathy.

               22. All this has to do with the past. As for the future,
               according to one of the fundamental dogmas resulting from
               non-reincarnation, the destiny of souls is irrevocably set
               after one sole existence. This definitive fixing of their destiny
               implies the cessation of all progress, because if there is
               any progress at all, there is no longer a definitive destiny.
               Depending on whether they have lived well or badly, they go
               immediately either to the dwelling place of the blessed or to
               eternal hell. Hence, they are immediately separated forever,
               without hope of ever being united again, so that fathers,



                                             103




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 103                                        3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                          CHAPTER IV



               mothers and children, husbands and wives, brothers,
               sisters and friends are never certain of seeing each other
               again. It is the most complete rupture of family ties.

                      With reincarnation and the progress that results
               from it, all those who have loved one another meet again
               on earth and in space, gravitating together to reach God.
               Those who fail along the way delay their advancement and
               happiness, but all hope is not lost. Helped, encouraged
               and upheld by those who love them, they will one day exit
               the quagmire in which they have been immersed. In short,
               with reincarnation there is ongoing solidarity between
               incarnates and discarnates, and hence the tightening of
               the bonds of affection.

               23. In summary, four alternatives are presented to
               humans for their future beyond the grave: first, nothingness,
               according to the materialist doctrine; second, absorption
               into the universal whole, according to the pantheistic
               doctrine; third, individuality with a definitive fixed fate,
               according to the Church’s doctrine; fourth, individuality
               with unending progress, according to the Spiritist doctrine.
               According to the first two, family ties are broken after
               death, and there is no hope of meeting again; with the
               third, there is a chance family members will see each other
               again, provided they are in the same environment, and
               this environment might be hell as well as heaven; with the
               plurality of existences, which is inseparable from gradual
               progression, there is certainty about the continuity of
               relationships between those who love one another, and
               this is what comprises the true family.



                                             104




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 104                                    3/7/2009 18:00:24

                         NO ONE CAN SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD UNLESS
                                      HE IS BORN AGAIN


               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               THE LIMITS ON INCARNATION


               24. What are the limits of incarnation?

                      “Incarnation per se does not have precisely traced
               limits if the term is understood as referring to the envelope
               that comprises the body of the spirit, considering the fact
               that the materiality of this envelope diminishes as the
               spirit purifies itself. On certain worlds more advanced
               than earth, the body is less compact, less heavy and less
               course, and consequently, less subject to vicissitudes. At a
               higher degree, it is diaphanous and almost fluidic. Degree
               by degree it is dematerialized and ends up melding with the
               perispirit. Depending on the world on which the spirit is
               called to live, the spirit takes on the envelope appropriate
               to the nature of that world.

                      The         perispirit   itself   endures   successive
               transformations. It becomes more and more etherealized
               each time up to complete purification, which characterizes
               pure spirits. If special worlds are meant as stations for
               highly advanced spirits, such spirits are not connected
               there as on lower worlds. The state of detachment in which
               they find themselves enables them to go anywhere the
               missions entrusted to them may call them.

                      If incarnation is considered from the material point of
               view – as is the case here on earth – it could be stated that
               it is limited to less evolved worlds. It therefore depends on



                                                105




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 105                                     3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                          CHAPTER IV



               the spirit to free itself quickly or less quickly by working
               for its purification.

                      One must also consider the fact that in the errant
               state, that is, in the intervals between corporeal existences,
               the situation of the spirit is in keeping with the nature of
               the world to which it is connected according to its degree
               of advancement; that in the errant state it is more or less
               happy, free and enlightened according to the degree of its
               dematerialization.

                                                       St. Louis (Paris, 1859)



               NEED FOR INCARNATION


               25. Is incarnation a punishment and are only guilty spirits
               subject to it?

                      The passage of spirits through corporeal life is
               necessary so that they may accomplish, with the help of
               physical action, the designs whose execution God has
               entrusted to them. This is necessary for them because the
               activity they are obliged to perform helps the development
               of their intelligence. God, being supremely just, must
               regard all his children equally; that is why he gives all of
               them the same starting point, the same aptitude, the same
               obligations to fulfill and the same freedom to act. Any
               privilege would be a preference and any preference an
               injustice. But incarnation is nothing for all spirits but a
               transitory state. It is a task that God imposes on them
               upon their entry into life as the first test of the use they



                                             106




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 106                                      3/7/2009 18:00:24

                         NO ONE CAN SEE THE KINGDOM OF GOD UNLESS
                                      HE IS BORN AGAIN


               will make of their free will. Those who eagerly fulfill this
               task quickly and less painfully clear their first degree of
               initiation and enjoy the fruits of their labor sooner. On the
               other hand, those who make bad use of the freedom that
               God has granted them delay their advancement; it is thus
               that by their obstinacy they may prolong indefinitely the
               need to reincarnate, and it is at that point that incarnation
               becomes a punishment.

                                                       St. Louis (Paris, 1859)


               26. Comment: A rough comparison will make this
               difference more understandable. Students can reach
               degrees of knowledge only after having passed through the
               series of classes leading to it. These classes, whatever the
               work they require, are a means for reaching the objective
               and not a punishment. Diligent students shorten the way
               and encounter fewer thorns along it. It is otherwise for
               those whose negligence and laziness obligate them to
               repeat certain classes. It is not the class work that is a
               punishment, but the obligation to recommence the same
               work.

                      The same applies to humankind on the earth. For the
               spirits of primitives, who are nearly at the beginning of
               their spirit lives, incarnation is a means for developing
               their intelligence. However, for educated individuals in
               whom the moral sense is broadly developed and who are
               obligated to recommence the steps of a corporeal life full of
               anguish, when they could have already reached the
               objective, it is a punishment because of their need to
               prolong their stay on lower and unfortunate worlds. On


                                           107




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 107                                      3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                              CHAPTER IV



               the other hand, those who work actively for their moral
               progress not only shorten the duration of physical
               incarnation, but they may all at once transcend the
               intermediate degrees that separate them from the more
               highly evolved worlds.

                      Might spirits incarnate only once on the same globe
               and fulfill their many existences on different spheres?
               This opinion would be acceptable only if all the humans
               on earth were at the same intellectual and moral level.
               The differences among them, from primitives to civilized
               individuals, show the many degrees that they are called
               to ascend. Moreover, an incarnation must have a useful
               purpose. But what would be the useful purpose of the
               ephemeral incarnations of children who die very young?
               They      would        have   suffered   without   profiting   either
               themselves or others. God, whose laws are all supremely
               wise, does nothing useless. Through reincarnation on the
               same globe, God has willed that the same spirits come
               into contact with one another again for the chance to
               repair their mutual offenses. Because of their previous
               relationships, God wishes furthermore to establish family
               ties on a spiritual basis and to support the principles of
               solidarity, fraternity and equality as a natural law.




                                                  108




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 108                                            3/7/2009 18:00:24

               CHAPTER V


               Blessed are the afflicted
                      x The justice of afflictions
                      x Current causes of afflictions
                      x Prior causes of afflictions
                      x Forgetfulness of the past
                      x Reasons for resigning oneself
                      x Suicide and insanity

                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS
                      x To suffer well or badly
                      x Evil and its remedy
                      x Happiness is not of this world
                      x The loss of loved ones. Premature deaths
                      x If he had been a good man, he would have died
                      x Voluntary suffering
                      x True misfortune
                      x Melancholy
                      x Voluntary trials. True sackcloth
                      x Should we put an end to our neighbor’s trials?
                      x Is it permissible to shorten the life of a patient who
                         is suffering with no hope of a cure?
                      x Sacrificing one’s own life
                      x Making one’s own suffering profitable for others




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 109                                           3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                             CHAPTER V



                      1. “Blessed are they who weep, for they shall be comforted.
                      Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for
                      they shall be filled. Blessed are they who suffer persecution
                      because of righteousness, for the kingdom of heaven is
                      theirs.” (Mt. 5:4, 6, 10)

                      2. “You are blessed, you who are poor, for the kingdom of
                      heaven is yours. You are blessed, you who now hunger, for
                      you shall be filled. You are fortunate, you who now weep, for
                      you shall laugh.” (Lk. 6:20, 21)

                      “But woe to you who are rich! For you have your consolation
                      in this world. Woe to you who are filled, for you shall be
                      hungry. Woe to you who now laugh, for you shall be reduced
                      to mourning and tears.” (Lk. 6:24, 25)



               THE JUSTICE OF AFFLICTIONS


               3. The compensations that Jesus promises to the afflicted
               of the earth cannot occur except in the future life.
               Without certainty about the future, these maxims would
               be nonsense; even more, they would be a falsehood. But
               even with this certainty, it is difficult to understand the
               usefulness of suffering in order to be happy. It is said that
               it is in order to have greater merit. But then one must
               ask: Why do some suffer more than others? Why are
               some born into poverty and others into opulence, without
               having done anything to justify such a position? Why does
               nothing ever work out for some, while everything seems to
               smile on others? But what is even harder to grasp is seeing
               benefits and misfortunes so unequally divided between



                                                  110




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 110                                           3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               vice and virtue; seeing virtuous people suffer alongside the
               wicked ones who prosper. Faith in the future might offer
               consolation and lead to patience, but it does not explain
               these anomalies, which appear to belie God’s justice.

                      However, if one believes in God, one cannot conceive
               of God apart from infinite perfection. God must be all
               powerful, wholly just and wholly good; otherwise, God
               would not be God. If God is supremely good and just,
               then God can neither act capriciously nor with partiality.
               Therefore, the vicissitudes of life have a cause, and since
               God is just, that cause must also be just. This is what
               everyone must understand very well. By means of Jesus’
               teachings, God has placed humans on the path toward
               that cause, and today, having deemed them sufficiently
               mature to understand it, God has revealed it entirely
               through Spiritism, i.e., through the voice of the Spirits.



               CURRENT CAUSES OF AFFLICTIONS


               4. The vicissitudes of life are of two types, or if one prefers,
               they have two very different sources that are important
               to differentiate: some have their cause in the present life;
               others outside of it.

                      On searching for the source of earthly misfortunes, it
               will be realized that many are the natural consequence of
               the character and behavior of those who bear them.

                      How many fail due to their own fault! How many are
               the victims of their own imprudence, pride and ambition!



                                                     111




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 111                                       3/7/2009 18:00:24

                                          CHAPTER V



                      How many ruin themselves for lack of discipline or
               perseverance, for wrong conduct, or for not having limited
               their desires!

                      How many unfortunate marriages there are because
               they result from calculated self-interest or vanity, and
               because the heart has played no part!

                      How many disagreements and disastrous quarrels
               could have been avoided with more moderation and less
               susceptibility!

                      How many ills and infirmities are the consequence of
               intemperance and excesses of all kinds!

                      How many parents are unhappy with their children
               because they did not combat their bad inclinations right
               from the start! Whether from weakness or indifference,
               they allowed the seeds of pride, selfishness and foolish
               vanity to develop in them, withering their hearts. Afterward
               – much later – in reaping what they have sown, they are
               surprised and afflicted by their children’s lack of respect
               and gratitude.

                      Let all those who are stricken in their hearts by life’s
               vicissitudes and disappointments calmly examine their
               conscience. Let them go back step by step to the source
               of the misfortunes that afflict them and see whether they
               would not often say, “If only I had or had not done this or
               that, I would not be in such a conundrum.”

                      Who then can they blame for all their afflictions
               but themselves? Humans are thus in the majority of
               cases the artisans of their own misfortunes. But instead


                                             112




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 112                                      3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               of acknowledging this fact, they find it simpler and less
               humiliating to their vanity to accuse fate, Providence, bad
               luck or their unlucky star, whereas their unlucky star lies
               in their own carelessness.

                      Misfortunes of this nature assuredly comprise a
               noteworthy contingent in life’s vicissitudes, and humans
               will avoid them only by working for their moral as well as
               their intellectual improvement.

               5. Human law reaches certain wrongs and punishes
               them; condemned persons can thus be said to bear the
               consequences of what they have done. However, the law
               does not and cannot reach every wrong; it touches mainly
               the wrongs that harm society and not the ones that harm
               those who commit them. God, however, wills the progress
               of all creatures, which is why God does not fail to punish
               any departure from the moral path. There is no wrong, no
               matter how small, or any infraction of the divine law that
               does not have powerful and unavoidable consequences
               that may be more regrettable or less so. Hence it follows
               that in both small and great matters, humans are always
               punished for that in which they have sinned. The suffering
               that is the sin’s consequence is a warning that they have
               erred. It gives them experience, enabling them to sense the
               difference between good and evil and the need to improve
               themselves so that in the future they may avoid what has
               been for them a source of bitterness; otherwise, there
               would be no motive for mending their ways, and trusting
               in their impunity they would delay their advancement and,
               consequently, their future happiness.



                                                     113




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 113                                  3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



                      Experience, however, sometimes arrives a bit late,
               after life has already been wasted and troubled, after
               strength has already been spent and after evil no longer
               has a remedy. Then the person will say, “If only at the
               beginning of my life I had known what I know today, how
               many wrongs I would have avoided! If I had it to do all
               over again, I would do everything differently. But there is
               no more time left!” Like the lazy worker who says, “I have
               wasted my day,” he or she likewise says, “I have wasted
               my life!” Nonetheless, just as the sun rises the next day for
               the worker and a new day begins that allows him or her to
               make up for lost time, so also after the night of the grave,
               the sun will shine with a new life, making it possible to
               take advantage of the experiences of the past and make
               good resolutions for the future.



               PRIOR CAUSES OF AFFLICTIONS


               6. However, if there are misfortunes in this life of which
               humans are the primary cause, there are others which,
               at least in appearance, are completely foreign to them
               and which seem to touch them fatalistically. Such is, for
               example, the loss of loved ones and family breadwinners;
               such are, furthermore, the accidents that no foresight
               could have prevented; the reversals of fortune that
               frustrate all measures of prudence; natural disasters and
               congenital infirmities, especially those that take from their
               unfortunate victims the means of earning their livelihood
               through labor, such as physical disabilities and mental
               impairment, etc.



                                             114




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 114                                    3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



                      Those who are born into such conditions have
               obviously done nothing in their present life to deserve,
               without compensation, such a sad fate, which they
               could not avoid, which they are powerless to change by
               themselves, and which puts them at the mercy of public
               commiseration. Why, then, are there such unfortunate
               beings, while right beside them under the same roof and
               in the same family there are others who have been favored
               in every way?

                      Finally, what can be said of those children who die
               at a very young age, and who knew of life only suffering?
               These are problems that no philosophy has yet been able to
               resolve, anomalies that no religion has been able to justify,
               and which would be the negation of God’s goodness, justice
               and providence according to the hypothesis that the soul
               is created at the same time as the body and that its fate is
               irrevocably set after a stay of but a few instants upon the
               earth. What caused these souls, having just left the hands
               of the Creator, to bear such miseries in this world, and to
               merit, in the future, any sort of recompense or punishment,
               when they could have done neither good nor evil?

                      Nevertheless, in virtue of the axiom that every effect
               has a cause, these miseries are effects that must have a
               cause, and if one believes in a just God, then that cause
               must also be just. Consequently, since the cause always
               precedes the effect, and since the cause in this case cannot
               be found in the present life, then it must be prior this life,
               that is, it belongs to a previous existence. On the other
               hand, since God can neither punish us for the good we



                                                     115




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 115                                     3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



               have done nor for the evil we have not done, then if we are
               being punished it is because we have done evil. If we have
               not done evil in this life, then we did it in another. This is
               an alternative that is impossible to escape and whose logic
               shows on what side the justice of God lies.

                      Therefore, humans are not always or fully punished
               in their current existence, but they can never escape
               the consequences of their wrongs. The prosperity of evil
               persons is only momentary and if they do not expiate their
               evil today, they will tomorrow; likewise, those who suffer
               today are expiating their past. The misfortune that at first
               seems to be undeserved thus has its reason for being, and
               those who are suffering may always say, “Forgive me, Lord,
               for I have sinned.”

               7. Sufferings due to prior causes are frequently, like those
               that arise from current wrongs, the natural consequence
               of wrongs that were committed previously; that is, through
               justice that is strictly meted out, humans bear what they
               made others bear. If they were hard and inhumane, they
               might in turn be treated harshly and inhumanely; if they
               were proud, they might be born into humiliating conditions;
               if they were miserly or selfish, or if they made bad use
               of their wealth, they might be deprived of necessities; if
               they were bad children, they might suffer from their own
               children, etc.

                      Thus, through the plurality of existences and the
               function of the earth as an expiatory world, one can explain
               the anomalies displayed in the distribution of fortune
               and misfortune between good and bad persons on this



                                             116




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 116                                     3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               world. This anomaly exists in appearance only because it
               is considered from the point of view of the present life.
               However, if we elevate ourselves by means of thought so as
               to embrace a series of existences, we will see that everyone
               receives the share they deserve without harm to what will
               be given to them in the spirit world, and that God’s justice
               is never broken.

                      Humans must never lose sight of the fact that they are
               on a less evolved world and that they are kept there solely
               because of their imperfections. With each vicissitude,
               they must tell themselves that if they belonged to a more
               advanced world, it would not be happening, and that it
               depends on them alone – by working to improve themselves
               – not to have to return to this world.

               8. Life’s tribulations may be imposed on hardened spirits
               or those too ignorant to make a choice knowingly, but
               they are freely chosen and accepted by repentant spirits
               who want to repair the evil they committed and to try to
               do better. So it is that, having performed its task poorly,
               the spirit asks to start over so as not to lose the benefit
               of its labor. Therefore, tribulations are at the same time
               expiations that punish the past and trials for the future,
               which they prepare. Let us render thanks to God, who,
               out of divine goodness, grants humans the possibility of
               reparation and does not irrevocably condemn them for
               their first wrong.

               9. One must not think, however, that every instance of
               suffering endured on this world is necessarily the indication
               of a specific wrong. They are often simply trials chosen



                                                     117




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 117                                    3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



               by a spirit to finish its purification and to accelerate its
               advancement. Hence, expiation always serves as a trial,
               but a trial is not always an expiation. Trials or expiations,
               however, are always signs of a relatively low order spirit,
               because one who is perfect has no more need of being tested.
               Consequently, a spirit may have acquired a certain degree
               of elevation, but wanting to advance further, it requests a
               mission, a task to complete. The more trying the struggle,
               the more it will be recompensed if it emerges victorious.
               Such are, more specifically, those persons of naturally good
               instincts, of elevated spirit and noble innate sentiments,
               who seem to have brought nothing evil from their previous
               existence, and who endure the greatest afflictions with
               wholly Christian resignation, asking God that they might
               bear them without complaining. On the other hand, one
               may consider as expiations those afflictions that provoke
               complaint and compel humans to rebel against God.

                      Suffering that does not provoke complaint may
               undoubtedly be an expiation, but this indicates it was
               voluntarily chosen beforehand rather than imposed,
               and it is a test of a strong resolution, which is a sign of
               progress.

               10. Spirits cannot aspire to perfect happiness as long
               as they are impure. Any kind of blemish prevents their
               entry onto blissful worlds. They are like the passengers
               on a plague ship, to whom entrance to a town is forbidden
               until they have been purified. It is in their many corporeal
               existences that spirits rid themselves little by little of their
               imperfections. The trials of life enable advancement when



                                             118




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 118                                       3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               well accepted. As expiations, they erase wrongs and purify.
               It is the medicine that cleanses the sores and heals the
               patient. The graver the illness, the stronger the medicine
               must be. Therefore, those who suffer greatly must tell
               themselves that they have much to expiate, and should
               rejoice at being healed sooner. It depends on them, through
               resignation, to make such suffering profitable and not to
               waste the fruit by complaining. Without resignation, they
               will have to start all over again.



               FORGETFULNESS OF THE PAST


               11. It is in vain that one objects that forgetfulness is an
               obstacle to taking advantage of experiences from previous
               lives. If God has deemed it appropriate to cast a veil over
               the past, it is because it must be useful. In fact, such
               remembrance would entail serious inconveniences. In
               certain cases, it could humiliate us greatly or perhaps
               exalt our pride, and for that very reason interfere with
               our free will. In any case, it would cause an unavoidable
               disturbance in social relationships.

                      A spirit is frequently reborn into the same environment
               in which it has already lived, and finds itself in relationships
               with the same individuals in order to repair the evil it did
               to them. If it were to recognize in them those whom it used
               to hate, perhaps its hatred would reawaken. In any case, it
               would feel humiliated in the presence of those it offended.

                      God has given us for our advancement precisely what
               is necessary and what will be enough for us: the voice of



                                                     119




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 119                                       3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



               conscience and our instinctive tendencies, taking from us
               what could harm us.

                      On being born, human beings bring with them
               whatever they have acquired. They are born as they have
               made themselves; each existence is for them a new starting
               point. It matters little for them to know what they were. If
               they are punished, it is because they committed evil; their
               current evil tendencies are indicative of what still remains
               within them to be corrected, and that is what they should
               concentrate their attention on, for whatever has been
               corrected completely leaves no remaining trace. The good
               resolutions they have made are the voice of conscience
               that warns them as to what is good or evil and provides
               them the strength to resist their evil tendencies.

                      Furthermore, this forgetfulness occurs only during
               corporeal life. Upon reentering the spirit life, the spirit
               reacquires its memories of the past; hence, forgetfulness is
               only a momentary interruption similar to what occurs in
               earthly life during sleep, but which does not prevent our
               remembering on the next day what we did the day before
               or on preceding ones.

                      It is not only after death that the spirit recovers the
               memories of its past. It can be stated that it never loses
               them, because experience proves that during incarnation,
               during the sleep of the body and while it enjoys a certain
               amount of liberty, the spirit is conscious of its previous
               acts. It knows why it is suffering and that it is suffering
               justly. Remembrance is blotted out only during the
               outward life of relationships. However, due to the absence



                                             120




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 120                                     3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               of a precise memory, which might be painful and harm its
               social relations, it draws new strength in these moments of
               the soul’s emancipation if it knows how to take advantage
               of them.



               REASONS FOR RESIGNING ONESELF


               12. With the words, “Blessed are the afflicted, for they
               shall be consoled,” Jesus indicates simultaneously the
               compensation that awaits those who suffer and the
               resignation that leads one to bless suffering as a prelude
               to healing.

                      These words could also be translated like this: You
               should consider yourselves fortunate to suffer, because
               your pains in this world are the debt of your past wrongs.
               And these pains, if borne patiently while you are on earth,
               will save you from centuries of suffering in the future life.
               Hence, you should be happy because God has reduced
               your debt by permitting you to repay it now, which will
               guarantee you tranquility for the future.

                      The one who suffers is like a debtor who owes a large
               sum, and to whom his creditor says, “If you will pay me today
               even a hundredth part of your debt, I will release you from the
               rest and you will be free. But if you don’t, then I will hound
               you until you pay the very last cent.” Would that debtor not
               be happier bearing all kinds of hardships in order to free
               himself by paying only a hundredth of what he owes? Instead
               of complaining to his creditor, would he not be thankful?




                                                     121




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 121                                      3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



                      Such is the meaning of the words, “Blessed are the
               afflicted, for they shall be consoled.” They are blessed
               because they are releasing themselves from their debt, and
               after they have done so they will be free. However, if upon
               being released on the one hand, they go into debt on the
               other, they will never attain their freedom. Consequently,
               each new wrong increases the debt, for there is not even
               one, whatever it may be, that does not entail its obligatory
               and unavoidable punishment – if not today, then tomorrow;
               if not in this life, then in another. Among these wrongs,
               one must put in first place the lack of submission to God’s
               will; therefore, if we complain in our afflictions and do not
               accept them with resignation and as something deserved,
               if we accuse God as unjust, we contract a new debt that
               causes the loss of the benefit that we could have gotten from
               suffering. That is why it is necessary to start over, exactly
               as if you were to pay a creditor who has been hounding you,
               but then asked for the money back as a new loan.

                      Upon reentering the world of spirits, humans are
               like laborers who show up on payday. To some the Lord
               will say, “Here is your pay for the days you worked”; to
               others, the fortunate ones of earth, those who lived in
               idleness, who placed their happiness in the satisfactions
               of self-centeredness and in worldly pleasures, he will say,
               “Nothing is owed to you since you received your pay while
               on earth. Go and begin your task again.”

               13. Humans can either soften or increase the bitterness
               of their trials according to the manner in which they view
               earthly life. Their suffering is greater if they consider its



                                             122




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 122                                    3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               duration to be long. Consequently, those who look at
               things from the standpoint of the spirit life understand
               corporeal existence at a glance. They see it as a dot in the
               infinite; they grasp its brevity, and they tell themselves
               that this painful moment will soon be over. The certainty of
               a happier future that is not far off sustains and encourages
               them, and instead of complaining, they thank heaven for
               the pains that enable them to evolve. On the other hand, for
               those who see only corporeal life, pain seems unending to
               them and it presses on them with all its weight. The result
               of the former way of looking at life is that it decreases the
               importance of the things of this world, leading humans
               to moderate their desires and to be content with their
               station in life without envying others’, thereby attenuating
               the mental effect of the setbacks and disappointments
               they experience. Thus, they derive from it a calmness and
               resignation as useful to the health of the body as to that
               of the soul, whereas with jealousy, envy and ambition they
               willfully give in to torment and thus increase the misery
               and anguish of their short existence.



               SUICIDE AND INSANITY


               14. The calm and resignation acquired in the manner of
               looking at earthly life and in the faith in the future gives
               the spirit a serenity that is the best preservative against
               insanity and suicide. In fact, it is certain that most cases of
               insanity are due to the troubles produced by the vicissitudes
               that people do not have the strength to bear. However, if



                                                     123




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 123                                      3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                                   CHAPTER V



               due to the manner in which Spiritism enables them to
               regard the things of this world they end up accepting with
               indifference – even joy – the reversals and disappointments
               that would render them desperate in other circumstances,
               it is obvious that this strength, which puts them above
               such events, protects their minds from the distresses that
               would jolt them otherwise.

               15. The same applies to suicide. Except for suicide
              committed in a state of intoxication or insanity, and which
              we might call unconscious, it is certain that whatever may
              be the particular motive, it always has discontentment as
              the cause. Hence, those who are sure that they will be
              unfortunate only for a day and that better days will follow,
              easily have patience. They only become desperate if they
              can see no end to their suffering. What is a human lifetime,
              compared to eternity, if not less than one day? For those
              who do not believe in eternity, however, for those who
              believe that all is over when life ends, if they are oppressed
              by trouble and misfortune, they see no end to them except
              in death. Expecting nothing, they find it very natural and
              even logical to shorten their miseries by suicide.

              16.       Disbelief,        simple    doubts     about   the   future   –
              materialistic ideas, in other words – are the greatest
              incitements to suicide: they cause moral cowardice. And
              when men and women of science rest on the authority of
              their knowledge in order to try to prove to their listening or
              reading audience that they have nothing to hope for after
              death, are they not in fact leading them to the conclusion
              that if they are unfortunate then there is nothing better



                                                      124




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 124                                               3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               for them to do than to kill themselves? What could they
               possibly have to say that would turn them away from
               this conclusion? What compensation could they offer
               them? What hope could they give them? None at all,
               except nothingness. From this, one must conclude that if
               nothingness is the only heroic remedy, the sole prospect,
               then it would be more worthwhile to fall into it immediately
               rather than later on, and thereby suffer for less time.

                      The propagation of materialistic ideas is therefore the
               poison that injects the idea of suicide into a large number
               of individuals, and those who become apostles of such
               ideas assume an awful responsibility. With Spiritism,
               however, wherein doubt is no longer allowed, one’s outlook
               on life changes. Believers know that life goes on indefinitely
               beyond the grave, although in other conditions. Hence the
               patience and resignation that quite naturally keep them
               from any thought of suicide; and hence, in sum, moral
               courage.

               17. From this point of view, Spiritism has yet another
               equally positive and perhaps more decisive result. It shows
               us suicides themselves who come to reveal their unhappy
               situation and to demonstrate the fact that no one violates
               with impunity God’s law, which forbids human beings to
               cut their own life short. Among suicides, the suffering,
               although temporary instead of eternal, is nonetheless
               terrible and of such a nature as to induce to reflection
               those who might be tempted to leave here before God
               has so ordained. Spiritists thus have several reasons
               to counterbalance the idea of suicide: the certainty of a



                                                     125




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 125                                     3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



               future life in which they know that their happiness will
              be in proportion to their unhappiness and the level of
              resignation they had while on earth; the certainty that
               if they shorten their life, they will in fact attain a result
               exactly opposite to what they were hoping for; that they
               free themselves from one evil to incur one that is worse,
               longer and more dreadful; that they are fooling themselves
               if they believe that by killing themselves they will go to
               heaven more quickly; that suicide is an obstacle to being
               reunited in the other world with the objects of their
               affections and whom they had hoped to meet there again;
               from whence follows the conclusion that suicide, bringing
               nothing but disappointment, is against their best interests.
               Therefore, the number of suicides prevented by Spiritism
               has been considerable, and one may conclude from this
               fact that when everyone is a Spiritist there will be no more
               conscious suicides. Thus, comparing the results between
               materialist and Spiritist doctrines solely from the suicide
               point of view, we find that the logic of the former leads to
               suicide, whereas the logic of the latter deters it, which is a
               fact confirmed by experience.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               TO SUFFER WELL OR BADLY


               18. When Christ said, “Blessed are the afflicted, for theirs
               is the kingdom of heaven,” he was not referring to those
               who suffer in general, since everyone on the earth suffers,
               whether upon the throne or upon straw. But alas! Few



                                             126




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 126                                     3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               suffer well. Few understand that only trials that are borne
               well can lead them to the Kingdom of God. Discouragement
               is a fault. God refuses you consolation because you lack
               courage. Prayer is a support for the soul, but it is not
               enough. It must be based on a living faith in God’s goodness.
               You have often been told that God does not put heavy
               burdens on weak shoulders. The burden is proportional
               to the strength, just as the reward will be proportional to
               the resignation and courage. The reward will be greater
               than the affliction is painful. However, one must merit that
               reward, and that is why life is full of tribulations.

                       The soldier who is not sent to the front is discontent,
               because the repose of the barracks does not bring him a
               promotion. So then, be like the soldier and do not desire
               a repose in which your body would weaken and your soul
               would become numb. Be content when God sends you into
               battle. This battle is not one of gunfire but the bitterness
               of life, where sometimes more courage is needed than in
               bloody combat, since those who remain firm before the
               enemy might weaken under the duress of mental pain.
               Humans are not rewarded for this kind of courage, but
               God reserves victory laurels and a glorious place for them.
               When a reason for trouble or vexation touches you, try to
               lift yourselves above it, and when you have managed to
               control the impulses of impatience, anger or despair, say
               to yourselves with just satisfaction, “I was the stronger.”

                      “Blessed are the afflicted” may be translated thusly:
               blessed are those who have the opportunity to test their
               faith, firmness, perseverance and submission to God’s will,



                                                     127




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 127                                      3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



               for they will receive a hundred times the joy they lacked on
               earth; and after labor will come repose.

                                                      Lacordaire (Havre, 1863)



               EVIL AND ITS REMEDY


               19. Is your earth, then, a place of joy, a paradise of
               delights? Does not the voice of the prophet resound any
               longer in your ears? Did he not proclaim that there would
               be weeping and gnashing of teeth for those who are born
               into this valley of pain? You who have gone to live there
               must therefore expect burning tears and bitter suffering,
               but no matter how acute and deep your suffering may be,
               look up to heaven and bless the Lord for having willed
               to test you! ... O people! Do you acknowledge power of
               your Master only when he has healed the sores of your
               body and crowned your days with beatitude and joy? Do
               you acknowledge his love only when he has adorned your
               body with all sorts of glories and has restored its brilliance
               and purity? You must imitate the one who was given to
               you as the example. Having reached the ultimate degree
               of abjection and misery, and while laying upon the dung
               heap, he said to God, “Lord, I have known all the joys of
               opulence and you have reduced me to the most absolute
               misery; thank you, thank you, my God, for having willed
               to test your servant so!” How long will your gaze remain
               fixed upon the horizons limited by death? When will your
               soul finally desire to leap beyond the limits of the grave?
               Even if you had to weep and suffer an entire lifetime, what



                                             128




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 128                                      3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               would that be when compared to the eternal glory reserved
               for those who have endured their trials with faith, love and
               resignation? So seek consolation for your ills in the future
               that God has prepared for you, and seek the cause of your
               ills in the past. And you, who suffer the most, consider
               yourselves the blessed of this earth.

                      In your state as discarnates, when you were gliding
               through space, you yourselves chose your trial because
               you believed you were strong enough to bear it. So why
               complain now? You who asked for riches and glory, it was
               for bearing the struggle of temptation and overcoming it.
               You who asked to struggle in body and soul against moral
               and physical evil, it was because you knew that the harder
               the trial the greater and more glorious the victory would
               be, and that if you emerged triumphant, even if your body
               were thrown onto a dung heap, at death it would release
               a soul with unblemished radiance, made pure by the
               baptism of expiation and suffering.

                      What remedy, therefore, is recommended for those who
               are attacked by cruel obsessions and excruciating ills? Only
               one is infallible: faith, turning your gaze toward heaven. If
               in the turmoil of your cruelest suffering your voice would
               sing to the Lord, the angel at your bedside would show
               you the sign of salvation and the place you will someday
               occupy ... Faith is the sure remedy for suffering; it always
               points to the horizons of the infinite, before which the few
               dark days of the present are erased. Therefore, do not ask
               us what remedy should be employed to remedy this ulcer
               or that sore, this temptation or that trial. Remember that



                                                     129




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 129                                    3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



               those who believe are strengthened by the remedy of faith,
               and those who doubt its effectiveness even for one second
               are immediately punished, because they experience in the
               same instant the pungent anguish of affliction.

                     The Lord has set his seal upon all those who believe
               in him. Christ told you that with faith you can move
               mountains, and I say to you that those who suffer and
               have faith as a support will be placed under his watch-care
               and will suffer no more. The moments of greatest pain will
               be for them the first happy notes of eternal joy. Their soul
               will disengage itself from the body in such a way that, while
               the body is still writhing in convulsions, it will be gliding
               through the heavenly regions, singing with the angels
               hymns of thanksgiving and glory to the Lord.

                    Happy are they who suffer and weep! May their souls
               rejoice, for God will fill them with blessing.

                                                   St. Augustine (Paris, 1863.)



               HAPPINESS IS NOT OF THIS WORLD


               20. “I’m not happy! Happiness wasn’t made for me!”
               people of every social position generally exclaim. This, my
               dear children, proves better than any possible reason the
               truth of this maxim from Ecclesiastes: “Happiness is not
               of this world.” Indeed, neither wealth, power nor even the
               flower of youth are the essential conditions for happiness.
               I would say more: not even the combining of these three
               much-desired conditions are, since we constantly hear
               persons of all ages amongst the most privileged classes
               bitterly complaining about their situation.



                                             130




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 130                                       3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



                      Faced with such a fact, it is inconceivable that the
               working and militant classes envy with such avarice the
               position of those whom fortune seems to have favored. No
               matter what they may do in this world, all have their share of
               work and misery, their lot of suffering and disappointment,
               from which it is easy to draw the conclusion that the earth
               is a place of trial and expiation.

                      So then, those who preach that the earth is humans’
               only home and that it is only there and in only one lifetime
               that they are permitted to reach the highest degree
               of happiness that their nature will allow are deluding
               themselves and are deceiving those who listen to them,
               since it has been demonstrated through many centuries
               of experience that this globe entails only in exceptional
               cases the conditions needed for an individual’s complete
               happiness.

                      In general terms, one can affirm that happiness is a
               utopia, the search for which successive generations have
               set out without ever having been able to reach it, for if
               a wise individual is a rarity in this world, an absolutely
               happy one is not any easier to find.

                      That in which happiness on earth consists is something
               so ephemeral for those who do not act wisely that, despite
               one year, one month or one week of complete contentment,
               the rest of their lifetime slips away in a series of afflictions
               and disappointments. And note, my dear children, that I
               am speaking of those who are the fortunate ones of the
               earth, those who are envied by the masses.



                                                     131




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 131                                       3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                           CHAPTER V



                      Consequently, if the earthly dwelling place is meant
               for trial and expiation, one must accept the fact that
               there are more favorable homes elsewhere, where the
               human spirit, although still imprisoned in physical flesh,
               possesses the fullness of the joys connected with human
               life. That is why God has planted in your solar system those
               beautiful higher order planets, toward which your efforts
               and tendencies will someday enable you to gravitate, once
               you have become sufficiently purified and perfected.

                      Nevertheless, do not deduce from my words that
               the earth is dedicated forever to the fate of being a
               penitentiary. Certainly not! Because from the progress
               already accomplished you can easily infer future progress,
               and from the social improvements that have been gained,
               new and more fertile improvements. Such is the immense
               task that must be accomplished by the new doctrine that
               the Spirits have revealed to you.

                      So then, my dear children, may a saintly emulation
               animate you, and may each one of you vigorously shed the
               old ways. You must all dedicate yourselves to spreading this
               Spiritism that has already begun your own regeneration. It
               is your duty to enable your brothers and sisters to share
               in the rays of the sacred light. Therefore, get to work,
               my beloved children! Within this solemn assembly, may
               all your hearts aspire to the great objective of preparing
               for future generations a world on which happiness is no
               longer a meaningless word.

                        François-Nicolas-Madeleine, Cardinal Morlot (Paris, 1863)




                                               132




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 132                                         3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               THE LOSS OF LOVED ONES; PREMATURE DEATHS


               21. When death comes to reap a harvest in your families,
               indiscriminately taking the youngest before the oldest, you
               often say, “God is not just since he sacrifices the one who
               is strong and has a great future, while preserving those
               who have already lived many years full of disappointment;
               taking those who are useful and leaving behind those who
               no longer are, and breaking a mother’s heart by depriving
               her of the innocent creature that was her whole joy.”

                      Humans, it is in this matter that you must lift
               yourselves above the commonplace thoughts of life in
               order to understand that the good is often where you
               believe you are beholding evil, and providential wisdom is
               where you believe you are beholding the blind fatalism of
               destiny. Why do you measure divine justice according to
               your own? Do you think the Lord of worlds inflicts you
               with cruel punishments out of mere caprice? Nothing is
               done without an intelligent purpose, and no matter what
               happens, everything has its reason for being. If you were
               to better scrutinize all the pains that strike you, you would
               always find in them a divine reason, a regenerating reason,
               and your miserable self-interests would be a secondary
               consideration that you would relegate to last place.

                      Believe me, in the case of an incarnation of twenty
               years, death is preferable to those shameful immoderations
               that desolate respectable families, break a mother’s heart
               and cause parents’ hair to gray before its time. Premature
               death is frequently a great blessing that God grants to



                                                     133




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 133                                    3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



               those who depart, thus preserving them from the miseries
               of life or the seductions that could have led them to their
               loss. Those who die in the flower of youth are not victims
               of fatalism; rather, God deemed it useful for them not to
               remain on earth any longer.

                      It is an awful misfortune, you say, for a life so full of
               hopes to be cut short so soon! What hopes are you talking
               about? Those of earth, where the one who departed could
               have shone, making his or her way and fortune? This
               narrow way of looking at things is always what renders
               you incapable of rising above matter. Do you know what
               would have been the fate of that life which, according to
               you, was so full of hopes? Who is to say that it would not
               have been full of bitterness? Do you then count as nothing
               the hopes of the future life? Are you saying that you would
               prefer those of the ephemeral life that you trudge through
               on the earth? Do you think a high position amongst other
               humans is worth more than one amongst the blessed
               spirits?

                      Rejoice instead of complaining when it pleases God to
               take one of his children from this valley of misery. Would
               it not be selfish to wish for them to have remained in order
               to suffer along with you? Ah! That is the grief conceived
               by those who have no faith, who see in death an eternal
               separation. But you Spiritists know that the soul lives
               better when disencumbered from its corporeal envelope.
               Mothers, you know your beloved children are close to
               you, yes, very close. Their fluidic bodies envelop you,
               their thoughts watch over you and your memory of them



                                              134




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 134                                       3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               inebriates them with joy; but your unreasonable sorrow
               afflicts them too, because it denotes a lack of faith and is
               a revolt against God’s will.

                      You who understand the spirit life, listen to the
               beating of your heart calling to those loved ones, and if
               you would ask God to bless them, you would feel within
               you those powerful consolations that dry tears, those
               marvelous aspirations that show you the future promised
               by the sovereign Lord.

                      Sanson, former member of the Parisian Spiritist Society (1863)




               IF HE HAD BEEN A GOOD MAN, HE WOULD HAVE DIED


               22. When speaking of a bad person who has escaped some
               peril, you often say, “If he had been a good man he would
               have died.” Well then, in saying this you state a truth,
               because it just so happens that God often gives to a spirit
               who is still budding on the paths of progress a longer trial
               than to a good spirit who, as a reward for its merit, will
               receive the grace of its trial being as short as possible.
               Consequently, whenever you use that axiom have no doubt
               that you commit a blasphemy.

                      If a good man dies, whose neighbor is a bad man, you
               rush to say, “I would rather it had been him instead.” You
               are greatly mistaken, because the one who has departed
               has completed his task, whereas the one who remains
               perhaps has not even begun. So why would you want the


                                                     135




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 135                                            3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          CHAPTER V



               bad person not to have time to finish, and the other to
               remain imprisoned on terrestrial soil? What would you say
               about a prisoner who served his sentence but was kept
               in prison, while another, who had no such right, was set
               free? Understand, therefore, that true freedom consists in
               deliverance from the bonds of the body, and that as long
               as you are on the earth, you are in captivity.

                      Accustom yourselves not to criticize what you cannot
               understand, and believe that God is just in all things; many
               times, what appears to be an evil is really a blessing, but
               your faculties are so limited that the great whole escapes
               your obtuse senses. Through thought, strive to leave your
               limited sphere, and to the measure that you ascend, the
               importance of the material life will diminish before your
               eyes, for it will show itself to you only as one incident in
               the infinite duration of your existence as a spirit – the only
               true existence.

                                                        Fenelon (Sens, 1861)



               VOLUNTARY SUFFERING


               23. Human beings are constantly in search of the happiness
               that incessantly escapes them, for spotless happiness does
               not exist on the earth. Nevertheless, despite the vicissitudes
               that form an unavoidable procession in this life, they might
               at least enjoy relative happiness; however, they search for it
               in perishable things subject to the same vicissitudes, that
               is, in material pleasures instead of the pleasures of the
               soul, which are a foretaste of the imperishable pleasures


                                             136




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 136                                     3/7/2009 18:00:25

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               of heaven. Instead of seeking peace of mind – the only real
               happiness in this world – they are avid for anything that
               can agitate and upset them. And oddly enough, they seem
               to create on purpose the torments that were up to them
               to avoid.

                      Are there any greater torments than those caused
               by envy and jealousy? For the envious or jealous there
               is no rest; they are in a constant fever. What they do not
               have and what others do have causes them insomnia; the
               successes of their rivals make them giddy; their emulation
               is exerted only to eclipse their neighbors; all their joy
               consists in inciting in those as senseless as themselves the
               raging jealousy they themselves possess. Poor senseless
               beings, in effect, are those who do not imagine that perhaps
               tomorrow they will have to leave behind all such futilities,
               which, by coveting them, poison their lives! It is not to
               them that these words apply “Blessed are the afflicted, for
               they shall be comforted,” since their preoccupations are
               not those that bring compensation in heaven.

                      On the other hand, how many torments will those
               who know how to be content with what they have spare
               themselves, those who behold without envy what they do
               not have, and who do not try to appear to be what they are
               not. These are always wealthy, since, if they would look
               beneath themselves instead of above, they would always
               see persons who have even less. They are serene because
               they do not create imaginary needs for themselves. And is
               not serenity in the midst of life’s storms real happiness?

                                                               Fenelon (Lyon, 1860)



                                                     137




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 137                                           3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER V



               TRUE MISFORTUNE


               24. Everyone talks about misfortune, all have experienced
               it and believe they know about its multiple character. I
               have come to tell you that nearly everyone is mistaken and
               that true misfortune is not everything that people, that
               is, those who are unfortunate, believe it to be. They see it
               in poverty, the fireless chimney, the threatening creditor,
               the cradle empty of that angel who used to smile; they see
               it in tears, the coffin we walk behind with an uncovered
               head and broken heart, the anguish of betrayal and the
               baring of the pride which would like to be dressed in
               purple and which can barely hide its nakedness beneath
               the ragged tatters of vanity. All this and much more is
               called misfortune in human language. Yes, it is misfortune
               for those who see nothing but the present; however, true
               misfortune is found more in the consequences of a thing
               than in the thing itself. Tell me if an event that is most
               happy for the moment, but which leads to disastrous
               consequences, is not really more unfortunate than the one
               that at first causes a great vexation but ends up resulting
               in the good. Tell me if the storm that snaps your trees but
               purifies the air, dissipating unhealthy miasmas that would
               cause death, is not a blessing rather than a misfortune.

                      In order for one to judge something, one must look at
               the consequences. That is why, in order to determine what
               is really fortunate or unfortunate, one must be transported
               beyond this life, because it is there that the consequences
               will be felt. Hence, everything that is called unhappiness



                                             138




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 138                                   3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               according to your shortsightedness ends with corporeal
               life and finds its compensation in the future life.

                      I will reveal misfortune to you under a new form,
               under a beautiful and colorful form that you will desire
               and welcome with all the strength of your deluded souls.
               Misfortunes are the joy, the pleasure, the turmoil, the
               empty agitation and the insane satisfaction of vanity that
               silence the conscience, oppress the action of thought and
               confuse people about their future. Misfortune is the opium
               of the forgetfulness that you ardently desire.

                      Have hope, you who weep! Tremble, you who laugh
               because your body is satiated! We do not fool God; we
               do not dodge our destiny. And the trials, those creditors
               more pitiless than the wolf pack let loose by misery, are
               watching your illusory repose to plunge you suddenly into
               the agony of true misfortune, the kind that surprises the
               soul indolent through indifference and selfishness.

                      May Spiritism enlighten you and reestablish truth
               and error in their true light after having been so strangely
               deformed by your blindness! Then you will act like brave
               soldiers who, instead of running away from peril, prefer the
               battles of brave combat to the peace that will bring them
               neither glory nor promotion! What does it matter to the
               soldier to lose his weapons, equipment and uniform in the
               fray as long as he emerges as the victor and covered with
               glory! What does it matter to those who have faith in the
               future to leave their riches and their mantle of flesh upon
               the battlefield of life, provided their soul enters radiantly
               into the heavenly kingdom?

                                                    Delphine de Girardin (Paris, 1861)


                                                     139




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 139                                              3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER V



               MELANCHOLY


               25. Do you know why a vague sadness sometimes weighs
               upon your hearts and makes you find life so bitter? It
               is your spirit, which aspires to happiness and freedom,
               and which, bound to the body that serves as its prison,
               exhausts itself in vain efforts to escape. However, seeing
               that such efforts are useless, it falls into despondency,
               and the body, bearing the spirit’s influence, sluggishness,
               dejection and a kind of apathy, seizes you and you find
               yourself unhappy.

                      Believe me and strongly resist these feelings that
               weaken your willpower. The yearnings for a better life are
               innate in the spirit of all humans, but do not seek them in
               this world. And nowadays, as God is sending his Spirits to
               instruct you about the divine happiness reserved for you,
               patiently await the angel of deliverance, who will help you
               break the bonds that hold your spirit captive. Remember
               that, during your trial on the earth, you have a mission that
               you cannot doubt, whether in dedicating yourself to your
               family or whether in fulfilling the various obligations that
               God has entrusted to you. If during the course of this trial,
               and while performing your task, you see worries, troubles
               and vexations fall upon you, be strong and courageous in
               order to bear them. Face them resolutely. They are of short
               duration and will lead you to the friends for whom you
               weep. They will rejoice at your arrival amongst them and
               will extend their arms to you to lead you to a place where
               the afflictions of earth have no access.

                                                   François de Geneve (Bordeaux)



                                             140




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 140                                        3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               VOLUNTARY TRIALS. TRUE SACKCLOTH


               26. You ask if it is permissible to mitigate your trials. This
               question leads to these: is it permissible for those who are
               drowning to save themselves? For those who have a thorn
               to remove it? For those who are ill to call a doctor? Trials
               are meant to engender intelligence as well as patience
               and resignation. Individuals may be born into a painful
               and difficult situation precisely to make them search for
               the means of overcoming it. The merit consists in bearing
               without complaint the consequences of the ills that cannot
               be avoided, in persevering in the struggle and in not
               becoming desperate if unsuccessful, but without giving into
               indifference, which would be laziness more than virtue.

                      This question of course leads to another. Since Jesus
               said, “Blessed are the afflicted,” is there any merit in
               seeking afflictions, thereby increasing trials by means of
               voluntary suffering? To this I will respond very clearly:
               yes, there is great merit if such suffering and privations
               are meant for the good of one’s neighbor, because it is
               charity through sacrifice; and no, if they are meant only
               for the good of oneself, because it results from selfishness
               through fanaticism.

                      A big distinction must be made here: as for you
               personally, be content with the trials that God sends
               you and do not increase their burden, which is often
               already        so     heavy.     Accept     them   faithfully   without
               complaining; that is all God asks of you. Do not weaken
               your body with useless privations and purposeless



                                                     141




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 141                                              3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER V



               mortifications, because you have need of all your strength
               in order to fulfill your mission of labor on the earth.
               Intentionally torturing and martyring your body is an
               infringement of the law of God, who has given you the
               means of nourishing and strengthening it. To needlessly
               weaken it is true suicide. Use it but do not abuse it; such
               is the law. The abuse of the best things brings its
               punishment in unavoidable consequences.

                      The suffering that one imposes on oneself for the relief
               of one’s neighbor is something else. If you endure cold and
               hunger in order to warm and feed someone who is in need,
               and if your body suffers because of it, it is then a sacrifice
               that is blessed by God. You who leave your fragrant homes
               to go to an infected hovel to bring consolation; you who
               dirty your delicate hands to treat wounds; you who lose
               sleep to watch over the bedstead of a sick person, who
               is only your brother or sister in God; in short, you who
               use your health in the practice of good deeds: that is your
               sackcloth, the true sackcloth of blessing, for the pleasures
               of the world have not shriveled your heart. You have not
               slept in the bosom of the voluptuous enervations of wealth,
               but have made yourselves into consoling angels for the
               disinherited poor.

                      But you who retire from the world in order to avoid its
               seductions and to live in isolation, what is your usefulness?
               Where is your courage in trial, since you run from the
               struggle and desert the fight? If you want sackcloth, apply
               it to your soul and not your body. Mortify your spirit and
               not your flesh; whip your pride; receive humiliation without



                                             142




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 142                                      3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               complaint; flog your selfishness; and harden yourselves
               against the pain of insult and slander, more pungent than
               bodily pain. This is true sackcloth, whose wounds will be
               taken into account because they will testify to your courage
               and submission to God’s will.

                                                       A Guardian Angel (Paris, 1863)


               SHOULD WE PUT AN END TO OUR NEIGHBOR’S TRIALS?

               27. Should we put an end to our neighbor’s trials if we can,
               or should we, out of respect for God’s designs, let them take
               their course?

                      We have stated and repeated many times that you are
               on this earth of expiation to conclude your trials, and that
               everything that happens to you is a consequence of your
               previous existences, an installment on the debt you owe.
               However, in some people this thought provokes notions
               that must be deterred because they may have disastrous
               consequences.

                      Some think that because one is put on the earth for
               expiation, all trials must take their course. There are even
               those who want to believe that not only must nothing
               be done to mitigate them, but that, on the contrary, it
               is necessary to contribute to them to make them more
               profitable, adding to their intensity. This is a great error.
               Yes, your trials must take the course marked out by God,
               but do you know what that course is? Do you know how
               far they must go, or if your merciful Father has not said to
               the suffering of this or that brother or sister, “You shall go



                                                     143




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 143                                             3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER V



               no farther?” Do you know if God’s providence has chosen
               you not as an instrument of punishment to intensify the
               suffering of the guilty, but as the balm of consolation that
               must heal the wounds that God’s justice had opened up?
               Therefore, when you see one of your brothers or sisters
               being afflicted, do not say, “It is God’s justice and it must
               take its course.” Instead, say to yourselves, “Let’s see what
               means our merciful Father has put within my reach in
               order to ease the suffering of my brother or sister. Let’s see
               if my moral consolation, my material help or my counsels
               might not assist in overcoming this trial with greater
               strength, patience and resignation. Let’s even see if God
               has not placed in my hands the means of putting an end to
               this suffering; if it has not been given to me also as a trial,
               an expiation perhaps, in order to deter evil and replace it
               with peace.”

                      Therefore, always mutually help one another in your
               respective trials and never regard yourselves as instruments
               of torment. Such a thought should be revolting to every man
               and woman of heart, especially to all Spiritists, because
               Spiritists, better than anyone else, should understand the
               infinite extent of God’s goodness. Spiritists ought to believe
               that their entire life should be an act of love and devotion;
               that no matter what they may do to oppose the Lord’s wishes,
               his justice will take its course. Therefore, they can fearlessly
               make every effort to mitigate the bitterness of expiation, but
               only God can shorten or prolong it as he deems necessary.

                      Would there not be great pride on the part of humans
               in believing themselves to have the right, so to speak, to



                                             144




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 144                                       3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               twist the knife in the wound? To increase the dose of poison
               in the heart of someone who is suffering, under the pretext
               that it is his or her expiation? Oh! Always regard yourselves
               as instruments chosen to make the suffering stop. To
               summarize: all of you are on the earth for expiation, but
               all of you, without exception, must employ all your efforts
               to mitigate your neighbor’s expiation according to the law
               of love and charity.

                                          Bernardin, A Protector Spirit (Bordeaux, 1863)



               IS IT PERMISSIBLE TO SHORTEN THE LIFE OF A
              PATIENT WHO IS SUFFERING WITH NO HOPE OF
              A CURE?


              28. A man is dying, the victim of cruel suffering. His state is
              known to be hopeless. Would it be permissible to save him a
              few moments of anguish by hastening his end?

                      Who would give you the right to foresee God’s designs?
              Could he not lead certain persons to the edge of the grave
              and then bring them back in order to make them examine
              themselves and lead them to other thoughts? No matter
              how extreme the condition of a dying person, no one can
              say with certainty that his or her final hour has arrived.
              Has science never been wrong in its predictions?

                      I know very well that there are cases, which with
              good reason may be considered as desperate; however,
              even if there is no basis for hope of a definite return to
              life and health, are there not countless examples in which



                                                      145




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 145                                                3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER V



               at the moment of taking their final breath, patients rouse
               themselves and recover their faculties for a few moments?
               Well then, this time of grace that has been granted them
               may be of great importance to them because you may be
               unaware of the thoughts that the spirit may have in the
               death throes, or how much torment may be spared by the
               sudden flash of repentance.

                      The materialist, who sees the body only and does
               not consider the soul, cannot comprehend these things,
               but the Spiritist, who knows what happens beyond the
               grave, knows the value of one last thought. So mitigate
               final suffering as much as you can, but guard against
               shortening a life, even for only a minute, for that minute
               might save many tears in the future.

                                                       St. Louis (Paris, 1860)



               SACRIFICING ONE’S OWN LIFE


               29. Are persons who are disillusioned with life, but who do
               not want to commit suicide, guilty for seeking death on the
               battlefield with the intention of making their death useful?

                      Whether persons kill themselves or have someone
               else do it, their purpose is always to shorten their life,
               and consequently there is suicide by intent if not in fact.
               The thought that their death will be useful for something
               is delusional; it is only a pretext for coloring their act and
               rendering it excusable in their own eyes. If they seriously
               wanted to serve their country, they would seek to stay alive,



                                             146




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 146                                       3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          BLESSED ARE THE AFFLICTED



               defending it in everything and not seeking to die, because once
               dead they can no longer serve it for anything. True devotion
               consists in not fearing death when it might be useful, in
               braving peril, and in sacrificing their lives beforehand and
               without regret if that is necessary. However, premeditated
               intent in seeking death by exposing oneself to danger, even
               if to render service, annuls the merit of the act.

                                                              St. Louis (Paris, 1860)

               30. A certain man exposes himself to imminent danger in
               order to save the life of a fellow being, knowing beforehand
               that he himself will die; would this be considered a suicide?

                      From the moment in which there is no intent to
               seek death, there is no suicide, but devotion and self-
               denial despite the certainty of dying. But who can be so
               certain? Who can say that Providence has not reserved
               an unexpected means of salvation at the most critical
               moment? Could not Providence save someone who is right
               in front of the mouth of a cannon? On many occasions,
               Providence wishes to prolong the trial of resignation to the
               ultimate limit, when an unexpected circumstance diverts
               the fatal blow.

                                                              St. Louis (Paris, 1860)



               MAKING ONE’S OWN SUFFERING PROFITABLE FOR
               OTHERS


               31. Do not those who resignedly accept their suffering
               by submitting to God’s will with an eye on their future


                                                     147




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 147                                             3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER V



               happiness work only for themselves, and can they render
               their suffering profitable for others?

                      This suffering might be materially and morally
               beneficial to someone else: materially, if through labor
               the privations and sacrifices they impose on themselves
               contribute to the material welfare of their neighbor;
               morally, by the example they offer of their submission to
               God’s will. This example of the power of the Spiritist faith
               can encourage unfortunate people to resignation, and save
               them from despair and its disastrous consequences for the
               future.

                                                        St. Louis (Paris, 1860)




                                             148




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 148                                       3/7/2009 18:00:26

               CHAPTER VI


               The consoling Christ
                      x The easy yoke

                      x The promised Consoler



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x The coming of the Spirit of Truth




               THE EASY YOKE


                      1. “Come unto me, all you who suffer and who are
                      overburdened, and I will comfort you. Take my yoke upon
                      you and learn from me that I am gentle and humble of heart,
                      and you will find rest for your souls, for my yoke is easy and
                      my burden is light.” (Mt. 11:28-30)

               2. All types of suffering – misery, disappointment, physical
               pain, loss of loved ones – find their consolation in faith
               in the future and in trust in God’s justice, which Christ
               came to teach humankind. On the other hand, upon those
               who expect nothing after this life, or who simply doubt,
               afflictions bear down with all their weight and no hope




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 149                                            3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER VI



               comes to soften their bitterness. This is what led Jesus
               to say, “Come unto me, all you who are weary and I will
               comfort you.”

                      Nevertheless, Jesus places one condition on the
               assistance and happiness he promises to the afflicted.
               That condition is found in the law that he teaches. His
               yoke is the observance of that law, but this yoke is easy
               and the law is gentle, since it imposes love and charity as
               a duty.



               THE PROMISED CONSOLER


                      3. “If you love me, keep my commandments. And I
                      will pray to my Father and he will send you another
                      consoler so that he may remain with you forever: the
                      Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because
                      it neither sees him nor knows him. But as for you, you
                      will know him because he will remain with you and will
                      be among you. But the consoler, who is the Holy Spirit,
                      whom my Father will send in my name, will teach you
                      all things and will enable you to remember everything
                      that I have said to you.” (Jn. 14:15-17, 26)

               4. Jesus promises another consoler: the Spirit of Truth,
               whom the world does not yet know because it is not mature
               enough to understand him, and whom the Father will
               send to teach all things and bring to remembrance what
               Christ has said. Therefore, if the Spirit of Truth must come
               later to teach all things, it is because Christ has not said
               everything. If the Spirit comes to bring to remembrance


                                             150




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 150                                     3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          THE CONSOLING CHRIST



               what Christ has said, it is because it has been forgotten or
               poorly understood.

                      Spiritism has come at the stated time to fulfill Christ’s
               promise: the Spirit of Truth presides over its establishment;
               it calls humans to observe the law and teaches all things
               by enabling them to understand what Christ said only
               in parables. Christ stated, “Let those hear who have
               ears to hear.” Spiritism has come to open eyes and ears
               because it speaks without figures or allegories. It lifts the
               veil intentionally left over certain mysteries. It has come,
               finally, to bring supreme consolation to the disinherited of
               the earth and all those who suffer, attributing a just cause
               and useful purpose to all pain.

                      Christ said, “Blessed are the afflicted, for they shall
               be comforted.” But how can we bless suffering if we do
               not know why we suffer? Spiritism shows that the cause
               lies in previous existences and in the destiny of the earth,
               where humans expiate their past. It shows them the
               purpose of their sufferings as being salutary crises which
               lead to healing and which are the purification that ensures
               happiness in future existences. Humans understand that
               they deserve to suffer and they find suffering to be just.
               They know that this suffering aids their progress and they
               accept it without complaining, just as workers accept the
               work that will ensure their wages. Spiritism provides them
               an unshakable faith in the future, and bitter doubt no
               longer falls upon their soul. It enables them to see things
               from a higher point of view; the importance of earthly
               vicissitudes is lost in the vast and splendid horizon that



                                                  151




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 151                                       3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER VI



               Spiritism contemplates, and the perspective of happiness
               that awaits them gives them the patience, resignation and
               courage needed to follow their pathway to the end.

                      Thus, Spiritism accomplishes what Jesus said about
               the promised consoler: the knowledge of things that enables
               humans to know where they have come from, where they
               are going and why they are on the earth. It is the call to
               the true principles of God’s law and consolation through
               faith and hope.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               THE COMING OF THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH


               5. I have come, as I once came amongst the wayward
               children of Israel, to bring the truth and dissipate the
               darkness. Listen to me. Spiritism, as my word of old, must
               remind disbelievers that above them reigns the immutable
               truth: the good God, the great God who makes the plant
               germinate and raises the tides. I have revealed the divine
               Doctrine, and like a reaper, I have gathered into sheaves
               the good scattered amid humankind and have said, “Come
               unto me, all you who suffer!”

                      However, ungrateful men and women have strayed
               from the straight and broad way that leads to the kingdom
               of my Father, and have become lost on the bitter path of
               impiety. My Father does not want to annihilate the human
               race; he wants you, through the help you give one another
               – both the living and the dead, that is, dead according



                                             152




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 152                                  3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          THE CONSOLING CHRIST



               to the flesh, since death does not exist – to succor one
               another, and for the voice of the prophets and apostles
               no longer to be heard, but instead, the voice of those who
               have departed from the earth, proclaiming to you, “Pray
               and believe! For death is resurrection and life is the chosen
               trial during which your cultivated virtues must grow and
               develop like the cedar.”

                      O frail humans, who are aware of the darkness of your
               minds, do not stray from the beacon that divine clemency
               has placed in your hands to light your way and lead you,
               as lost children, back to the bosom of your Father.

                      I am too moved with compassion for your miseries, your
               great frailty, not to extend a sure hand to those wayward
               unfortunates who, seeing heaven, fall into the abysses of
               error. Believe, love and meditate upon the things that are
               being revealed to you. Do not mix tares with the good seed,
               utopias with the truth.

                      O Spiritists! Love one another; this is the first teaching.
               Educate yourselves; this is the second. All truths are
               found in Christianity. The errors that have become rooted
               within it are of human origin; and here, beyond the grave
               – which you believed was nothingness – voices cry out to
               you: “Brothers and sisters! Nothing perishes. Jesus Christ
               is the victor over evil; be victors over impiety.”

                                                        Spirit of Truth (Paris, 1860)



               6. I have come to teach and console the disinherited poor.
               I have come to tell them to raise their resignation to the


                                                  153




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 153                                             3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER VI



               level of their trials; to weep, for sorrow was sacred in the
               Garden of Olives; but also to hope, for consoling angels
               will come to wipe away their tears.

                      Workers, trace out your path. The next day, restart the
               trying journey of the day before. The labor of your hands
               supplies earthly bread for your bodies, but your souls are
               not forgotten. I, the divine gardener, cultivate them in the
               silence of your thoughts. When the hour for your repose
               sounds, when the thread of your life slips through your
               fingers and when your eyes are closed to the light, you will
               sense my precious seed emerge and germinate within you.
               Nothing is lost in the kingdom of our Father, and your sweat
               and miseries form a treasure that will make you wealthy
               in the higher realms, where light replaces darkness, and
               where the most unclothed among you will perhaps be the
               most resplendent.

                      Truly I say to you: those who bear their burdens and
               help their brothers and sisters are my beloved. Instruct
               yourselves in the precious Doctrine that dissipates the
               error of rebelliousness and teaches you the sublime
               purpose of the human trial. Just as the wind sweeps the
               dust away, may the breeze of the Spirits dissipate your
               jealousy toward the wealthy of the world, who are often
               the most miserable because their trials are more perilous
               than yours. I am with you and my apostle teaches you.
               Drink from the living fount of love and prepare yourselves,
               O captives of life, to someday freely and joyfully throw
               yourselves into the bosom of the One who created you
               weak so that you could become perfect, and who wills for



                                             154




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 154                                     3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          THE CONSOLING CHRIST



               you yourselves to knead your pliable clay so that you may
               be the artisans of your immortality.

                                                        Spirit of Truth (Paris, 1861)


               7. I am the great doctor of souls and I have come to bring
               you the medicine that shall heal them. The frail, the
               suffering and the infirm are my blessed children and I have
               come to save them. Therefore, come to me, you who suffer
               and who are overburdened, and you will be soothed
               and consoled. Do not look elsewhere for strength and
               consolation, for the world is unable to provide them. God
               makes a supreme appeal to your hearts through Spiritism:
               listen to it. May impiety, deceit, error and disbelief be
               uprooted from your aching souls. They are the monsters
               that suck your purest blood, and which nearly always
               wound you mortally. In the future, humble and submissive
               to your Creator, may you practice his divine law. Love and
               pray. Be docile before the Spirits of the Lord; invoke him
               from the depths of your heart, and then he will send you his
               beloved Son to teach you and say these good words, “I am
               here; I have come to you because you have called me.”

                                                   Spirit of Truth (Bordeaux, 1861)



               8. God consoles the humble and gives strength to the
               afflicted who ask for it. God’s power covers the earth, and
               everywhere, beside a tear he places a consoling balm.
               Devotion and self-denial are a continual prayer and they
               contain a profound teaching. Human wisdom resides in
               those two words. May all suffering spirits understand this



                                                  155




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 155                                             3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER VI



               truth instead of complaining about their pain, about the
               moral sufferings which in this world are your lot. Take
               these two words as your motto: devotion and self-denial,
              and you will be strong, for they summarize all the duties
              that charity and humility impose on you. The sentiment of
              a duty fulfilled will provide resignation and rest for your
              spirit. The heart beats better, the soul becomes serene and
              the body is no longer feeble, because the body suffers all
              the more depending on how deeply the spirit is struck.

                                                   Spirit of Truth (Havre, 1863)




                                             156




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 156                                        3/7/2009 18:00:26

               CHAPTER VII


               Blessed are the poor in
               spirit
                      x What should be understood by ‘poor in spirit’

                      x Whoever exalts himself shall be humbled

                      x Mysteries hidden from the learned and wise



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x Pride and humility

                      x The mission of the intelligent person on the earth




               WHAT SHOULD BE UNDERSTOOD BY ‘POOR IN SPIRIT’


                      1. “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
                      heaven.” (Mt. 5:3)



               2. Disbelief has made fun of the maxim, “Blessed are the
               poor in spirit,” just as it has many other things without
               understanding them. By ‘poor in spirit’ Jesus does not




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 157                                              3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                          CHAPTER VII



               mean persons devoid of intelligence, but the humble: he
               said the kingdom of heaven is for them and not for the
               proud.

                      Persons of knowledge and intellect – according to the
               world – usually have such a high opinion of themselves
               and their superiority that they consider divine things
               as unworthy of their attention. Their gaze, focused on
               themselves, cannot lift itself up to God. This inclination
               to believe themselves to be above anything and everything
               quite often leads them to deny anything that might be above
               them – even the Divinity itself – and which could humble
               them. Or if they do consent to believing in the Divinity, they
               contest one of its most beautiful attributes: its providential
               action regarding matters of this world. They are persuaded
               that they are good enough to govern it well enough by
               themselves. Taking their own intelligence as the standard
               of universal intelligence, and deeming themselves capable
               of comprehending everything, they cannot believe in the
               possibility of what they do not comprehend. Once they
               have passed sentence, their judgment is unappealable.

                      If they refuse to believe in the invisible world and an
               extra-human power, it is not because it is beyond their
               ability, but because their pride revolts against the idea of
               something above which they cannot place themselves, and
               which would make them come down from their pedestal.
               Thus, they have only smiles of disdain for anything that
               is not of the visible and tangible world. They attribute to
               themselves too much intelligence and knowledge to believe
               in things which, according to them, are good for simple



                                              158




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 158                                     3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                    BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT



               folk, and they regard those who take such things seriously
               as poor in spirit.

                      Nonetheless, say what they may, like everyone else
               they will have to enter that invisible world that they now
               deride, where their eyes will be opened and they will realize
               their error. However, God is just and cannot put in the
               same category those who scorned the divine power and
               those who humbly submitted to the divinely established
               laws, nor can they be equal to each other.

                      In stating that the kingdom of heaven is for the simple,
               Jesus means that no one is admitted into it without
               simplicity of heart and humility of spirit; that ignorant
               persons who possess such qualities will be preferred to
               the learned who believe more in themselves than in God.
               In every instance, Jesus places humility in the category of
               virtues that bring us closer to God, and pride among the
               vices that distance us from God – and for a very obvious
               reason: humility is an act of submission to God, whereas
               pride is revolt against God. Therefore, it is more valuable
               for people’s happiness to be poor in spirit – in the earthly
               sense – and rich in moral qualities.



               WHOEVER EXALTS HIMSELF SHALL BE HUMBLED


                      3. At that time, the disciples approached Jesus and asked,
                      “Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” Jesus,
                      having called to a child, set him in their midst and said to
                      them, “Verily I say to you that if you do not convert, and if you
                      do not become like children, you will not enter the kingdom



                                                 159




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 159                                               3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                            CHAPTER VII



                      of heaven. Therefore, everyone who humbles himself
                      and becomes small like this child will be the greatest in
                      the kingdom of heaven, and as I have stated, everyone
                      who receives a child in my name receives me likewise.”
                      (Mt. 18:1-5)

                      4. Then, the mother of the sons of Zebadee approached him
                      with her two sons and kneeled before him, showing him that
                      she wanted to ask him something. He said to her, “What do
                      you want?” She said to him, “Command that my two sons
                      here may have a seat in your kingdom, one on your right and
                      the other on your left.” But Jesus answered her, “You do not
                      know what you are asking; can you drink from the cup that
                      I will drink?” They said to him, “We can.” Jesus answered
                      them, “It is true that you will drink from the cup that I will
                      drink, but as for being seated on my right or on my left, it is
                      not for me to grant, but it will be for those for whom it has
                      been prepared by my Father.” Having heard this, the other
                      ten disciples were filled with indignation against the two
                      brothers. Jesus called them to himself and said to them, “You
                      know that the princes of the nations rule over them and that
                      the mighty treat them with authority. It shall not be the same
                      among you; but let him who wants to become the greatest be
                      your servant, and let him who wants to be the first among
                      you be your slave; just as the Son of man has not come to be
                      served but to serve and to give his life for the redemption of
                      many. (Mt. 20:20-28)

                      5. On the day of the Sabbath, Jesus entered the home of
                      one of the principal Pharisees in order to have his meal, and
                      those who were there were watching him. Then, observing
                      how the guests were choosing the best places, he proposed
                      to them this parable, saying, “Whenever you are invited to a



                                                160




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 160                                             3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                    BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT



                      wedding feast, do not take the best seat, for fear that among
                      the guests there might be a person who is more distinguished
                      than you, and so that the one who has invited you will not
                      have to say to you, ‘Give your seat to this one,’ and you
                      will not be reduced to taking the lowest seat in shame. But
                      whenever you are invited, go and sit in the lowest seat, so
                      that when the one who has invited you comes he will say
                      to you, ‘My friend, move up higher.’ And then this will be a
                      reason for honor before those who are at the table with you,
                      for whoever exalts himself shall be humbled and whoever
                      humbles himself shall be exalted. (Lk. 14:1, 7-11)

               6. These maxims are the consequence of the principle of
               humility, which Jesus incessantly presents as the essential
               condition for the happiness promised to the Lord’s elect,
               and which he expressed with these words, “Blessed are
               the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” He
               takes a child as a model of simplicity of heart and says,
               “The greatest in the kingdom of heaven will be the one
               who humbles himself and becomes small like a child”;
               that is, the one who has no pretension of superiority or
               infallibility.

                      The same fundamental thought is found in this other
               maxim, “Let the one who wants to become the greatest be
               your servant,” and this, “Whoever humbles himself will be
               exalted and whoever exalts himself will be humbled.”

                      Spiritism has come to sanction the theory by example,
               showing us that those who are great in the spirit world are
               those who were small while on earth, and frequently, quite
               small are those who were the greatest and most powerful
               while on earth. This is because, upon dying, the former


                                                 161




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 161                                           3/7/2009 18:00:26

                                           CHAPTER VII



               brought with them that which makes them truly great
               in heaven, and which they will never lose: their virtues;
               whereas the latter had to leave behind that which made
               them great on earth, and which could not be brought with
               them: wealth, titles, glory and birth. Not having anything
               else, they arrive in the other world bereft of everything,
               like shipwreck survivors who have lost it all, even their
               clothes. They retain only their pride, which makes their
               new position all the more humiliating because they see
               above them and resplendent in glory those whom they
               used to belittle on earth.

                      Spiritism shows us another application of this principle
               in successive incarnations, where those who were the most
               exalted in one existence are humbled to the least position
               in a following existence if they had been dominated by
               pride and ambition. Therefore, do not seek the highest
               place while on earth or set yourselves above others if you
               do not want to be obligated to go to a lower place. On the
               contrary, seek the humblest and most modest position,
               because God will know to give you a higher place in heaven
               if you deserve it.



               MYSTERIES HIDDEN FROM THW LEARNED AND WISE


                      7. Then Jesus spoke these words: “I render you glory, my
                      Father, Lord of heaven and earth, for having hidden these
                      things from the learned and wise, and for having revealed
                      them to the simple and small.” (Mt. 11:25)



                                               162




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 162                                       3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                    BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT



               8. It might seem peculiar that Jesus renders thanks to God
               for having revealed such things to the simple – the poor in
               spirit – and for having hidden them from the learned and
               wise, who would apparently be more capable of grasping
               them. It is because one must understand the former as
               being the humble who humble themselves before God and
               who do not believe themselves superior to everyone else;
               and the latter as being the proud, conceited with their
               worldly knowledge, who believe themselves to be wise
               because they deny God, or treat God as an equal when
               they do not repudiate God outright, despite the fact that
               in antiquity learned was synonymous with wise. That is
               why God allows them to search for the secrets of earth,
               whereas God reveals the secrets of heaven to the simplest
               and to the humble who bow down before God.

               9. The same occurs today with the great truths revealed by
               Spiritism. Some disbelievers are surprised that spirits put
               forth such little effort to convince them. This is because
               spirits concern themselves only with those who search for
               the light in good faith and with humility, rather than those
               who believe they possess all the light, and who seem to
               think that God should be very happy to lead them to God
               by proving to them that God exists.

                      God’s power shines in the smallest matters as much as
               in the greatest. God does not put the light under a bushel,
               but scatters it abundantly far and wide; thus, those who
               do not see it are blind. God does not will to open their eyes
               forcefully, since it pleases them to keep them shut. Their
               time will come, but first they must feel the anguish of



                                                 163




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 163                                    3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                          CHAPTER VII



               darkness and acknowledge God, and not mere chance, as
               the one who hurts their pride. In order to overcome disbelief,
               God employs the means most appropriate according to the
               individual. It is not up to the disbeliever to prescribe to
               God what God must do, and say to God, “If you want to
               convince me, you must choose this or that manner at such
               and such a time because that time is the most suitable.”

                      Disbelievers should not be surprised, therefore, if
               God and the spirits, as agents of the divine will, do not
               submit to their requirements. They should ask themselves
               what they would say if the least of their servants wanted to
               impose him or herself on them. God imposes the conditions
               and does not submit to others. God listens kindly to those
               who humbly address God and not to those who deem
               themselves to be greater than God.

               10. Some might ask: Could God not touch them personally
               with manifest signs in whose presence the most hardened
               disbelievers would bow down? Of course, but then where
               would the merit be in that, and, moreover, what good would
               it do? Do we not see individuals everyday who deny the
               evidence and say, “Even if I saw it, I wouldn’t believe
               because I know it’s impossible?” If they refuse to recognize
               the truth, it is because their spirit is not yet mature enough
               to grasp it, nor their heart to feel it. Pride is the veil that
               clouds their sight. What good would it do to present the
               light to a blind person? Hence, it is necessary to heal the
               cause of the ill first, and like a skillful doctor, God punishes
               their pride first. God does not abandon any lost children;
               God knows that sooner or later their eyes will open, but



                                              164




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 164                                       3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                    BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT



               God wants this to be of their own will when, overcome by
               the torments of disbelief, they throw themselves into the
               divine arms, and like the prodigal son ask for divine
               grace.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               PRIDE AND HUMILITY


               11. May the peace of the Lord be with you, my dear friends!
               I have come to encourage you to follow the path of the
               good.

                      To the humble spirits who formerly used to inhabit
               the earth, God has given the mission to come and enlighten
               you. Blessed be God for the grace given to us of being able
               to help you with your advancement. May the Holy Spirit
               illumine me, help me render my word understandable and
               grant me the favor of putting it within the reach of all. All
               you who are incarnate, who are suffering and searching
               for the light, may the will of God help me to make it shine
               in your eyes!

                      Humility is a much-neglected virtue among you. The
               great examples that have been given you are followed very
               little; however, without humility can you be charitable
               toward your neighbor? Oh! No, because this sentiment
               puts all men and women on the same level; it tells them
               they are brothers and sisters and that they must mutually
               help one another; and it leads them to the good. Without
               humility, you adorn yourselves with virtues you do not



                                                 165




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 165                                    3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                          CHAPTER VII



               possess, as if wearing clothes to hide the deformities of
               your body. Remember the One who saves us; remember
               his humility, which made him so great and placed him
               above all the prophets.

                      Pride is the terrible adversary of humility. If Christ
               promises the kingdom of heaven to those who are poorest,
               it is because the mighty of the earth imagine that titles and
               riches are rewards given for their merit, and that their
               essence is purer than that of the poor. They believe that
               these are owed to them, and that is why they accuse God
               of injustice whenever he takes them away. Oh! Such
               mockery and blindness! Does God make distinctions
               among you because of your bodies? Is the envelope of the
               poor not the same as that of the rich? Did the Creator
               make two types of human beings? Everything that God
               does is great and wise; never attribute to him the ideas
               that are conceived in your proud minds.

                      O you rich! While you sleep under golden roofs and
               sheltered from the cold, do you not know that thousands
               of your brothers and sisters – who are just like you – are
               sleeping on straw? Are not the wretches suffering from
               hunger your equal? These words are revolting to your
               pride, I know full well. You may agree to give them alms,
               but to fraternally shake hands with them – never! “What!”
               you say, “I, a descendent of noble blood, one of the great
               ones of the earth, equal to those wretches in rags? A vain
               utopia of the so-called philosophers! If we are equal, why
               has God set them so low and me so high?” It is true that
               your garments are scarcely the same; however, undress



                                              166




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 166                                    3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                    BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT



               both of you, and what difference would there be between
               you? “Nobility of blood,” you will say. But chemistry has not
               found any difference between the blood of the nobleman
               and that of the plebe, or between that of the master and
               that of the slave. Who says that you yourself were not also
               once impoverished and unfortunate like them? That you
               did not beg for alms? That someday you will not beg from
               those whom you despise today? Are riches eternal? Do
               they not end with your body, the perishable envelope of
               your spirit? Oh! Apply some humility to yourself! Set your
               eyes upon the reality of the things of this world, upon what
               leads to greatness on one hand and humiliation on the
               other. Remember that death will not spare you any more
               than anyone else; that titles will not save you from it; that
               it can strike you tomorrow, today, in an hour. And if you
               shroud yourselves in your pride, oh! Then I feel sorry for
               you because you are worthy of pity.

                      You proud! What were you before you were noble and
               powerful? Perhaps you were lower than the least of your
               servants. Therefore, bow your haughty brow, which God
               can bring down at the moment in which you raise yourself
               the highest. All humans are equal on the divine scales and
               only their virtues distinguish them from one another in
               God’s eyes. All spirits are of one and the same essence and
               all bodies are made of the same substance; your titles and
               your names do not change them in any way. They remain
               in the grave and they do not give you the bliss promised to
               the elect. Charity and humility are their titles of nobility.



                                                 167




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 167                                        3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                          CHAPTER VII



                      Poor creature! You are a mother; your children are
               suffering. They are cold and hungry; bent under the weight
               of your cross, you go and humiliate yourself so that they
               might have a piece of bread! Oh! I bow down before you!
               How nobly holy and great you are in my eyes! Hope and
               pray; happiness is not yet of this world. To the poor and
               oppressed who trust in him, God gives the kingdom of
               heaven.

                      And you, young maiden, poor child, given to work and
               privation – why such sad thoughts? Why do you weep? Lift
               up your gaze, pious and serene, to God, who provides food
               to the little birds; trust in him and he will not abandon
               you. The noise of parties, the pleasures of the world make
               your heart beat fast. You would love to adorn your head
               with flowers and mingle with the wealthy of this earth.
               You say to yourself that, like these women who pass you
               by, nonchalant and laughing, you too could be rich. Oh!
               Be still, child! If you knew how many tears and nameless
               sorrows are hidden beneath those embroidered dresses,
               how many sobs are muffled under the noise of that joyous
               orchestra, you would prefer your humble solitude and
               your poverty. Keep yourself pure in God’s eyes if you do
               not want your guardian angel to return to him, hiding its
               face with its white wings and leaving you to your remorse,
               without a guide, without support in this world where you
               will be lost, waiting to be punished in the next.

                      And all you who endure human injustice, be indulgent
               with the wrongs of your brothers and sisters by remembering


                                              168




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 168                                  3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                    BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT



               that you yourselves are not exempt from reproach – to do
               so is charity, but it is also humility. If you suffer slander,
               bow your head under the trial. What does the world’s
               slander matter to you? If your conduct is pure, cannot God
               compensate you? To courageously bear humiliation from
               others is to be humble and to recognize that only God is
               great and powerful.

                      O dear God! Must Christ come a second time to earth to
               teach human beings your laws, which they have forgotten?
               Will he once more have to expel the merchants from the
               temple as they defile your house, which is a place of prayer
               only? And who knows? O humankind! If God were to grant
               you such grace, perhaps you would reject it as before. You
               would call him a blasphemer, for he would humiliate the
               pride of modern Pharisees. Perhaps you would make him
               take up the road to Golgotha once again.

                      Left to themselves when Moses went up on Mt. Sinai
               to receive God’s commandments, the people of Israel
               forsook the one true God. Men and women gave their gold
               and jewels to make an idol to worship. You civilized men
               and women, you do the same. Christ left you his doctrine;
               he provided you with an example of all the virtues, and
               you have forsaken his examples and precepts. With your
               passions you have all made a God to your own liking:
               according to some, terrifying and bloodthirsty; according
               to others, uncaring about the concerns of the world. The
               God you have made is still the golden calf that each of you
               adapts to his or her own tastes and ideas.



                                                 169




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 169                                     3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                          CHAPTER VII



                      Wake up, my brothers and sisters, my friends! May
               the voice of the Spirits touch your hearts. Be generous
               and charitable without ostentation; that is, do the good
               with humility. Let each of you tear down little by little
               the altars you have erected to pride. In a word, be true
               Christians and you will possess the kingdom of truth. No
               longer doubt God’s goodness when he gives you so many
               proofs of it. We have come to prepare the way for the
               fulfillment of the prophecies. When the Lord comes to give
               you a more resounding manifestation of his clemency, may
               the Heavenly Messenger find you as one great family. May
               your gentle and humble hearts be worthy of understanding
               the Divine Word that he will bring you. May the Chosen
               One find on his path only the palm branches laid there by
               your return to goodness, charity and fraternity. Then your
               world will become a terrestrial paradise. But if you remain
               insensitive to the voice of the Spirits sent to purify and
               renew your civilized society, so rich in knowledge and yet
               so poor in good sentiments… alas! nothing will remain for
               us but to weep and groan about your fate. But no, it will
               not be that way. Return to God your Father, and then all
               of us who have served for the fulfillment of his will shall
               sing the canticle of thanksgiving to thank the Lord for his
               unbounded goodness and glorify him for ever and ever.
               Amen.

                                                Lacordaire (Constantine, 1863)



               12. O humankind, why do you complain about the
               calamities that you have heaped upon your own heads?



                                              170




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 170                                      3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                    BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT



               You have despised the holy and divine morals of Christ.
               Do not be surprised, therefore, that the cup of iniquity has
               overflowed on all sides.

                      Troubles have become widespread. Who is to blame
               except you yourselves, who incessantly seek to crush
               one another? You cannot be happy without mutual
               benevolence, but how can benevolence exist with pride?
               Pride is the fount of all your ills; so devote yourselves to
               destroying it if you do not want to perpetuate its devastating
               consequences. There is only one way offered to you for this,
               but it is foolproof: take as your invariable rule of conduct
               the law of Christ, the law you have rejected or falsified in
               its interpretation.

                      Why do you hold such high regard for whatever
               shines and enchants the eyes rather than what touches
               the heart? Why is the vice found in opulence the object of
               your adulations, while you have only a look of disdain for
               the true merit that lies in obscurity? Let rich debauchees –
               lost in body and soul – appear anywhere and all doors are
               opened to them and all eyes are on them, whereas hardly
               anyone will concede a gesture of greeting to moral persons
               who live by their labor! As long as the consideration
               granted to persons is measured by the weight of the gold
               they possess or by the name they bear, what interest could
               they possibly have in correcting their defects?

                      The opposite would occur if the defect of gold were
               criticized by public opinion in the same way as the defect of
               tatters. Pride, however, is indulgent toward anything that
               pleases it. “This is a time of cupidity and money,” you say.



                                                 171




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 171                                     3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                          CHAPTER VII



               No doubt about it; but why have you let material needs
               encroach on good sense and reason? Why does anyone
               want to rise above his or her brothers and sisters? Society
               today is suffering the consequences of this fact.

                      Do not forget that such a state of things is always a
               sign of moral decadence. When pride reaches extremes, it
               is an indication that a downfall is close at hand, for God
               always punishes the arrogant. If he sometimes allows them
               to ascend, it is to give them time to reflect and mend their
               ways under the blows that he gives to their pride from
               time to time in order to warn them. Instead of humbling
               themselves, however, they rebel. Then, when their cup is
               full, God brings them down suddenly, and their downfall is
               all the more terrible the higher they have ascended.

                      Poor humankind, whose selfishness has corrupted
               every pathway, take heart once again, nonetheless. In
               his infinite mercy, God has sent you a powerful remedy
               for your ills, an unexpected aid in your affliction. Open
               your eyes to the light: there are the souls of those who are
               no longer on the earth and who have come to call you to
               your real duties. With all the authority of their experience,
               they will tell you how the vanities and grandeur of your
               temporary existence are a small thing in comparison with
               eternity. They will tell you that there the greatest is the
               one who was the humblest among the small of your world;
               that those who loved their brothers and sisters the most
               are also those who will be loved the most in heaven; that
               the powerful of the earth, if they abused their authority,
               will be reduced to obeying their servants; that, in short,



                                              172




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 172                                    3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                    BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT



               charity and humility, those two sisters who walk hand
               in hand, are the most effective means for obtaining grace
               before the Eternal One.

                                          Adolfo, Bishop of Argel (Marmande, 1862)



               THE MISSION OF THE INTELLIGENT PERSON ON
               THE EARTH


               13. Do not pride yourself on what you know, because such
               knowing has very narrow limits in the world on which
               you dwell. But even supposing you were one of those
               distinguished personalities on this globe, you would still
               have no right to flatter yourself. If in his designs God has
               enabled you to be born into an environment where you are
               able to develop your intelligence, it is because he wills for
               you to employ it for the good of all. It is a mission he has
               given you, putting in your hands the instrument that will
               help you, in your turn, to develop the intelligences lagging
               behind and lead them to God. Does not the nature of that
               instrument indicate the use to be made of it? Does not the
               hoe that the gardener places in the hands of his helper
               show the helper that he must till? What would you say if
               this helper, instead of working, raised the hoe in order to
               strike his master? You would say that it is horrible and
               that he deserves to be dismissed. Well then, does not the
               same occur with those who use their intelligence to destroy
               the idea of God and Providence amongst their brothers
               and sisters? Do they not raise against their Master the
               hoe that was given to them to till the soil? Do they have



                                                 173




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 173                                          3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                                  CHAPTER VII



               a right to their wages, or do they deserve to be expelled
               from the garden instead? Do not doubt that they will be
               expelled, and they will trudge through miserable lives full
               of humiliation until they bow before the One to whom they
               owe everything.

                      Intelligence is rich in merit for the future, but on the
               condition that it is employed rightly. If all people who have
               been given it used it according to God’s designs, the Spirits’
               task of enabling humankind to advance would be easy.
               Unfortunately, many make of it an instrument of pride and
               perdition for themselves. Humans abuse their intelligence
               like all their other faculties; nonetheless, the lessons are
               not lacking to warn them that a powerful hand can take
               back what it has given them.

                                          Ferdinand, a Protector Spirit (Bordeaux, 1862)




                                                      174




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 174                                                3/7/2009 18:00:27

               CHAPTER VIII


               Blessed are the pure of
               heart
                      x Let the children come to me

                      x Sinning in thought. Adultery

                      x True purity. Unclean hands

                      x Scandals. If your hand is a cause for scandal, cut
                          it off



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x Let the children come to me

                      x Blessed are they whose eyes are closed




              LET THE CHILDREN COME TO ME


                      1. Blessed are the pure of heart, for they shall see God.
                      (Mt. 5:8)

                      2. Then, some children were presented to him so that he
                      would touch them, but as his disciples kept away with




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 175                                       3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                          CHAPTER VIII



                      scolding words those who were being presented, Jesus was
                      displeased and said to them, “Let the children come to me
                      and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of heaven is for
                      those who are like them. Verily, I say to you, anyone who
                      does not receive the kingdom of heaven like a child will not
                      enter it.” And embracing them, he blessed them, placing his
                      hands upon them. (Mk. 10:13-16)

               3. Purity of heart is inseparable from simplicity and humility,
               and excludes every thought of selfishness and pride. That is
               why Jesus uses childhood as a symbol of such purity, just
               as he uses it as a symbol for humility.

                      This comparison might not seem just, considering the
               fact that the spirit of a child may be quite old, and that
               upon being reborn to corporeal life it brings with it the
               imperfections that it had not gotten rid of in its previous
               existences. Only a spirit who has reached perfection could
               give us a model of true purity. However, the comparison is
               precise from the present life point of view, because, having
               not yet manifested any perverse inclinations, little children
               offer us the picture of innocence and candor. Furthermore,
               Jesus does not say that the kingdom of God is for them
               literally, but for those who are like them.

               4. Since the spirit of a child has already lived before, why
               does it not show from birth what it really is? Everything is
               wise in God’s works. Children have need of sensitive care,
               which only a mother’s tenderness can give them, and this
               tenderness increases with their frailty and innocence. To
               a mother, her child is always an angel and it has to be
               that way in order to capture her concern. She would not



                                               176




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 176                                          3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                   BLESSED ARE THE PURE OF HEAR T



               have the same care toward her child if, instead of innocent
               charm, she found behind her child’s infantile features a
               virile character and adult thoughts; and she would care
               even less if she knew about the child’s past.

                      Furthermore, the activity of the intelligent principle
               would have to be in proportion to the weakness of the body,
               which could not endure a large amount of activity of the
               spirit such as that which may be seen in highly precocious
               individuals. That is why, as incarnation draws near, the
               spirit enters a state of confusion and gradually loses its
               self-awareness; for some time it remains in a sort of sleep,
               during which all its faculties remain latent. This transitory
               state is necessary to give the spirit a new starting point, and
               to enable it to forget the things that might hinder it in its
               new earthly existence. Nevertheless, its past acts upon it.
               It is reborn to a greater life both morally and intellectually
               as it is upheld and aided by the intuition it has retained of
               it previously-acquired experience.

                      Beginning at birth, its thoughts gradually regain
               momentum to the degree that its organs develop, so that
               it may be said that during the first few years, the spirit is
               truly a child, since the ideas that will form the basis of its
               character are still dormant. During this time it is more
               malleable and therefore more accessible to the impressions
               that can modify its nature and enable it to progress, which
               in turn renders the task imposed on the parents easier.

                      Thus, the spirit wears the tunic of innocence for a
               while, and Jesus is correct when, notwithstanding the



                                                177




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 177                                      3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                           CHAPTER VIII



               soul’s previous lives, he uses the child as the symbol of
               purity and simplicity.



               SINNING IN THOUGHT; ADULTERY


                      5. “You have learned that it was said to the ancients, ‘You
                      shall not commit adultery.’ But I say to you that he who
                      looks at a woman with a wicked desire for her has already
                      committed adultery with her in his heart.” (Mt. 5:27,28)

               6. The word adultery must in no way be understood here
               in the exclusive sense of its normal meaning, but in a more
               generalized sense. Jesus often employed it by extension to
               designate evil, sin and every bad thought, as, for example,
               in this passage: “For if anyone amongst this adulterous
               and sinful generation is ashamed of me and my words, the
               Son of Man will be ashamed of him also when he comes
               accompanied by the holy angels in the glory of his Father.”
               (Mk. 8:38)

                      True purity is not only displayed in one’s actions; it
               is also displayed in one’s thoughts, for those who have a
               pure heart do not even think about evil. This is what Jesus
               meant. He condemns sin, even in thought, because it is a
               sign of impurity.

               7. This principle naturally leads to the following question:
               Does one suffer the consequences of an evil thought if it is
               not followed by an effect?

                      Here, there is an important distinction to be made.
               As the soul caught up on the wrong path advances in its


                                                178




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 178                                          3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                   BLESSED ARE THE PURE OF HEAR T



               spiritual life, it enlightens itself and rids itself little by little
               of its imperfections, depending on the greater or lesser
               willingness it employs in virtue of its free will. Every evil
               thought thus results from the soul’s imperfection; however,
               depending on its desire to purify itself, even an evil thought
               can become an opportunity for advancement if it forcefully
               rejects it. This indicates an effort to wipe away a stain.
               Hence, it will not yield if presented with an opportunity to
               satisfy an evil desire, and after having resisted it, it will feel
               much stronger and happier with its victory.

                      On the other hand, the soul that has not made good
               resolutions seeks an opportunity for an evil act, and if it
               does not actually commit one, it is not because of its will
               but because it lacked the opportunity. Consequently, it is
               as guilty as if it had actually committed it.

                      In sum, persons who do not even conceive the thought
               of evil have already made progress; those to whom the
               thought occurs but who reject it are on their way to making
               progress; finally, those who have such a thought and take
               pleasure in it are still indwelt by evil in all its strength. In
               one, the work is finished; in the others, it remains yet to
               be done. God is just and considers all such nuances in
               people’s responsibility for their actions and thoughts.



               TRUE PURITY. UNCLEAN HANDS


                      8. Then the scribes and Pharisees who had come to Jerusalem
                      approached Jesus and said to him, “Why do your disciples
                      violate the tradition of the ancients, for they do not wash their
                      hands when they eat their meals?”


                                                 179




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 179                                               3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                            CHAPTER VIII



                      But Jesus responded to them, “Why do you yourselves violate
                      the commandment of God in order to follow your tradition?
                      Although God gave this commandment: Honor your father
                      and mother; and this one: He who speaks outrageous words
                      to his father or mother is to be put to death, you have said:
                      Anyone who has said to his father or mother, ‘Every offering
                      that I make to God is useful to you and fulfills the law,’ even
                      if afterward he neither honors nor helps his father or mother.
                      Thus, you have made God’s commandment useless for the
                      sake of your tradition.

                      “Hypocrites! Isaiah rightly prophesied about you when he
                      said, ‘These people honor me with their lips but their hearts
                      remain far from me. And it is in vain that they honor me by
                      teaching maxims and ordinances that come from men.’”

                      Then, having called the people, he said to them, “Hear and
                      understand this well: It is not what enters the mouth that
                      defiles the man, but what comes out of the mouth of the man.
                      What comes out of the mouth proceeds from the heart and
                      is what makes the man unclean, for it is from the heart that
                      evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, robberies,
                      perjuries, blasphemies and slanders proceed. The things that
                      make the man unclean are there; but eating without having
                      washed one’s hands does not make a man unclean.”

                      Then his disciples approached and said to him, “Did you know
                      that when the Pharisees heard what you just said, they were
                      offended by it?” But he answered them, “Every plant that
                      my heavenly Father has not planted will be uprooted. Leave
                      them; they are the blind who lead the blind. If one blind man
                      leads another, both fall into the pit.” (Mt. 15:1-20)

                      9. While he was speaking, a Pharisee asked him if he would
                      dine with him in his home. And Jesus went there and took his


                                                 180




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 180                                             3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                   BLESSED ARE THE PURE OF HEAR T



                      place at the table. The Pharisee then began to say to himself,
                      “Why did he not wash his hands before dinner?” But the Lord
                      said to him, “You Pharisees take great care in washing the
                      outside of the cup and plate. However, the inside of your
                      heart is full of greed and iniquity. How foolish you are!
                      Did not he who made the outside also make the inside?”
                      (Lk. 11:37-40)

               10. The Jews had neglected the true commandments
               of God in order to hold to the practice of regulations
               established by humans, and of which strict observers made
               matters of conscience. The very simple basis had ended up
               disappearing beneath the complexity of form. Since it was
               much easier to observe outward acts than to reform oneself
               morally, by washing their hands instead of cleansing their
               heart, people deluded themselves and believed that they
               were square with God because they conformed to such
               practices. Even though they remained as they were, they
               were taught that God required nothing more. That is why
               the prophet said, “In vain these people honor me with their
               lips, teaching human maxims and ordinances.”

                      The same occurred with Christ’s moral doctrine,
               which ended up being placed on a secondary level. Just
               like the Jews of old, many Christians came to believe that
               their salvation was more surely guaranteed by means of
               outward practices than by morality. It is to such human
               additions to the law of God that Jesus makes the allusion
               when he said, “Every plant that my heavenly Father has
               not planted shall be uprooted.”



                                                181




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 181                                            3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                           CHAPTER VIII



                      The purpose of religion is to lead people to God, but people
               cannot reach God unless they are perfect. Consequently, any
               religion that does not enable people to become better does not
               meet its objective. Any religion on which people believe they
               can support themselves for doing evil is either false per se or
               false in principle. Such is the result of all religions in which
               form is more important than the foundation. Belief in the
               efficacy of outward signs is nullified if it does not keep murders,
               adultery, robbery, slander or evil against one’s neighbor from
               being committed, whatever such signs may be. This sort of
               belief creates superstition, hypocrisy and fanaticism – not
               moral men and women.

                      It is not enough, therefore, to put on the appearance
               of purity; above all, one must be pure of heart.



               SCANDALS 1. IF YOUR HAND IS A CAUSE FOR
               SCANDAL, CUT IT OFF


                      11. “Woe to the world because of scandals, for it is necessary
                      that scandals come; but woe to the person through whom the
                      scandal comes.”

                      “If anyone causes a scandal to one of these little ones who
                      believe in me, it would be better for him if one of those
                      millstones were hung around his neck and that he were cast
                      into the depths of the sea.”


               1
                 The French term is scandale, from the Latin scandalum and Greek
               skândalon (used in the Gospel passage) meaning snare or cause of moral
               stumbling. – Tr.


                                                182




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 182                                             3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                   BLESSED ARE THE PURE OF HEAR T



                      “Be very careful not to despise any of these little ones. I
                      declare to you that their angels in heaven incessantly come
                      before my Father in heaven, for the Son of Man has come to
                      save who was lost.”

                      “If your hand or your foot is a cause for scandal, cut it off and
                      throw it away from you. It is much better for you to enter life
                      having only one foot or one hand than to have two and be
                      cast into eternal fire. And if your eye is a cause for scandal,
                      tear it out and throw it away from you. It is better for you to
                      enter life with only one eye than to have two and be thrown
                      into the fire of hell.” (Mt. 18:6-10)

               12. In its ordinary meaning, scandal means every action
               that shocks morality or decency in an ostensive way.
               The scandal does not lie in the action per se, but in the
               repercussion it might have. The word scandal always
               implies the idea of a certain outburst. Many persons are
               happy to avoid a scandal because their pride would suffer
               and their worth would diminish in other people’s eyes. As
               long as their turpitudes are ignored, it is enough for them
               and their conscience to be at ease. According to Jesus’
               words, they are “whitewashed tombs on the outside, but
               full of rottenness on the inside; clean vessels on the outside
               but dirty on the inside.”

                      In the evangelical sense, the meaning of the frequently
               used word scandal is much more general, which is why its
               acceptation is not understood in certain cases. It is not only
               what offends someone else’s conscience, but is everything
               that results from human vices and imperfections; all the
               wrongful actions of one individual toward another, with or



                                                  183




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 183                                               3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                          CHAPTER VIII



               without repercussion. Scandal, in this case, is the effective
               result of bad morals.

               13. It is necessary for there to be scandals in the world,
               said Jesus, because humans are imperfect while on the
               earth and are thus inclined to do evil, just as bad trees
               bear bad fruit. Therefore, one must understand by these
               words that evil is a consequence of humans’ imperfections
               and not that there is an obligation for them to commit it.

               14. It is necessary that scandals come because, being in a
               state of expiation while on the earth, humans are punished
               by means of contact with their vices, of which they are the
               first victims, and whose inappropriateness they end up
               understanding. Once they are tired of suffering from evil,
               they seek the remedy in the good. The reaction to these
               vices therefore serves at the same time as punishment for
               some and trials for others. This is how God enables the
               good to emerge from evil and humans themselves to profit
               from bad and disagreeable things.

               15. If such is the case, one might say that evil is necessary
               and will last forever, because if it were to disappear, God
               would be deprived of a powerful means of punishing the
               guilty; hence, it is pointless to try to improve humankind.
               However, if there were no longer the wrongdoer, there
               would be no more need for punishment. Let us imagine
               humankind transformed into moral individuals: no one
               would try to do evil to his or her neighbor and everybody
               would be happy because they would be good. Such is the
               state of advanced worlds where evil is excluded; such will
               be the state of the earth when it has progressed sufficiently.



                                              184




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 184                                     3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                   BLESSED ARE THE PURE OF HEAR T



               Nevertheless, while some worlds evolve, others are formed,
               peopled by primitive spirits. These worlds serve as
               habitations of exile and places of expiation for imperfect,
               rebellious, persistently evil spirits who have been barred
               from worlds that have become blissful.

               16. But woe to him through whom scandal comes. This
               means that since evil is always evil, those who unknowingly
               have served as instruments for divine justice, those
               whose evil instincts have been utilized, have committed
               evil nevertheless and must be punished. Thus it is, for
               example, that an ungrateful child is a punishment or trial
               for the parents who bear it because they themselves had
               perhaps been bad children and now must suffer the penalty
               of talion. However, the child is blameworthy nonetheless
               and must be punished in turn in the persons of his or her
               own children or in some other way.

               17. If your hand is a cause for scandal, cut it off. This is a
               powerful image which would be absurd if taken literally,
               and which simply means that one must destroy within
               oneself all cause of scandal, that is, of evil; one must
               uproot from one’s heart every impure sentiment and every
               immoral tendency. It also means that it would be more
               praiseworthy to have one’s hand cut off than for that hand
               to have been an instrument for an evil act; to be deprived
               of one’s sight than one’s eyes having been an avenue for
               evil thoughts. Jesus never said anything absurd to those
               who could understand the allegorical and deeper meaning
               of his words. However, many things cannot be understood
               without the key that Spiritism provides.



                                                185




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 185                                     3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                          CHAPTER VIII



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               LET THE CHILDREN COME TO ME


               18. Christ said, “Let the children come to me.” Profound in
               their simplicity, these words do not imply the mere calling
               of children, but of the souls that gravitate in the lower
               regions, where misfortune knows no hope. Jesus called
               unto him the intellectual infancy of the full-grown person:
               the weak, the enslaved and the wicked. He could not teach
               anything to physical infancy, which is subject to matter
               and the yoke of instinct, and does not yet belong to the
               higher order of reason and will, which is exercised around
               them and for their benefit.

                      Jesus wanted people to come to him with the trust
               of those little beings of wavering steps. His calling to
               them would win him the hearts of women, who are all
               mothers. Thus, he could submit souls to his tender and
               mysterious authority. He was the flame that shone in the
               darkness, the morning light that awakens the dawn. He
               was the initiator of Spiritism, which in turn must call to
               itself not little children but mature individuals of goodwill.
               A vigorous process has begun; it is no longer a question
               of believing instinctively and obeying mechanically; it is
               necessary for humans to follow the intelligent law that
               reveals its universality.

                      Dearly beloved, the time has come in which errors,
               once explained, will become truths. We will teach you the
               precise meaning of the parables and will show you the
               strong correlation linking what was with what is. Truly,



                                              186




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 186                                     3/7/2009 18:00:27

                                   BLESSED ARE THE PURE OF HEAR T



               I say to you: spirit manifestations are increasing on the
               horizon, and Spiritism is the messenger that will shine like
               the sun on the mountaintops.

                                                 John the Evangelist (Paris, 1863)


               19. Let the little children come to me, for I have the milk
               that strengthens the weak. Let all come to me who are
               fearful and feeble, and in need of support and consolation.
               Let the unlearned come to me so that I may enlighten them.
               Let all those who suffer come to me – the multitudes of the
               afflicted and unfortunate. I will teach them about the great
               remedy that softens the ills of life, and I will give them the
               secret of healing for their wounds! My friends, what is this
               supreme balm possessing virtue par excellence, this balm
               that may be applied to all the wounds of the heart to heal
               them? It is love, it is charity! If you possess this divine
               fire, what will you fear? Every moment of your life you
               will say, “My Father, may your will be done and not mine.
               If it pleases you to try me through pain and tribulation,
               may you be blessed, for it is for my own good and I know
               that it is your hand that is weighing on me. O Lord, if
               it pleases you to have mercy on your weak creature, if
               you give my heart permissible joys, may you be more
               blessed. But do not allow your divine love to sleep in my
               soul; may I unceasingly lift up to your feet the voice of my
               thanksgiving!”

                      If you have love, you have everything there is to be
               desired on the earth. You possess the most excellent pearl
               that neither circumstances nor the evils of those who



                                                187




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 187                                          3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                              CHAPTER VIII



               hate and persecute you will be able to take away. If you
               have love, you will have put your treasure where worms
               and rust cannot reach it, and you will see everything that
               might stain its purity erased from your soul. You will feel
               the weight of matter grow lighter day by day, and like a
               bird soaring in the sky with no memory of earth, you will
               ascend without ceasing, you will ascend forever until your
               exhilarated soul satiates itself with life in the bosom of the
               Lord.

                                                  A Protector Spirit (Bordeaux, 1861)




               BLESSED ARE THEY WHOSE EYES ARE CLOSED 1


               20. My good friends, why have you called me? Is it so that
               I might place my hands upon this poor sufferer here and
               heal her? Ah! Such suffering, good God! She has lost her
               sight and darkness has come upon her. Poor child! May
               she pray and hope. I do not know how to perform miracles
               apart from the will of the good God. All the healings I
               was able to receive, and which were pointed out to you,
               may be attributed only to the One who is our Father in
               everything.

               1
                   This communication was given regarding a blind person, on whose behalf
               the spirit of J. B. Vianney, a priest in Ars, was evoked – Auth. (St. Jean-
               Baptiste Vianney, 1786–1859, French parish priest, popularly known as
               the Curé d’Ars, b. Dardilly, near Lyons. Canonized by the Roman Church
               in 1925 and in 1929 made universal patron of parish priests. – Columbia
               Encyclopedia, sixth ed. Columbia University Press, 2001 – Tr.)


                                                   188




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 188                                                  3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                   BLESSED ARE THE PURE OF HEAR T



                      In your afflictions, therefore, always look to heaven
               and say from the bottom of your heart, “My Father, heal
               me, but may my infirm soul be healed before the infirmities
               of my body; may my flesh be chastised if need be so that
               my soul may ascend to you with the whiteness it had
               when you created it.” After this prayer, my good friends,
               which the good God will always hear, strength and courage
               will be given to you, and perhaps also the healing that
               you have only timidly asked for as recompense for your
               self-denial.

                      Nevertheless, since I am here in a gathering that deals
               with study more than anything else, I will tell you that
               those who have been deprived of their sight should regard
               themselves as the blessed ones of expiation. Remember
               that Christ said it is better to pluck out your eye if it is
               evil and that it would be better if it were cast into the fire
               than be the cause of your perdition. Alas! How many there
               are on your earth, who someday in the darkness will curse
               having seen the light! Oh! Yes, how happy are they who
               in expiation have been struck in their sight! Their eyes
               will not be a cause for scandal or downfall; they can fully
               live the life of the soul; they can see more than you who
               see clearly... Whenever God allows me to open the eyes
               of any of these poor sufferers and restore their sight, I
               say to myself: Dear soul, why do you not know about the
               delights of the spirit that lives in contemplation and love?
               You would not be asking to see images that are less pure
               and less sweet than those that have been given to you to
               behold in your blindness.




                                                189




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 189                                     3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                          CHAPTER VIII



                      Oh! Yes, blessed are the blind who want to live with
               God. They are happier than you who are here, for they feel
               happiness, they touch it, they see souls and can soar with
               them in spirit realms that the predestined of your earth
               do not see. The open eye is always ready to cause the soul
               to fail; the shut eye, on the other hand, is always ready to
               enable it to reach God. Believe me well, my good and dear
               friends, blindness of the eyes is often the true light of the
               heart, while sight is frequently the dark angel that leads
               to death.

                      And now, a few words for you, my poor suffering
               woman: wait and be of good cheer! If I were to tell you: My
               daughter, your eyes shall be opened, how joyous you would
               be! But who knows if such joy would not lead to your loss!
               Trust in the good God who bestows happiness and allows
               sadness! I shall do everything for you that is allowed,
               but you in turn must pray, and especially, meditate on
               everything I have just said.

                      Before I leave, may all you gathered here receive my
               blessing.

                                             Vianney, priest of Ars (Paris, 1863)



               21. Comment: Whenever an affliction is not the result of
               acts of the present life, one must search for their cause in
               a previous one. Whatever is called a whim of chance is no
               more than the effect of God’s justice. God does not inflict
               arbitrary punishment; God always wills for a correlation
               to exist between the wrong and the punishment. If in the
               divine goodness God has cast a veil over our past acts, God


                                              190




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 190                                         3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                   BLESSED ARE THE PURE OF HEAR T



               nevertheless points the way to us by saying: “Whoever has
               killed with the sword shall perish by the sword,” words that
               may be translated as, “The punishment is always according
               to the sin.” Therefore, if someone suffers the torment of
               the loss of sight, it is because sight was for him or her a
               cause of downfall. Also, it could be that the person was the
               cause of the loss of someone else’s sight; perhaps someone
               had become blind as a result of excess work having been
               imposed or as a result of mistreatment, lack of care, etc.,
               and now the person is suffering the penalty of talion. The
               person him or herself could have chosen such expiation,
               applying these words of Jesus personally: “If your eye is a
               cause for scandal, pluck it out.”




                                                191




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 191                                   3/7/2009 18:00:28

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 192   3/7/2009 18:00:28

               CHAPTER IX


               Blessed are the meek
               and peace-loving
                      x Insults and violence


                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x Affability and meekness

                      x Patience

                      x Obedience and resignation

                      x Anger




               INSULTS AND VIOLENCE


                      1. Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the earth.
                      (Mt. 5:4)

                      2. Blessed are the peace-loving, for they shall be called
                      children of God. (Mt. 5:9)

                      3. You have learned what was said to the ancients: You shall
                      not kill, and whoever kills shall deserve being condemned
                      to judgment. But I say to you that whoever shows anger




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 193                                          3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                           CHAPTER IX



                      against his brother shall deserve being condemned to
                      judgment; whoever says to his brother Raca shall deserve
                      to be condemned by the council; and whoever says to him:
                      You fool, shall deserve being condemned to the fire of hell.
                      (Mt. 5:21-22)

               4. By these maxims, Jesus makes meekness, moderation,
               docility, affability and patience a law. Consequently, he
               condemns violence, anger and even any discourteous
               expression regarding another person. Raca, to the Hebrews,
               was a term of scorn that meant a worthless person, and it
               was said while spitting and turning one’s head to the side.
               Jesus goes even further, since he threatens with the fire of
               hell anyone who says to another person: You fool.

                      It is obvious that here, as in every circumstance,
               the intent either increases or attenuates the wrong; but
               how can a simple word have enough gravity to deserve
               such a severe reproach? It is because every offensive
               word expresses a sentiment contrary to the law of love
               and charity, which should regulate human relations and
               maintain harmony and unity in them; because such a word
               is an insult to mutual benevolence and fraternity; because
               it encourages hatred and animosity; finally, because after
               humility toward God, charity toward one’s neighbor is the
               first law for every Christian.

               5. What did Jesus mean by these words: “Blessed are the
               meek, for they shall possess the earth,” he who stated that
               one should renounce the things of this world and promised
               those of heaven?

                      While waiting for the things of heaven, humans have
               need of the things of the earth in order to live. He only


                                               194




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 194                                          3/7/2009 18:00:28

                            BLESSED ARE THE MEEK AND PEACE-LOVING



               advises them not to attach more importance to the latter
               than to the former.

                      By these words Jesus means that up till now
               the things of the earth have been monopolized by
               aggressive persons to the harm of those who are meek
               and peace-loving; that the latter often lack the necessities,
               while the former have the superfluous. He promises that
               justice will be rendered to the meek and peace-loving on
               earth as in heaven, for they shall be called children of
               God. When the law of love and charity is finally the law
               of humankind, there will be no more selfishness; the weak
               and peace-loving will no longer be exploited or crushed by
               the strong and aggressive. Such will be the state of the
               earth, when, according to the law of progress and the
               promise of Jesus, it becomes a blessed world through
               the expulsion of evil individuals.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               AFFABILITY AND MEEKNESS


               6. Benevolence toward one’s fellow beings, the fruit of love
               toward one’s neighbor, produces the affability and
               meekness that are its manifestation. However, one must
               not always trust in appearances. Good manners and
               worldly skill can lend the veneer of such qualities. How
               many there are whose feigned good nature is no more than
               an outward mask, a garment whose premeditated form
               covers up hidden deformities! The world is full of such
               individuals, who have a smile on their lips and venom in


                                             195




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 195                                    3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                          CHAPTER IX



               their hearts; who are meek as long as nothing angers them,
               but who bite back at the least contrariety; whose silver
               tongue when they speak to your face changes into a
               poisoned arrow when they speak behind your back.

                      To this class belong also the men and women who
               seem benign on the outside but who are really domestic
               tyrants, making their families and subordinates suffer the
               weight of their pride and despotism as though wanting to
               get even for the restraints imposed on them elsewhere. Not
               daring to use their authority on strangers who would put
               them in their place, they want to at least be feared by those
               who cannot resist them. Their vanity rejoices at being able
               to say, “Here, I command and am obeyed,” without thinking
               that they could very well add, “and I am detested.”

                      It is not enough for lips to flow with milk and honey,
               because if the heart does not do the same, it is hypocrisy.
               Those whose affability and meekness are not feigned never
               belie themselves; they are the same, both in the world and
               at home. Furthermore, it is said that even if we are able to
               fool others by appearances, we do not fool God.

                                                         Lazare (Paris, 1861)




               PATIENCE


               7. Pain is a blessing that God sends upon the elect;
               therefore, do not become troubled when you suffer;
               instead, bless Almighty God, who through the pain of this
               world has marked you out for glory in heaven.


                                             196




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 196                                     3/7/2009 18:00:28

                            BLESSED ARE THE MEEK AND PEACE-LOVING



                      Be patient. Patience too is a form of charity and you
               must practice the law of charity taught by Christ, the
               envoy of God. The charity that consists in giving alms to
               the poor is the easiest of all charities. There is another
               kind, however, that is much more burdensome, and,
               consequently, more meritorious: forgiving those whom God
               has placed on our path to be instruments of our suffering
               and to put our patience to the test.

                      Life is difficult, I know. It is composed of a thousand
               nothings, which are pinpricks that end up hurting us.
               But we must consider the duties imposed on us, the
               consolations and compensations we receive in return, and
               then we will see that the blessings are more numerous
               than the sorrows. The burden seems less heavy when we
               look to heaven than when our brow is bent toward the
               ground.

                      Courage, my friends; Christ is your model. He
               suffered more than any of you and had nothing for which
               to reproach himself, whereas you have your past to expiate
               and to strengthen you for the future. So be patient; be
               Christian – this word sums up everything.

                                                   A Spirit Friend (Havre, 1862)



               OBEDIENCE AND RESIGNATION


               8. At all points Jesus’ doctrine teaches obedience and
               resignation: two very active companion virtues of meekness,
               although people erroneously confuse them with the negation



                                             197




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 197                                        3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                          CHAPTER IX



               of sentiment and will. Obedience is the consent of reason;
               resignation is the consent of the heart; both are active forces
               because they carry the burden of the trials that insensate
               rebellion lets drop. The coward cannot be resigned, just as
               the proud and selfish person cannot be obedient. Jesus was
               the incarnation of these virtues scorned by materialistic
               antiquity. He came at a time in which Roman society was
               perishing in the bankruptcy of corruption. He came to make
               the triumphs of sacrifice and renunciation of the flesh shine
               in the bosom of downcast humankind.

                    Every generation is thus marked with the stamp of
               either virtue or vice, which must either save or ruin it.
               The virtue of your generation is intellectual activity;
               its vice is moral indifference. I say “activity” only, for a
               genius might suddenly arise and single-handedly discover
               horizons that the multitudes will see only later, whereas
               “activity” is the combining of everyone’s efforts to reach
               a less-grandiose goal, but which nevertheless tests the
               intellectual advancement of that generation. Submit
               yourselves to the thrust we have come to give your spirits.
               Obey the great law of progress, which is the catch-phrase
               of your generation. Woe to lazy spirits, those who close
               off their understanding! Woe to them! For we who are the
               guides of humankind on the march will apply the whip to
               compel their rebellious wills through the two-fold effort of
               brake and spur. All prideful resistance will yield sooner or
               later. But blessed are they who are meek, for they will lend
               a willing ear to our teachings.

                                                          Lazare (Paris, 1863)




                                             198




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 198                                      3/7/2009 18:00:28

                            BLESSED ARE THE MEEK AND PEACE-LOVING



               ANGER


               9. Pride leads you to deem yourselves to be more than you
               really are; you cannot endure any comparison that might
               belittle you. On the contrary, pride makes you consider
               yourselves to be so far above your brothers and sisters
               – whether in spirit, social position or personal advantage
               – that the least parallel irritates and hurts you. And then
               what happens? You give in to anger.

                      Seek the origin of these outbursts of temporary
               insanity that make you resemble brutes, causing you to
               lose your poise and your reason. Seek and you will find
               that they are almost always based on wounded pride. Is
               it not wounded pride at being contradicted that makes
               you reject wise remarks and makes you angrily reject the
               wisest counsels? Even impatience, which often causes
               puerile annoyances, is connected to the importance that
               one attributes to one’s person, before which one thinks
               everyone else should bow down.

                      In their frenzy, angry persons attack everything from
               brute nature to inanimate objects, which they crush
               because they do not obey. Ah! If at such moments they
               could serenely see themselves, they would either be
               afraid of themselves or they would discover that they look
               ridiculous! Let them thereby deduce the impression they
               must have on others. Even if it were for nothing else but
               self-respect, they should make an effort to overcome a
               propensity that makes them an object of pity.


                                             199




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 199                                   3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                          CHAPTER IX



                      If persons would realize that anger does not solve
               anything, that it affects their health and compromises their
               life, they would see that they themselves are its primary
               victim. However, another consideration should especially
               restrain them: the thought that they make everyone
               around them unhappy. If they have a heart, should they
               not regret making those whom they love most to suffer?
               What a deadly grief it would be if in a hot-headed outburst
               they committed an act that they would deplore for the rest
               of their lives!

                      In sum, anger does not exclude certain qualities of the
               heart, but it keeps one from practicing much good and can
               lead to practicing much evil. This fact should be enough
               to motivate efforts to control it. Moreover, Spiritists are
               encouraged for another reason: anger is contrary to charity
               and Christian humility.

                                            A Protector Spirit (Bordeaux, 1863)



               10. According to the very wrong idea that one cannot
               reform one’s own nature, humans think they are to
               be excused from putting forth the effort to correct their
               defects, in which they deliberately delight, or which would
               require too much perseverance to emend. It is thus, for
               example, that individuals inclined toward anger nearly
               always blame it on their temperament. Before regarding
               themselves as blameworthy, they blame their faults on
               their body, thus accusing God for their misdeeds. This is a
               further consequence of the pride that may be found mixed
               in with all their imperfections.



                                             200




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 200                                       3/7/2009 18:00:28

                            BLESSED ARE THE MEEK AND PEACE-LOVING



                      Of     course,      there   are    temperaments   that   lend
               themselves more than others to violence, just as there are
               more flexible muscles that lend themselves better to acts
               of strength. Nonetheless, do not believe that the primary
               cause of anger is to be found there; rather, be convinced
               that a peace-loving spirit, even in an ill-tempered body,
               will always be peace-loving, whereas a violent spirit in a
               lymphatic body will not thereby be meeker. Instead, the
               violence will only take on a different character. By not
               having a suitable organism to second its violence, anger
               will be more concentrated, whereas in the former instance,
               it will be more expansive.

                      Thus, the body does not cause anger in persons who
               do not already have it, just as it does not cause the other
               vices. All virtues and all vices are inherent to the spirit.
               Otherwise, where would the merit and responsibility be? A
               physically handicapped person cannot make him or herself
               whole, because his or her spirit has nothing to do with it;
               but this person can change what is of the spirit if he or she
               has a firm will. My fellow Spiritists, does experience not
               show you how far the power of the will can go in light of the
               truly miraculous transformations that you see happening?
               So tell yourselves that humans do not remain vice-prone
               unless they want to remain vice-prone; those who want to
               correct themselves always can. Otherwise, there would be
               no law of progress for human beings.

                                                            Hahnemann (Paris, 1863)




                                                   201




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 201                                           3/7/2009 18:00:28

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 202   3/7/2009 18:00:28

               CHAPTER X



               Blessed are the merciful
                       x Forgive so that God will forgive you

                       x Reconciliation with one’s adversaries

                       x The sacrifice most pleasing to God

                       x The speck and the plank in one’s eye

                       x Do not judge so that you yourself might not be

                           judged. Let him who is without sin cast the first

                          stone




                       THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                       x Forgiveness of offenses

                       x Indulgence1




               1
                   The Spirits’ Book, questions 886: The true meaning of charity: “Benevolence
               toward everyone, indulgence toward the imperfections of others and forgiveness for
               offenses.” (Emphasis added). – Tr.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 203                                                         3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                            CHAPTER X



               FORGIVE SO THAT GOD WILL FORGIVE YOU


                      1. Blessed are the merciful, for they themselves shall receive
                      mercy. (Mt. 5:7)

                      2. If you forgive others for the wrongs they have committed
                      against you, your heavenly Father will forgive your sins also,
                      but if you do not forgive others when they have offended
                      you, your heavenly Father will not forgive your sins either.
                      (Mt. 6:14-15)

                      3. If your brother has sinned against you, go to him and
                      make his wrong known in private, between you and him. If
                      he listens to you, you will have gained a brother. Then
                      Peter approached him and said, “Lord, how many times
                      shall I forgive my brother when he has sinned against me?
                      Up to seven times?” Jesus answered him, “I do not tell you
                      up to seven times, but up to seventy times seven times.”
                      (Mt. 18:15, 21-22)

               4. Mercy is the compliment of meekness, because whoever
               is not merciful cannot be meek and peaceable. Mercy
               consists in forgetting and forgiving offenses. Hatred and
               rancor denote a soul that is neither advanced nor great.
               Forgetting offenses is proper to the advanced soul, which
               is above the insults that might be directed at it. One is
               always anxious, darkly suspicious and full of bile; the
               other is calm, full of gentleness and charity.

                      Woe to those who say, “I will never forgive,” because
               if they are not condemned by other human beings, they
               certainly will be by God. By what right will they beg
               forgiveness for their wrongs if they themselves do not
               forgive the wrongs of others? When Jesus says to forgive


                                                204




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 204                                            3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                          BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL



               others not seven times but seventy times seven, he teaches
               us that mercy should have no limits.

                      However, there are two quite different ways of forgiving:
               one is great, noble, truly generous, without ulterior motives,
               delicately sparing the self-esteem and susceptibility
               of one’s opponent even when he or she is completely to
               blame; and the second, by which the offended person – or
               the one who thinks he or she has been offended – imposes
               humiliating conditions on the other person and makes
               him or her feel the weight of a forgiveness that angers
               instead of pacifies. If this person offers his or her hand,
               it is not done benevolently but ostentatiously in order to
               be able to tell the whole world, “See how generous I am!”
               In such circumstances, it is impossible for there to be a
               sincere reconciliation for either one. No, in this there is no
               generosity, but a way of satisfying pride. In every dispute,
               the one who shows that he or she is more conciliatory,
               who demonstrates more disinterestedness, charity and
               true greatness of soul, will always win the sympathy of
               impartial individuals.



               RECONCILIATION WITH ONE’S ADVERSARIES


                      5. Be reconciled as quickly as possible with your adversary,
                      while you are with him on the way so that he does not hand
                      you over to the judge, and so that the judge does not hand
                      your over to the Minister of Justice, so that you may not be
                      imprisoned. Verily, I say to you that you will not leave there
                      as long as you have not paid the last farthing. (Mt. 5:25-26)




                                                    205




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 205                                               3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                                CHAPTER X



               6. In the practice of forgiveness and the good in general,
               there is more than a moral effect: there is also a physical
               effect. We know that death does not free us from our
               enemies. In their hatred, vengeful spirits often pursue
               beyond the grave those against whom they harbor rancor;
               thus the proverb that states, “The beast dead, the venom
               is dead”1 is erroneous when applied to human beings. An
               evil spirit awaits the one against whom it wishes evil to
               be imprisoned in the body and less free in order to more
               easily torment it, striking it in its interests or dearest
               affections. In this fact, one can see the cause of most
               cases of obsession, especially those that display a certain
               gravity such as subjugation and possession. Obsessed and
               possessed persons are therefore almost always victims
               of a prior revenge which they probably caused by their
               conduct. God allows this in order to punish them for the
               evil they committed, or if they did not commit it, then for
               having lacked indulgence and charity by refusing to forgive.
               Consequently, from the point of view of one’s future peace-
               of-mind, it is important to repair as quickly as possible the
               wrongs one has committed against one’s neighbor, and to
               forgive one’s enemies in order to eliminate, before death,
               all motives of dissention and all causes based on ulterior
               animosity. In this way, one may make of an obstinate
               enemy in this world a friend in the other – or at least put
               oneself on the side of the good – and God will not allow the
               one who has forgiven to be the target of vengeance. When
               Jesus recommends being reconciled as quickly as possible
               with one’s adversary, it is not only with a view to mitigating

               1
                   French proverbe “Morte la bête, mort le venin.” – Tr.


                                                    206




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 206                                     3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                          BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL



               discords in the course of one’s current existence, but rather
               to keep them from continuing in future ones. “You will not
               leave there,” he says, “as long as you have not paid the
               last farthing,” meaning, as long as you have not completely
               satisfied God’s justice.



               THE SACRIFICE MOST PLEASING TO GOD


                      7. If, therefore, when you present your offering on the altar,
                      you remember that your brother has something against
                      you, leave your gift at the foot of the altar and go first to be
                      reconciled with your brother, and afterward, return to offer
                      your gift. (Mt. 5:23-24)

               8. When Jesus said, “Go first to be reconciled with your
               brother before presenting your offering at the altar,” he
               is teaching that the sacrifice most pleasing to the Lord is
               the sacrificing of one’s resentment; that before presenting
               oneself to God in order to be forgiven, it is necessary to have
               forgiven, and that if a wrong has been committed against
               any brother or sister, it is necessary to have repaired it.
               Only then will the offering be pleasing, because it will
               come from a heart purified of every evil thought. Jesus
               materializes this precept because the Jews were used to
               offering material sacrifices. He had to adapt his words to
               their customs. Christians do not offer material gifts; they
               offer a spiritualized sacrifice, but the precept thereby takes
               on an even greater import. They offer their soul to God
               and that soul must be purified. Entering the temple of the
               Lord, they must leave behind every sentiment of hatred and



                                                    207




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 207                                              3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                            CHAPTER X



               animosity, and every evil thought against their brother or
               sister. Only then will their prayer be taken by the angels to
               the feet of the Eternal One. This is what Jesus is teaching
               by these words: Leave your offering at the foot of the altar
               and go first to be reconciled with your brother or sister if
               you want to be pleasing to the Lord.



               THE SPECK AND THE PLANK IN ONE’S EYE


                      9. How is it that you see a speck in your brother’s eye but
                      you do not see the plank in your own? Or, how is it that you
                      say to your brother, “Let me take a speck out of your eye,”
                      while you have a plank in yours? You hypocrites, first take
                      the plank out of your own eye and then you will be able to
                      take the speck out of your brother’s eye. (Mt. 7:3-5)

               10. One of humankind’s defects consists in seeing someone
               else’s evil before seeing the evil that is within ourselves. In
               order to judge oneself, it would be necessary to see oneself
               in a mirror, stepping outside of oneself somehow and
               regarding oneself as another person, asking: What would
               I think if I saw someone else doing what I am doing? Most
               assuredly it is pride that leads people to disguise their own
               defects, both moral and physical. This fault is essentially
               contrary to charity because true charity is modest, simple
               and non-judgmental. Prideful charity is nonsense, since
               these two sentiments neutralize each other. In fact, how
               can certain people who are vain enough to believe in their
               own self-importance and the supremacy of their own
               qualities possess at the same time enough self-denial to



                                                208




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 208                                          3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                          BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL



               point out in someone else the good that might eclipse their
               own instead of the evil that might make them stand out?
               If pride is the father of many vices, it is also the denial of
               many virtues. Pride may be found to be the basis and the
               motive for nearly all actions. That is why Jesus devoted
               himself to fighting it as the main obstacle to progress.



               DO NOT JUDGE SO THAT YOU YOURSELF MIGHT
               NOT BE JUDGED; LET HIM WHO IS WITHOUT SIN
              CAST THE FIRST STONE


                      11. Do not judge so that you yourself might not be judged, for
                      you will be judged according to your having judged others,
                      and the same measure will be used on you that you have
                      used on them. (Mt. 7:1-2)

                      12. Then, the scribes and Pharisees brought him a woman
                      who had been caught in adultery and stood her in the midst
                      of the people, saying to Jesus, “Master, this woman has just
                      been caught in adultery. Now, the law of Moses orders us to
                      stone adulterers. What, then, is your opinion on the matter?”
                      They said this to test him in order to have a reason to accuse
                      him. However, Jesus kneeled down and began writing on the
                      ground with his finger. When they continued to question him,
                      he stood up and said to them, “Let him among you who is
                      without sin cast the first stone at her.” Then, he kneeled
                      again and continued writing on the ground. But hearing him
                      speak in such a way, they began to leave one by one, the
                      older ones first. Thus, Jesus remained alone with the woman,
                      who was in the middle of the square.



                                                    209




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 209                                            3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                             CHAPTER X



                      Then, Jesus stood up and said to her, “Woman, where are your
                      accusers? Have not any of them condemned you?” She said to
                      him, “No, Lord.” Jesus responded to her, “Neither will I condemn
                      you. Go, and in the future, sin no more.” (Jn. 8:3-11)

               13. “Let him among you who is without sin cast the first
               stone at her,” said Jesus. This maxim makes indulgence
               a duty, for there is no one who does not need indulgence
               in return. Indulgence teaches us that we must not judge
               others more severely than we would judge ourselves, or
               condemn others for what we absolve in ourselves. Before
               blaming someone else’s wrong, let us see if the same
               reproof might not fall upon us.

                      Blame cast at another’s conduct can have two motives:
               to reprimand evil or to discredit the person whose acts
               are being criticized. The latter motive is never excusable,
               because it is defamatory and malicious. The former may
               be praiseworthy, and even become a duty in certain cases
               since some good might result from it, and since without it,
               evil would never be restricted in society. Moreover, is it not
               one’s duty to help with the progress of one’s fellow humans?
               Thus, it would not be right to take the principle, “Do not
               judge if you do not want to be judged” in the absolute
               sense, because the letter kills but the spirit enlivens.

                      Jesus could not have prohibited the condemnation of
               what is evil, since he himself did so and in no uncertain
               terms. What he meant was that the authority to condemn
               is a result of the moral authority of the one who does the
               condemning. To be guilty of what one condemns in someone
               else is to belie such authority; moreover, it removes the



                                                 210




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 210                                              3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                          BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL



               right to restrain. Furthermore, one’s inner awareness denies
               any respect for and any voluntary submission to those
               who, vested with any kind of power, violate the laws and
               principles they are in charge of enforcing. There is no
               legitimate authority in God’s eyes except that which is
               founded on the example of the good it does. This too is what
               the words of Jesus emphasize.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               FORGIVENESS OF OFFENSES


               14. How many times should I forgive my brother or sister?
               Not seven times, but seventy times seven. This is one of
               Jesus’ teachings that should strike your mind the hardest
               and speak to your heart the loudest. Compare these words
               of mercy with the prayer so simple, so concise and so great
               in its aspirations which Jesus gave to his disciples, and you
               will discover the same thought. Jesus – righteousness par
               excellence – responds to Peter: You shall forgive without
               limit; you shall forgive every offense as many times as it
               is committed against you; you shall teach your brothers
               and sisters that forgetfulness of self, which makes them
               invulnerable to attack, evil behavior and insult; you shall
               be meek and humble of heart without ever measuring
               your kindness; in short, you shall do for others what you
               would want your heavenly Father to do for you. Has he not
               forgiven you often? Does he count the number of times his
               forgiveness has descended to wipe away your wrongs?


                                                    211




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 211                                    3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                               CHAPTER X



                       So, listen to Jesus’ answer, and, like Peter, apply it
               to yourselves. Forgive, be indulgent, charitable, generous
               – even lavish – with your love. Give, because the Lord
               will repay you; forgive, because the Lord will forgive you;
               abase yourselves, because the Lord will lift you up; humble
               yourselves, because the Lord will sit you at his right hand.

                       Dearly beloved, go study and comment on these words
               I am addressing to you on behalf of the One who, from
               the heights of the heavenly splendors, always watches
               over you, and continues with love the ungrateful task
               that he began eighteen centuries ago.1 Therefore, forgive
               your brothers and sisters, as you yourselves have need of
               being forgiven. If their actions do you personal harm, it
               is one more reason for you to be indulgent, for the merit
               of forgiveness is proportional to the seriousness of the
               evil. There will be no merit in forgiving the errors of your
               brothers and sisters if they have done only little harm.

                       O Spiritists, never forget that in words as well as
               in actions forgiveness of wrongs must not be an empty
               expression. If you say you are Spiritists, then be so; forget
               the evil that has been done to you and think of one thing
               only: the good you can do. Those who enter upon this path
               must not wander from it even in thought, because they are
               responsible for their thoughts, known by God. Therefore,
               empty your thoughts of any sentiment of rancor. God knows
               what lies at the bottom of each one’s heart. So, happy are
               they who can go to sleep every night, saying: I have nothing
               against my neighbor.

                                                              Simeon (Bordeaux, 1862)

               1
                   This book was written in the late 1800s. – Tr.


                                                    212




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 212                                             3/7/2009 18:00:28

                                          BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL



               15. Forgiving one’s enemies is to ask forgiveness for oneself;
               forgiving one’s friends is to give them proof of friendship;
               forgiving offenses is to show that one has become better.
               Therefore, my friends, forgive so that God may forgive you,
               for if you are hard, demanding and inflexible, if you are
               severe toward even a minor offense, how can you expect
               God to forget that every day you are in ever greater need
               of indulgence? Oh! Woe to those who say, “I shall never
               forgive,” because they speak their own condemnation.
               Moreover, who knows if looking deep down inside you
               might not discover that you yourself were the aggressor?
               Who knows if in the fight that begins as a pinprick and
               ends up as a rupture you did not throw the first punch? If
               an offensive word did not escape you? If you used all the
               moderation necessary? Of course, your adversary erred
               in demonstrating excessive susceptibility, but that is a
               reason for you to be indulgent so that you do not deserve
               the reproach directed at you. Let us assume that you truly
               were offended in a particular instance. Who could say that
               you have not poisoned the matter with reprisal and that
               you have not let what could have been easily forgotten
               degenerate into a serious quarrel? If it depended on you to
               prevent the outcome but you did not, you are blameworthy.
               Finally, let us assume that you have absolutely nothing
               to be blamed for; in that case, you will have even greater
               merit if you show clemency.

                      However, there are two quite different manners of
               forgiving: there is forgiveness from the lips and forgiveness
               from the heart. Many say to their adversaries, “I forgive
               you,” while inwardly they feel a secret pleasure when ills
               befall them, and they tell themselves that they got only


                                                    213




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 213                                     3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER X



               what they deserved. How many say, “I forgive,” and then
               add, “but I’ll never reconcile; I never want to see that
               person again for the rest of my life.” Is that forgiveness
               according to the Gospel? No. True forgiveness – Christian
               forgiveness – is the kind that casts a veil over the past. It
               is the only kind that will be credited to you, for God is not
               satisfied with appearances. God probes the depths of the
               heart and the most secret thoughts. No one deceives him
               with words and futile façades. The complete and absolute
               forgetting of offenses is proper of great souls; rancor is
               always a sign of low-mindedness and inferiority. Do not
               forget that true forgiveness is recognized by actions much
               more than by words.

                                                      Paul, Apostle (Lyon, 1861)



               INDULGENCE


               16. Spiritists, today we would like to speak to you about
               indulgence, that sentiment so sweet, so fraternal that
               all people should have for their brothers and sisters, but
               which few put to good use.

                      Indulgence does not see the defects of others, or if
               it does, it avoids talking about them or publicizing them.
               On the contrary, it hides them so that they do not become
               known, and if malevolence uncovers them, indulgence
               always has an excuse to mitigate them, that is, a plausible
               and genuine excuse, and not one of those that has the
               appearance of mitigating the wrong but actually emphasizes
               it with clever perfidy.



                                             214




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 214                                        3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL



                      Indulgence is never concerned with the wrongs of
               others – unless it can be of assistance – and furthermore,
               it takes care to mitigate them as much as possible. It does
               not make shocking remarks, nor does it have reproach on
               its lips; it counsels only and usually in a quiet manner.
               Whenever you criticize, what conclusion should one derive
               from your words? That you, who reproach, do not practice
               what you condemn and that you are more worthy than
               the guilty party. O People! When will you judge your own
               hearts, your own thoughts, your own actions, without
               concerning yourselves with what your brothers and sisters
               do? When will you look upon yourselves with your stern
               eyes?

                      Therefore, be stern toward yourselves and indulgent
               toward others. Remember God, who judges in the last
               instance, who sees the secret thoughts of each heart, and
               who, consequently, frequently forgives the wrongs that
               you condemn, or condemns those that you excuse, for
               he knows the motives for every action; and bear in mind
               that you, who proclaim loudly, “Anathema!” might perhaps
               have committed even more serious wrongs.

                      Be indulgent, my friends, because indulgence appeals,
               calms and uplifts, whereas sternness discourages, keeps
               away and angers.

                                            Joseph, a Protector Spirit (Bordeaux, 1863)



               17. Be indulgent toward the wrongs of others, whatever
               they might be; do not judge with severity except where your
               own actions are concerned. The Lord will show indulgence


                                                     215




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 215                                               3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER X



               toward you to the degree that you have shown indulgence
               toward others.

                      Uphold the strong: encourage them to persevere.
               Strengthen the weak by showing them the goodness of God,
               who takes the least repentance into consideration. Show
               to all the angel of repentance stretching out its white wings
               over human wrongs and veiling them from the eyes of the
               One who cannot look upon what is impure. Understand
               the infinite mercy of your Father and never forget to say
               to him through your thoughts and especially through your
               actions, “Forgive our offenses as we forgive those who have
               offended us.” Understand well the value of these sublime
               words; not only is their literal meaning praiseworthy, but
               also the teaching they contain.

                      What are you asking of the Lord when you ask him to
               forgive you? Are you asking him only to forget your offenses?
               Forgetting them will leave you with nothing, for if God
               were to limit himself to forgetting your wrongs, he would
               not punish you, but neither would he reward you. Reward
               cannot be payment for the good that is not done, much less
               for the evil that has been done, even if the evil has been
               forgotten. By asking God to forgive your transgressions,
               you are asking him the favor of his grace that you may not
               fall into them again, and for the strength needed to enter
               upon a new pathway, a way of submission and love upon
               which you can add reparation to repentance.

                      Whenever you forgive your brothers and sisters, do
               not content yourselves with casting the veil of forgetfulness
               over their wrongs; that veil is frequently very transparent to



                                             216




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 216                                     3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL



               your eyes. Bring them love at the same time as forgiveness;
               do for them what you would ask your heavenly Father to
               do for you. Replace the anger that defiles with the love
               that purifies. Preach by example the active, inexhaustible
               charity that Jesus has taught you; preach charity just as
               he himself did while he lived upon the earth in full view of
               corporeal eyes, and just as he has continued to do, even
               though he is no longer visible except to the eyes of the
               spirit. Follow his divine model; walk in his footsteps: they
               will lead you to the place of refuge where you will find
               repose after struggle. Like him, bear all your crosses and
               thoughtfully but courageously mount your Calvary: on its
               top is glorification.

                                                     Jean, Bishop of Bordeaux (1862)



               18. Dear friends, be strict with yourselves but indulgent
               toward the weaknesses of others. Doing so is a further
               practice of holy charity that few observe. All of you have
               evil tendencies to overcome, defects to correct and habits
               to change. All of you have a burden that is heavier or less
               heavy, but which you must get rid of in order to scale the
               peak of the mountain of progress. Then why are you so
               all-seeing toward your neighbor, yet so blind regarding
               yourselves? When will you stop noticing the speck in
               your brother’s or sister’s eye while not noticing the plank
               that blinds you and causes you to go from downfall to
               downfall? Believe in your friends, the Spirits. All men and
               women proud enough to deem themselves superior in
               virtue and merit to their incarnate brothers and sisters



                                                    217




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 217                                            3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER X



               are foolish and at fault, and God will punish them on the
               day of his justice. The true character of charity is modesty
               and humility, which consist in seeing the defects of others
               only on the surface and in taking an interest in valuing
               whatever is good and virtuous in them, for if the human
               heart is an abyss of corruption, there is always in a few of
               its hidden-most corners the seed of a few good sentiments
               and a live spark of spiritual essence.

                      O Spiritism, consoling and blessed doctrine, happy
               are they who know you and take advantage of the salutary
               teachings of the Spirits of the Lord! The way is illuminated
               for them, and throughout their entire journey they can read
               these words that point to the means for them to reach the
               end: practical charity, charity of the heart, charity toward
               one’s neighbors and toward oneself; in other words, charity
               toward all and love for God above all things, because love
               for God summarizes all duties and it is impossible to love
               him truly without practicing charity, which he made into a
               law for all his creatures.

                                            Dufetre, Bishop of Nevers (Bordeaux)



               19. Since no one is perfect, does it follow that no one has
               the right to reprehend one’s neighbor?

                      Of course not, since each of you must labor for the
               progress of all, especially those whose tutelage has been
               entrusted to you. But you must reprehend others with
               moderation, with a useful purpose, and not as is usually
               done: for the pleasure of denigrating them. In this latter
               instance, criticism is wickedness; in the former, it is a


                                               218




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 218                                        3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL



               duty, which charity commands to be achieved with all the
               care possible. Moreover, the criticism one casts at others
               must at the same time be directed at oneself, asking if one
               does not deserve it more.

                                                              St. Louis (Paris, 1860)


               20. Would it be reprehensible to observe others’ imperfections
               when it does not result in a benefit for them, and when one
               does not divulge them?

                      Everything depends on the intent. Of course, no
               one is forbidden from seeing evil where there is evil.
               Furthermore, it would be unsuitable to see only the good
               everywhere: such an illusion would be harmful to progress.
               The error is in making the observation to the detriment
               of one’s neighbor, unnecessarily discrediting him or her
               committing a public eye. It would also be reprehensible
               to make such an observation only to take pleasure in a
               sentiment of malice and for the satisfaction of catching
               others committing a wrong. The opposite applies, when,
               casting a veil over evil to hide it from the public, we limit
               ourselves to observing it for our own evolution, that is,
               to study it in order to avoid what we censure in others.
               Furthermore, is not this observation useful to the moralist?
               How could the moralist paint the defects of humankind
               without studying the models?

                                                              St. Louis (Paris, 1860)



               21. Are there cases in which it is useful to disclose someone
               else’s evil?


                                                    219




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 219                                             3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER X



                      This question is very delicate, and it is here that one
               must appeal to charity rightly understood. If a person’s
               imperfections are harmful to that person alone, it would
               never be useful to disclose them. However, if they might
               cause harm to others, it is preferable to take into account
               the interests of the majority against the interests of only one.
               Depending on the circumstances, unmasking hypocrisy
               and falsehood may comprise an obligation because it is
               better for one person to fall than for several to become his
               or her victims. In such a case, one must weigh the sum of
               the advantages and disadvantages.

                                                        St. Louis (Paris, 1860)




                                             220




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 220                                       3/7/2009 18:00:29

               CHAPTER XI


               Loving one’s neighbor
               as oneself

                      x The greatest commandment

                      x Render unto Caesar what is Caesar’s



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x The law of love

                      x Selfishness

                      x Faith and charity

                      x Charity toward criminals

                      x Should one risk one’s own life for a criminal?




               THE GREATEST COMMANDMENT


                      1. The Pharisees, having learned that he had silenced the
                      Sadducees, gathered together. And one of them, a doctor of




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 221                                        3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                             CHAPTER XI



                      the law, came to him to ask him this question in order to
                      test him: “Master, which is the greatest commandment of the
                      law?” Jesus answered him, “You shall love the Lord your God
                      with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your mind;
                      this is the greatest and first commandment. And this is the
                      second, which is similar to it: You shall love your neighbor as
                      yourself. All the law and the prophets are contained in these
                      two commandments.” (Mt. 22:34-40)

                      2. Do unto men everything you would want them to do unto
                      you, for such is the law and the prophets. (Mt. 7:12)

                      Treat all men just as you would want them to treat you.
                      (Lk. 6:31)

                      3. The kingdom of heaven is like a king who wanted to settle
                      accounts with his servants. And having begun to do so,
                      one who owed him ten thousand talents was presented to
                      him. But since he did not have the means to repay them, his
                      master ordered him, his wife, his children and everything he
                      owned to be sold in order to satisfy the debt. The servant,
                      throwing himself at his feet, begged him, saying, “Lord, have
                      a little patience and I will repay you the full sum.” Then the
                      servant’s master, touched with compassion, allowed him to
                      go and forgave his debt. However, having barely left, the
                      servant met one of his fellow servants who owed him one
                      hundred denarii, took him by the throat, and nearly strangling
                      him, said to him, “Pay me what you owe.” His fellow servant
                      threw himself at his feet and begged him, saying, “Have a
                      little patience and I will repay you the full sum.” But the other




                                                 222




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 222                                               3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                 LOVING ONE’S NEIGHBOR AS ONESELF



                      did not want to listen to him, and upon leaving, had him put
                      in prison to be kept there until he paid him what he owed.

                      When his other fellow servants saw what had happened,
                      they were extremely upset and informed their master about
                      everything that had occurred. Then, the master had the first
                      servant brought to him and said, “You evil servant, I exempted
                      you from all that you owed me because you begged me. Thus,
                      should not you also have had mercy on your fellow servant,
                      just as I had mercy on you?” And the master, enraged, handed
                      him over to the jailers until he paid everything he owed.

                      It is thus that my Father who is in heaven will treat you if
                      from the bottom of your heart you do not forgive your brother
                      for the wrongs he has committed against you. (Mt. 18:23-35)

               4. Loving one’s neighbor as oneself; doing unto others what
               we would want them to do unto us is the most complete
               expression of charity there is, because it sums up all our
               duties toward our neighbor. One could not have a surer
               guide in this respect than the commandment that one
               should do unto others what one desires for oneself. By what
               right would one demand from one’s fellow beings better
               behavior, more indulgence, benevolence and dedication
               than what one shows toward them? The practice of these
               two maxims leads to the destruction of selfishness. When
               humans take them as a rule for their conduct and as a
               foundation for their institutions, they will understand true
               fraternity and will ensure that peace and justice reign
               among them. There will be neither hatred nor dissention,
               but only unity, harmony and mutual benevolence.



                                                223




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 223                                             3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                             CHAPTER XI



               RENDER UNTO CAESAR WHAT IS CAESAR’S


                      5. Then the Pharisees, having gone out, decided amongst
                      themselves to ensnare him in his own words. Thus, they sent
                      to him their disciples with the Herodians to say to him, “Master,
                      we know that you are truthful and that you teach the way
                      of God through the truth, without regard for whomever one
                      might be, because you do not take into consideration men’s
                      positions. So tell us your opinion on this: is it permissible for
                      us to pay taxes to Caesar or not?

                      Jesus, however, knowing their malice, said to them, “You
                      hypocrites, why are you testing me? Show me the coin you
                      use for the tax.” And having presented him with a denarius,
                      Jesus said to them, “Whose image and inscription is this?”
                      “Caesar’s,” they said to him. Then Jesus answered them,
                      “Then render unto Caesar what is Caesar’s and to God what
                      is God’s.”

                      Having heard him speak like this, they marveled at his
                      response, and leaving him, they went away. (Mt. 22:15-22;
                      Mk. 12:13-17)

               6. The question posed to Jesus was motivated by the
               circumstance in which the Jews dreaded the tax imposed
               on them by the Romans and thus they made it a religious
               issue. A large political party had been formed to repeal
               the tax. The payment of the tax was thus a current matter
               of outrage for them; otherwise, the question they put to
               Jesus, “Is it permissible for us to pay taxes to Caesar or
               not?” would not have made any sense. The question was a
               trap, because, depending on his response, they hoped to
               incite either the Roman authorities or the Jewish dissidents



                                                 224




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 224                                               3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                 LOVING ONE’S NEIGHBOR AS ONESELF



               against him. But “Jesus, knowing their malice,” eluded
               the problem and gave them a lesson in justice by telling
               them to pay to each what was owed. (See the Introduction,
               section on Publicans)

               7. This maxim: “Render unto Caesar what is Caesar’s”
               should not be understood in a restrictive ands absolute
               manner. Like all Jesus’ teachings, it is a general principle
               summed up in a practical and usual form and is deduced
               from a particular circumstance. This principle is a
               consequence of the one that suggests acting toward others
               as we would want them to act toward us. It condemns all
               physical or moral harm caused to others and any violation
               of their interests. It prescribes respect for others’ rights, just
               as each one desires his or her own rights to be respected;
               it extends to the fulfillment of duties toward family, society
               and authorities as well as toward individuals.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               THE LAW OF LOVE


               8. Love summarizes Jesus’ doctrine in its entirety because
               it is the sentiment par excellence, and sentiments are
               instincts raised to the height of the degree of progress
               accomplished. At their origin, humans have only instincts;
               more advanced and corrupted, they have only sensations;
               more educated and purified, they have sentiments. The
               exquisite apex of sentiment is love, not love in the ordinary
               sense of the term, but that inner sun that condenses and
               joins at its ardent focal point all supra-human aspirations


                                               225




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 225                                         3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER XI



               and revelations. The law of love replaces the personality with
               the union of all beings and extinguishes societal misery.
               Happy are they who, overcoming their human nature, love
               with a great love their brothers and sisters in suffering!
               Happy are they who love, for they know the anguish
               neither of the soul nor of the body. Their feet are light and
               they live as though transported outside themselves. When
               Jesus spoke the divine word love, it made people tremble,
               and martyrs, filled with hope, descend into the arena.

                      Spiritism in turn has come to speak a second word
               of the divine alphabet. Pay attention, for that word lifts
               the headstones from the empty graves: triumphing over
               death, reincarnation reveals to astonished humans their
               intellectual heritage. This word no longer leads them
               to their deaths, but to the conquest of their own being,
               elevated and transfigured. Blood redeemed the spirit, and
               today the spirit must redeem humans from matter.

                      I stated that, at their origin, humans had only instincts;
               therefore, those in whom the instincts dominate are closer
               to their starting point than to their goal. In order to advance
               toward the goal, they must overcome the instincts for the
               sake of the sentiments, that is, perfect the sentiments
               while dominating the latent seeds of matter. The instincts
               are the germination and the embryos of sentiment; they
               bring with them progress, just as the acorn contains the
               oak, and less advanced individuals are those who, ridding
               themselves little by little of their cocoon, remain enslaved
               to their instincts. The spirit must be cultivated like a field.


                                              226




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 226                                        3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                 LOVING ONE’S NEIGHBOR AS ONESELF



               All future wealth depends on today’s labor, and much
               more besides earthly goods, labor will bring you glorious
               elevation. It is then that, comprehending the law of love
               that unites all beings, you shall find in it the sweet joys of
               the soul, which are preludes to the joys of heaven.

                                                           Lazare (Paris, 1862)



               9. Love is the divine essence, and from beginning to end
               you possess in the depths of your soul the flame of that
               sacred fire. It is a fact that you have been able to prove
               over and over again; the vilest individual, the most abject,
               the most criminal, holds for another person or some object
               a living and ardent affection impervious to anything that
               could diminish it, often reaching sublime proportions.

                      I said for “another person or some object,” because
               amongst you there are individuals who spend the
               treasures of the abundant love in their hearts on animals,
               plants and even physical objects: misanthropes of sorts,
               who complain about humankind in general and resist the
               natural inclinations of their soul as they search outside
               themselves for affection and sympathy. They reduce the
               law of love to the level of instinct. But no matter what they
               do, they will be unable to repress the living seed that God
               planted in their hearts at their creation. This seed develops
               and grows with morality and intelligence, and although
               restrained by selfishness, it is the source of the holy and
               kind virtues which generate sincere and lasting affections,



                                               227




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 227                                       3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER XI



               and which help you to travel the rugged and arid course of
               human existence.

                      There are some to whom the trial of reincarnation
               is repugnant because it implies that others take part in
               the affectionate relationships of which they are jealous.
               Poor brothers and sisters! It is your affection that has
               made you selfish; your love is confined to a closed circle of
               family and friends, and nobody else matters to you. Well!
               In order to practice the law of love as God intended it,
               you must progressively arrive at loving all your brothers
               and sisters indiscriminately. The task will be long and
               difficult, but it shall be accomplished. God wills it, and
               the law of love is the first and most important precept of
               your new doctrine because it is what will someday kill
               selfishness under any form in which it may appear, for
               besides personal selfishness, there is also family, caste
               and national selfishness. Jesus said, “Love your neighbor
               as yourselves.” Now what is the extent of one’s neighbor?
               Family, sect, nation? No. It is the whole of humankind.
               On more highly evolved worlds, it is the mutual love that
               harmonizes and guides the advanced spirits who inhabit
               them, and your planet, destined for impending progress
               due to its social transformation, will see its inhabitants
               practice this sublime law, the reflection of the Divinity.

                      The effects of the law of love are the moral betterment
               of the human race and happiness during earthly life. The
               most rebellious and the meanest shall reform themselves
               when they see the benefits produced by practicing this:
               Do not do unto others what you would not want them to do



                                             228




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 228                                     3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                 LOVING ONE’S NEIGHBOR AS ONESELF



               unto you; on the contrary, do unto them all the good that
               is within your ability.

                      Do not believe in the sterility and hardness of the
               human heart; in spite of itself, it yields to true love. Love
               is a magnet that it cannot resist, and contact with love
               enlivens and fertilizes the seeds of the virtue that lies
               latent within it. As a dwelling place of trial and exile, the
               earth will then be purified by that sacred fire, and will
               see the practice of charity, humility, patience, devotion,
               self-denial, resignation and sacrifice – all virtues that are
               the offspring of love. So, do not tire of hearing the words of
               John the Evangelist. You know that when infirmity and old
               age suspended the course of his preaching, he did nothing
               but repeat these sweet words: “My little children, love one
               another.”

                      Dear brothers and sisters, take advantage of these
               lessons. Their practice is difficult, but the soul will derive
               immense good from them. Believe me; put forth the
               sublime effort that I ask of you: “Love one another,” and
               you will see earth very soon transformed and made into
               an Elysium, where the souls of the righteous will go to
               enjoy repose.

                                                      Fenelon (Bordeaux, 1861)



               10. My dear co-disciples, the Spirits present here tell you
               through my voice: “Love much so that you may be loved.”
               This thought is so truthful that in it you will find everything
               that consoles and assuages the hardships of each day.



                                               229




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 229                                      3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER XI



               Better still, by practicing this wise maxim you will rise so
               far above matter that you will spiritualize yourselves before
               your earthly decease. Having developed within you the
               understanding of the future, Spiritist studies provide you
               with a certainty: your ascension toward God, with all the
               promises that respond to your soul’s aspirations. You must
               also uplift yourselves high enough to judge things without
               the constraints of matter and not condemn your neighbor
               before having directed your thought toward God.

                      In the deepest sense of the word, to love means
               being loyal, honest, and conscientious in order to do unto
               others what you would want done unto you. It means
               searching around yourselves for the inner meaning of all
               the hardships that oppress your brothers and sisters so
               that you may bring them relief. It means regarding the
               great human family as one’s own, for you will meet this
               family in a certain time on more advanced worlds, and
               the spirits who compose it are, like yourselves, children of
               God destined to evolve forever. That is why you must not
               refuse your brothers and sisters what God has freely given
               you, because you, on your part, will be very happy if your
               brothers and sisters give you what you need. Therefore,
               always offer a word of hope and support to all who suffer,
               so that you may be wholly loving and righteous.

                      Believe that these wise words, “Love much so that
               you may be loved,” will open the way for you; they are
               revolutionary and follow a steady and invariable course.
               But you have already gained much, you who are listening
               to me; you are infinitely better than you were a hundred
               years ago. You have changed so much for your own good



                                             230




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 230                                    3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                 LOVING ONE’S NEIGHBOR AS ONESELF



               that you have accepted without complaint a multitude of
               new ideas concerning liberty and fraternity, which you
               rejected before. And in another hundred years you will
               easily accept ideas that as yet have not been able to enter
               your minds.

                      Now that the Spiritist movement has taken such
               a big step, you can see how quickly the ideas of justice
               and renewal contained in the Spirits’ dictations are being
               accepted by the average intellectual world. This is because
               such ideas respond to everything divine within you; it is
               because you have been prepared by a fertile seed: that
               of the past century1, which implanted within society the
               great ideas of progress. And since everything is linked
               together under the orders of the Most High, all lessons
               received and accepted will be contained in that universal
               exchange of love for one’s neighbor. Through it, incarnate
               spirits, judging and sensing things better, will join hands
               throughout the confines of your planet; they will join with
               each other to understand and love one another, to destroy
               all injustices and all the causes of misunderstanding
               among peoples.

                      The grand concept of renewal through Spiritism –
               described so well in The Spirits’ Book – will produce the
               great miracle for the century to come: the uniting of all
               humankind’s material and spiritual interests through the
               full understanding of this maxim: “Love much so that you
               may be loved.”

                   Sanson, former member of the Parisian Spiritist Society (1863)

               1
                   That is, the 18th century. – Tr.


                                                      231




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 231                                         3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER XI



               SELFISHNESS


               11. Selfishness – that plague on humankind – must
               disappear from the earth, whose moral progress it hinders.
               To Spiritism the task is reserved of enabling earth to
               ascend in the hierarchy of worlds. Thus, selfishness is the
               target at which all true believers must aim their weapons,
               their strength and their courage. I say “their courage”
               because more courage is needed to overcome oneself
               than to overcome other people. Let all of you, therefore,
               make every effort to fight selfishness within you, for that
               monster that devours all minds, that child of pride, is the
               source of all the miseries of this world. It is the negation of
               charity, and consequently, the greatest obstacle to human
               happiness.

                      Jesus has given you the example of charity; Pontius
               Pilate, that of selfishness, for while the Righteous One
               was about to walk the holy stations of his martyrdom,
               Pilate washed his hands, saying, “What is this to me?
               This is a righteous man; why do you want to crucify him?”
               Nonetheless, he let him be led to his execution.

                      It is to this antagonism between charity and
               selfishness; it is to the invasion of the human heart by
               this leprosy that Christianity owes the fact that it has not
               completed its entire mission. It is upon you, new apostles
               of the faith and whom the high order spirits enlighten,
               that the job and duty of uprooting that evil has fallen so
               as to give Christianity all its power and to clear the way
               of the obstacles that hinder its forward progress. Uproot



                                             232




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 232                                      3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                 LOVING ONE’S NEIGHBOR AS ONESELF



               selfishness from the earth so that earth can ascend the
               scale of worlds, for the time has come for humankind to
               don the toga of manhood1, and to do so, you must first
               uproot selfishness from your hearts.

                                                          Emmanuel (Paris, 1861)



               12. If people were to mutually love one another, charity would
               be practiced more perfectly; however, for this to happen,
               you would have to make an effort to free yourselves of that
               breastplate covering your hearts so that you may be more
               sensitive to those who suffer. Hardness kills good sentiments;
               Christ never rebuffed anyone; all those who came to him, no
               matter who, were never rejected: the adulterous woman and
               the criminal were both helped by him; he never feared that
               his own reputation would suffer because of it. So, when will
               you take him as the model for all your actions? If charity were
               to reign on earth, evil would no longer have predominance; it
               would flee in shame; it would hide itself because everywhere
               it would find itself out-of-place. That is when evil would
               disappear – you can be sure of it.

                      Start by making an example of yourselves; be
               charitable toward everybody indiscriminately; make an
               effort not to pay any attention to those who regard you
               with disdain, and leave to God the burden of all justice,
               because each day in his kingdom he separates the wheat
               from the tares.


               1
                 At the age of 15, boys of ancient Rome were allowed to use the white
               toga symbolizing manhood. The imagery used in this message symbolizes
               the maturity of the planet. – Tr.


                                                233




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 233                                             3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER XI



                      Selfishness is the negation of charity; now, without
               charity there will be no peace for society; I would state
               further that there will be no safety. With selfishness and
               pride – which walk hand in hand – life will always be a
               pathway for the shrewdest, a conflict of interests in which
               the holiest affections are trampled on, where not even the
               sacred ties of family are respected.

                                                            Pascal (Sens, 1862)



               FAITH AND CHARITY


               13. My dear children, not long ago I told you that charity
               without faith is not enough to maintain among people a
               social order capable of making them happy. I should have
               said that charity is impossible without faith. Actually, you
               can find generous impulses even among persons without
               a religion, but that austere charity that is practiced only
               through self-denial, through a continual sacrifice of all
               selfish interest, can occur only if there is faith to inspire it,
               for nothing except faith can enable us to bear the cross of
               this life with courage and perseverance.

                      Yes, my children, it is in vain that, eager for
               gratification, people delude themselves about their destiny
               in this world by pretending that it is permissible for them
               to concern themselves solely with their own happiness.
               Of course, God has created us to be happy in eternity;
               meanwhile, earthly life ought to be used exclusively for
               our moral improvement, which is easier to accomplish
               with the help of the physical organs and the material



                                             234




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 234                                        3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                 LOVING ONE’S NEIGHBOR AS ONESELF



               world. Without taking into account the ordinary ups and
               downs of life, the diversity of your tastes, your tendencies
               and your needs, earthly life is also a way of perfecting
               yourselves by practicing charity, for it is only through
               mutual concessions and sacrifices that you can maintain
               harmony among such diverse elements.

                      You would be correct, however, in stating that people
               are meant to be happy in this world if they would seek
               happiness not in material pleasures but in the good. The
               history of Christianity tells of martyrs who went joyfully
               to their deaths. In order to be Christians in your society
               today, neither death by martyrdom nor the sacrifice of
               your life is needed, but only and merely the sacrifice of
               your selfishness, pride and vanity. You shall triumph if
               charity inspires you and if faith upholds you.

                                                A Protector Spirit (Krakow, 1861)



               CHARITY TOWARD CRIMINALS


               14. True charity is one of the most sublime teachings that
               God has given to the world. Complete fraternity ought to
               exist among the true disciples of his Doctrine. You must
               love unfortunates and criminals as God’s creatures, to
               whom forgiveness and mercy will be granted if they repent,
               as is the case with you for the wrongs that you commit
               against his law. Regard yourselves as more reprehensible
               and guilty than those to whom you refuse forgiveness and
               commiseration, because quite often they do not know God
               as you do, and less will be asked of them than of you.


                                               235




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 235                                         3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER XI



                      Do not judge; oh! Do not judge, my dear friends, for
               the judgment you render will be more severely applied
               to you, and you have need of indulgence for the sins you
               continually commit. Do you not know that there are many
               acts that are crimes in the eyes of the God of purity, but
               which the world does not even regard as light offenses?

                      True charity does not consist only in the alms you
               give or even in the consoling words that might accompany
               them. No, this is not what God demands of you. The sublime
               charity taught by Jesus also consists in the benevolence
               always granted in all things toward your neighbor. You can
               even exercise this sublime virtue on many individuals who
               do not need alms, but who words of love, consolation and
               encouragement will lead to the Lord.

                      I will say once more that the times are near when
               widespread fraternity will reign on this globe; the law of
               Christ is what will govern humans, and that law alone
               will be the restraint and hope that will lead souls to the
               blessed realms. Thus, love one another as children of the
               same Father. Do not set up differences between you and
               those who are unfortunate, for God wills for everyone to
               be equal. Therefore, despise no one. God allows great
               criminals to dwell amongst you to serve you as a lesson.
               Soon, when humans have been led to the true laws of God,
               such lessons will no longer be needed, and all impure and
               rebellious spirits will be relegated to lower worlds according
               to their inclinations.




                                             236




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 236                                     3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                 LOVING ONE’S NEIGHBOR AS ONESELF



                      You owe to those of whom I speak the help of your
               prayers – that is true charity. You do not have to say of
               criminals, “They are wretched; they must be expunged
               from the earth; the death that is inflicted on them is too
               kind for that type of individual.” No, you must not speak
               like that. Look at your model Jesus. What would he say if
               he saw such unfortunate persons next to him? He would
               grieve for them; he would regard them as truly needy, sick
               persons and would extend his hand to them. You cannot
               do this in reality, but you can at least pray for them and
               assist their spirits in the few moments they must yet spend
               on your earth. Repentance may touch their hearts if you
               pray with faith. They are your neighbors just as the best
               individuals are; like yours, their wandering and rebellious
               souls were created to become perfect. So help them out of
               their quagmire and pray for them.

                                               Elizabeth de France (Havre, 1862)



               SHOULD ONE RISK ONE’S OWN LIFE FOR A CRIMINAL?


               15. A man is in danger of death; in order to save him, one
               must risk one’s own life. However, it is known that he is a
               criminal, and that if he escapes death, he will be able to
               commit more crimes. In spite of this fact, should one risk
               one’s life to save him?

                      This is a very serious question, one that a spirit
               naturally could face. I will respond in accordance with my
               moral advancement, since the issue is whether or not one
               should risk one’s life for a criminal. Devotion is blind; one


                                               237




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 237                                        3/7/2009 18:00:29

                                          CHAPTER XI



               lends aid to an enemy; therefore, one must also lend aid
               to an enemy of society – a criminal, in other words. Do
               you think that you will only tear this criminal away from
               death? Perhaps, it will be from his entire past life. Consider
               the possibility that, in those quick instants that drag the
               final minutes of life from him, this lost man returns to his
               past life, or rather, his past life arises before him. Death,
               perhaps, is coming too soon for him; reincarnation could
               be terrible. So rush to his aid! You, whom the Spiritist
              science has enlightened, rush to him and snatch him
              from his condemnation, and then perhaps the person who
              would have died cursing you will instead throw himself
              into your arms. You should not ask yourselves, however,
              if he is going to do so or not; just go to his aid, because in
              saving him you obey that voice of the heart that tells you,
              “You can save him, so save him!”

                                                       Lamennais (Paris, 1862)




                                             238




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 238                                      3/7/2009 18:00:30

               CHAPTER XII


               Love your enemies
                      x Render good for evil

                      x Discarnate enemies

                      x If someone strikes your right cheek, offer him the
                      other also



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x Vengeance

                      x Hatred

                      x Dueling




               RENDER GOOD FOR EVIL


                      1. You have learned that it was said: “You shall love your
                      neighbor and hate your enemies.” But I say to you: Love your
                      enemies; do good to those who hate you and pray for those
                      who persecute and malign you so that you may be children
                      of your Father who is in heaven, who makes the sun rise on
                      the good and on the evil, and the rain fall on the just and the
                      unjust, for if you love only those who love you, what reward




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 239                                             3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                           CHAPTER XII



                      will you receive from it? Do not the Publicans also do that?
                      And if you greet only your brothers, what are you doing that
                      others do not? Do not the Publicans do the same? I say to
                      you that if your justice is not more abundant than that of the
                      scribes and the Pharisees, you will not enter the kingdom of
                      heaven. (Mt. 5:20, 43-47)

                      2. If you love only those who love you, what reward will you
                      have, since even sinners also love those who love them? And
                      if you do good only to those who do good to you, what reward
                      will you have, since even sinners do the same thing? And if
                      you lend only to those from whom you can expect the same
                      favor, what reward will you have, since even sinners lend to
                      each another in order to receive the same advantage? But as
                      for you, love your enemies, do good to all and lend without
                      expecting anything, and then your reward will be very great
                      and you will be children of the Most High, who is good to
                      ingrates and even the wicked. Thus, be full of mercy just as
                      your God is full of mercy. (Lk. 6:32-36)

               3. If love toward one’s neighbor is the principle of charity,
               loving one’s enemies is its sublime application, for such
               a virtue is one of the greatest victories attainable over
               selfishness and pride.

                      However, there is usually a misunderstanding as to
               the meaning of the word love in this context. Jesus did
               not mean by these words that one must have for one’s
               enemy the tenderness that one would have for a brother,
               sister or friend. Love presupposes trust, and we could not
               trust someone who we know means us harm. We could not
               have the same effusion of friendship with such a person,
               knowing that he or she is capable of abusing it. Among



                                                  240




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 240                                            3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          LOVE YOUR ENEMIES



               persons who distrust one another, the bonds of affinity
               cannot be the same as those that exist among those who
               are in communion of thought. Finally, one cannot feel the
               same pleasure upon meeting an enemy that one feels upon
               meeting a friend.

                      Furthermore, this sentiment results from a physical
               law: the law of assimilation and repulsion of fluids.
               A malevolent thought emits a fluidic current whose
               impression is painful; a benevolent thought envelops
               you in a pleasant emanation. Hence the difference in
               sensations one experiences when close to a friend or an
               enemy. To love one’s enemies, therefore, cannot mean that
               one should not make a difference between them and one’s
               friends. This precept seems difficult, even impossible to
               practice, only because people have wrongly believed that
               it prescribes giving friends and enemies the same place
               in their hearts. Since the poverty of the human language
               forces us to use the same term to express the various
               nuances of sentiments, reason calls us to differentiate
               them according to each case.

                      To love one’s enemies, therefore, does not mean
               holding for them an affection that is not natural, since
               contact with an enemy makes the heart beat in a much
               different way than does contact with a friend. It means
               holding neither hatred, rancor nor desires for vengeance
               against them; it means forgiving them unconditionally and
               without ulterior motives for the evil they have caused us;
               it means not setting up any obstacles to reconciliation; it
               means wanting the good for them instead of wishing them



                                                 241




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 241                                  3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          CHAPTER XII



               evil; it means rejoicing instead of despairing for the good
               that reaches them; it means extending to them a helping
               hand in case of necessity; it means abstaining either in
               word or act from anything that might harm them; finally,
               it means repaying their evil with good in everything with no
               intention of humiliating them. Whoever does this fulfills the
               conditions of the commandment: Love your enemies.

               4. Loving one’s enemies is absurd to disbelievers; those for
               whom the present life is everything see in their enemies
               only noxious beings who disturb their peace-of-mind, and
               from whom they believe only death can free them. Hence
               the desire for vengeance; they have no interest in forgiving
               unless it is to satisfy their pride in the eyes of the world.
               In certain cases, forgiveness even seems to them like a
               weakness unworthy of them. Even if they do not seek
               outright revenge, they nevertheless harbor rancor and a
               secret desire for evil.

                      For believers – and especially for Spiritists – the way
               of seeing things is different because they consider both
               the past and the future, between which their present life
               is only a dot. They know that, because of the very destiny
               of the earth, they must expect to meet up with evil and
               perverse people; that the wickedness of which they are
               the target makes up part of the trials they must undergo,
               and their elevated point of view renders the vicissitudes
               less bitter, whether they come from things or other people.
               If they do not complain about their trials, they must not
               murmur against those who serve as their instruments. If,
               instead of complaining, they thank God for putting them



                                              242




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 242                                     3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          LOVE YOUR ENEMIES



               to the test, they should thank the hand that furnishes them
               the opportunity to prove their patience and resignation.
               This thought naturally disposes them to forgiveness.
               Moreover, they feel that the more generous they are, the
               more uplifted they are in their own eyes, and they find
               themselves to be beyond the reach of malevolent attacks
               from their enemies.

                      Persons who occupy elevated positions in the world do
               not feel offended by the insults of those whom they regard
               as their inferiors. The same applies in the moral world for
               those who lift themselves above materialistic humanity.
               They understand that hate and rancor degrade and debase
               them; therefore, to be above their adversaries, they must
               have a bigger, nobler and more generous soul.



               DISCARNATE ENEMIES


               5. Spiritists have yet other reasons for being tolerant of
               their enemies. First of all, they know that wickedness is
               not a permanent state for humans; that it is due to a
               momentary imperfection, and that just as children correct
               themselves of their faults, evil people will someday
               acknowledge their wrongs and become good.

                      They also know that death frees them only from the
               physical presence of their enemies, and that their enemies
               can pursue them with their hatred even after having left the
               earth behind; that their vengeance thus fails in its objective,
               and, to the contrary, has the effect of causing a greater
               anger that can continue from one existence to the next.


                                                 243




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 243                                      3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          CHAPTER XII



               It is Spiritism’s responsibility to show through experience
               and the law that governs the relations between the visible
               and invisible worlds that the expression, “extinguishing
               hatred with blood” is radically erroneous, and that what
               is, in fact, the truth is that blood preserves hatred even
               beyond the grave. Consequently, Spiritism must present a
               positive reason and a practical usefulness for forgiveness
               and Christ’s sublime maxim: Love your enemies. There is
               no heart so perverse that it would not be touched by good
               behavior, even without being conscious of it. Through good
               conduct, one removes at the least any pretext for reprisals,
               and can turn enemies into friends both before and after
               his or her death. Through bad behavior we anger them,
               and it is then that they serve as instruments of God’s justice
               for punishing those who have not forgiven.

               6. One can therefore have enemies among both incarnates
               and discarnates. The enemies of the invisible world express
               their malevolence through the obsessions and subjugations
               of which so many persons are the target, and which are
               one variety of life’s trials. Trials like these, just like other
               trials, help one to advance and should be accepted with
               resignation and as the result of the inferior nature of the
               terrestrial globe. If there were no evil people on the earth,
               there would be no evil spirits around it. Consequently,
               if one must have indulgence and benevolence for one’s
               incarnate enemies, one must also have them for those who
               are discarnate.

                      In times past, blood victims were sacrificed to placate
               infernal gods, who were none other than evil spirits. These



                                              244




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 244                                       3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          LOVE YOUR ENEMIES



               infernal gods were succeeded by demons, who are the same
               thing. Spiritism has come to show that these demons are
               none other than the souls of wicked humans who have not
               yet gotten rid of their material instincts; that nothing can
               placate them except the sacrifice of one’s hatred, that is, by
               showing them charity; that charity not only has the effect
               of stopping them from practicing evil, but it also can lead
               them to the path of the good and contribute toward their
               salvation. It is thus that the maxim, “Love your enemies” is
               not limited to the narrow circle of the earth and the present
               life, but is part of the great law of universal solidarity and
               fraternity.



               IF SOMEONE STRIKES YOUR RIGHT CHEEK, OFFER
               HIM THE OTHER ALSO


                      7. You have learned that it was said, “An eye for an eye and
                      a tooth for a tooth.” I am telling you not to resist the evil that
                      others might want to do to you; but if someone strikes your
                      right cheek, offer him the other also; and if someone wants
                      to sue you to take your tunic, leave him your cloak also; and if
                      someone wants to force you to go a thousand steps with him,
                      go two thousand. Give to him who asks and do not turn away
                      someone who wants to borrow from you. (Mt. 5:38-42)

               8.     The       world’s   prejudices     concerning       what     has
               conventionally been called the “point of honor” causes
               that somber susceptibility that is born from pride and the
               exaltation of the personality, leading people to payback
               injury for injury, offense for offense, in what seems like



                                                  245




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 245                                                3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          CHAPTER XII



               justice to those whose moral sense has not risen above
               the earthly passions. That is why the Mosaic Law stated,
               “An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth,” a law that
               was in harmony with the time in which Moses lived.
               Christ came and said, “Repay evil with goodness,” and
               stated further, “Do not resist the evil that others might
               want to do to you; if someone strikes your right cheek, offer
               him the other also.” To the proud, this maxim seems like
               cowardice, because they do not understand that there
               is more courage in bearing an offense than in avenging
               oneself, and they always base their actions on motives that
               keep them from seeing beyond the present. Must one take
               this maxim literally, however? No more than the one that
               says to pluck out an eye if it is a cause of scandal. Taken
               to the extreme, it would mean condoning all repression
               – even when legal – and would leave the field free to evil
               persons by removing all their fear. If a restraint were not
               put on their aggressions, all good people would soon be
               their victims. The very instinct for self-preservation, which
               is a law of nature, states that one should not willingly hold
               one’s neck out for a murderer. Thus, by these words Jesus
               did not interdict self-defense, but condemned vengeance.
               By saying to offer one’s cheek when the other has been
               struck, he is saying in another way that one should not
               repay evil with evil; that people should humbly accept
               everything that tends to lower their pride; that it is more
               glorious for one to be wounded than to wound, to bear
               patiently an injustice than to commit one; that it is
               worthier to be deceived than to deceive, to be ruined than
               to ruin others. At the same time, it is the condemnation of



                                              246




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 246                                    3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          LOVE YOUR ENEMIES



               dueling1, which is no more than a manifestation of pride.
               Only faith in the future life and God’s justice – which never
               leaves injustice unpunished – can provide the strength to
               bear patiently the blows directed against our interests and
               self-centeredness. That is why we constantly state: Focus
               your gaze on the future ahead; the more you lift yourselves
               above the material life through thought, the less you will
               be disheartened by things of the earth.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               VENGEANCE


               9. Vengeance is one of the last remnants arising from
               barbaric customs that tend to be erased among human
               beings. Like dueling, it is one of the last vestiges of those
               primitive customs under which humankind struggled at
               the beginning of the Christian era. This is why vengeance
               is a sure indication of the backwardness of the persons
               who indulge in it and of the spirits who can still inspire it.
               Therefore, my friends, this sentiment must never live within
               the heart of anyone who claims to be a Spiritist. As you well
               know, vengeance is so contrary to Christ’s prescription,
               “Forgive your enemies,” that those who refuse to forgive not
               only are not Spiritists, but they are not even Christians.
               Vengeance is all the more ruinous when falsehood and
               wickedness are its assiduous companions. In fact, those
               who indulge in this deadly and blind passion almost never
               seek revenge openly. When such persons are the stronger,

               1
                   See footnote to Item 11 below. – Tr.


                                                   247




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 247                                     3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          CHAPTER XII



               they fall like ferocious beasts upon those whom they call
               their enemies once the sight of them has inflamed their
               passion, anger and hatred. However, more often than
               not, they put on a hypocritical appearance, hiding in the
               depths of their heart the evil sentiments that animate
               them. They secretly follow their unsuspecting enemies in
               the darkness and wait for the opportune moment to strike
               without endangering themselves. Hiding from them, they
               incessantly watch them; they prepare hateful traps for them
               and when the opportunity arises, they pour the poison in
               the cup. When their hatred does not reach such extremes,
               they attack their enemies’ honor and affections; they do
               not recoil at slander, and their perfidious insinuations,
               skillfully sown on the four winds, grow larger along the
               way. Consequently, when those who are being persecuted
               appear in places where their persecutor’s poisonous breath
               has passed, they are astonished at encountering cold faces
               where they used to find friendly and benevolent ones. They
               are stupefied when hands previously extended now refuse
               to shake theirs. Finally, they are shattered when their
               dearest friends and relatives avoid and run from them. Ah!
               Cowards who avenge themselves like this are a hundred
               times guiltier than those who go straight to their enemies
               and insult them to their face.

                      Thus, be gone with such primitive customs! Be gone
               with the ways of days gone by! Any Spiritist who today
               still claims to have the right to seek vengeance would
               be unworthy of being counted any longer in the phalanx
               that has taken as its motto: Without charity there is no
               salvation! But no, I will not hold on to such an idea, the


                                              248




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 248                                  3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          LOVE YOUR ENEMIES



               idea that a member of the great Spiritist family could in
               the future ever yield to the impulse of vengeance instead
               of forgiveness.

                                                       Jules Olivier (Paris, 1862)



               HATRED


               10. Love one another and you will be happy. Above all,
               assume the duty of loving those who inspire you with
               indifference, hatred or scorn. Christ, whom you should
               make your model, gave you an example of such devotion;
               a missionary of love, he loved to the point of giving his
               blood and his life. The sacrifice that obliges you to love
               those who offend and persecute you is painful, but it is
               precisely this type of sacrifice that will raise you above
               them. If you hate them as they hate you, you are worth
               no more than they are. Such sacrifice is the spotless host
               offered to God on the altar of your hearts, a sweet-smelling
               host whose fragrance rises up to him. Even though the law
               of love wants us to love our brothers and sisters without
               distinction, it does not shield the heart against harmful
               conduct; on the contrary, it is the most painful trial – I
               know it well, because during my last earthly existence,
               I experienced such torment. But God is ever present and
               punishes either in this life or in another all those who
               disregard the law of love. My dear children, do not forget
               that love brings us close to God, whereas hate keeps us
               from him.

                                                       Fenelon (Bordeaux, 1861)



                                                 249




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 249                                          3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                            CHAPTER XII



               DUELING 1


               11. The truly great are only those who, regarding life
               as a voyage that must lead them to an objective, make
               little ado about the rough spots along the way, and never
               allow themselves for an instant to detour from the upright
               path. With their eyes constantly set on their objective, it
               matters little to them that the barbs and thorns of the
               path threaten to cause them scratches; these graze them
               without harming them, and they stay on course. To expose
               their lives by avenging themselves for an offense is to recoil
               before life’s trials; it is always a crime in God’s eyes and if
               you were not as enthralled as you are by your prejudices,
               dueling would be deemed a ridiculous and supreme folly
               to human eyes.

                      Death resulting from a duel is a crime of homicide
               – your own legislation recognizes this fact. No one has
               the right in any event to make an attempt on the life of
               his fellow man. It is a crime in the eyes of God, who has
               traced out your line of conduct. Here, more than anywhere
               else, you are judges of your own case. Remember that
               you will be forgiven only according to how you yourselves
               have forgiven; through forgiving, you draw nearer to the
               Divine One, for clemency is the brother of power. As long
               as one drop of human blood runs over the earth as the
               result of human hands, the true kingdom of God will not

               1
                 Kardec addresses this topic in The Spirits Book (questions 757-759).
               Our footnote there reads in part “… [an] obsolete 19th century male-
               oriented custom. Actually, we continue to practice a more subtle form of
               dueling nowadays in our daily lives by using words and other antagonistic
               attitudes that are just as destructive.” – Tr.


                                                 250




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 250                                                3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          LOVE YOUR ENEMIES



               have arrived: that kingdom of peace and love, which must
               banish animosity, discord and war from your globe forever.
               Then, the word duel will no longer exist in your language
               except as a far-off, vague memory of a past which once was;
               men will recognize among themselves no other antagonism
               than the noble rivalry of doing the good.

                                          Adolphe, Bishop of Alger (Marmande, 1861)



               12. In certain cases, dueling might, of course, be a
               proof of physical courage and of disdain for life, but it is
               incontestably a proof of moral cowardice, as is also the
               case with suicide. The suicide does not have the courage
               to endure the vicissitudes of life; the dueler does not have
               the courage to endure offenses. Did Christ not tell you that
               there is more honor and courage in offering the left cheek
               to someone who has struck your right one than to avenge
               an offense? In the Garden of Olives, did Christ not tell
               Peter, “Put your sword back in its sheath, because those
               who kill with the sword shall die by the sword?” With these
               words, does Jesus not condemn dueling forever? In fact,
               my children, what courage is this, born of a violent, bloody
               and wrathful temperament that rants and raves at the first
               offense? Where is the greatness-of-soul of him who, at the
               least offense, wants to wash it with blood? Let him tremble!
               because in the depths of his conscience a voice will always
               cry out to him, “Cain! Cain! What have you done to your
               brother?” He will tell this voice, “It was necessary to spill
               blood in order to save my honor.” However, the voice will
               reply to him, “You wanted to save your honor before men
               for the few moments that remain for you to live on the



                                                   251




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 251                                           3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          CHAPTER XII



               earth, but you did not think about saving it before God!
               Poor fool!” How much blood would Christ ask of you for
               all the offenses he received? You not only wounded him
               with thorns and the lance, you not only nailed him to the
               gibbet, but in the midst of his agony, he could hear the
               mockery you heaped on him. After such outrages, what
               reparation did he ask of you? The last cry of the Lamb was
               a prayer for his executioners! Oh! Like him, forgive and
               pray for those who offend you.

                      Friends, remember this precept: “Love one another,”
               and then to the blow given out of hate, you will respond with
               a smile, and to the offense, with forgiveness. Of course, the
               world will rise up in fury and treat you as a coward; hold
               your head high and show that – like Christ – you are not
               afraid to have your brow laden with thorns, and that your
               hand does not want to be the accomplice in a homicide
               that supposedly authorizes a false appearance of honor,
               but which actually amounts to nothing more than pride
               and self-centeredness. In creating you, did God give you
               the right of life and death over one another? No, he gave
               such right only to nature for reforming and rebuilding
               itself. But as for you, he did not permit you to dispose even
               of yourselves. Like the suicide, the dueler will be marked
               with blood when he appears before God, and the Sovereign
               Judge reserves a harsh and long punishment for both. If
               God has threatened with his justice him who says raca to
               his brother, how much more severe will the punishment be
               for him who appears before him with hands red with the
               blood of his brother!

                                                    St. Augustine (Paris, 1862)



                                              252




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 252                                       3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          LOVE YOUR ENEMIES



               13. Like the practice known in a former age as “the judgment
               of God,” the duel is one of those barbaric institutions that
               still govern society. However, what would you say if you
               saw two adversaries being immersed in boiling water or
               submitted to the contact of a red-hot iron in order to settle
               their quarrels, with the one enduring the test better being
               considered the one in the right? You would call such a
               custom ludicrous. The duel is even worse. For the skillful
               dueler, it is murder committed in cold blood with deliberate
               premeditation because he is sure of the blow he will deliver.
               For his adversary, almost certain to succumb due to his
               weakness and ineptitude, it is suicide committed with
               the coldest reflection. I know that oftentimes one seeks
               to avoid this alternative by relying on equally criminal
               chance; is not that, however, a return in a different form
               to the “judgment of God” of the Middle Ages? And yet,
               during that era, one would be infinitely less guilty; the very
               name judgment of God implies faith, naive certainly, but
               at least a faith in the justice of God who could not allow
               an innocent person to succumb, whereas in the duel one
               relies on brute strength in such a way that quite often it is
               the offended party who dies.

                      O stupid conceit, foolish vanity and insane pride,
               when will you be replaced by Christian charity, love for
               one’s neighbor and the humility that Christ exemplified
               and prescribed? Only then will those monstrous prejudices
               that still govern humankind – and which laws are powerless
               to repress – disappear, for it is not enough to prohibit evil



                                                 253




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 253                                     3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          CHAPTER XII



               and prescribe the good; the good and the horror of evil
               must dwell in the human heart.

                                            A Protector Spirit (Bordeaux, 1861)



               14. What will people think of me – you often say – if I
               refuse the reparation asked of me, or if I do not demand
               it from someone who has offended me? Those who are
               foolish like you, i.e. backward persons, will find fault with
               you. But those who have been enlightened by the beacon
               of mental and moral progress will say that you are acting
               in accordance with true wisdom. Reflect a bit: because of a
               word, many times said thoughtlessly or inoffensively on the
               part of one of your brothers, your pride feels bruised and
               you respond to him in a harsh manner. A confrontation
               ensues. Before that critical moment arrives, do you ask
               yourself if you are acting like a Christian? What will you
               owe society if you deprive it of one of its members? Do
               you think of the remorse for having deprived a wife of her
               husband, a mother of her son, and children of their father
               and their support? Certainly, the one who has offended
               you owes reparation; however, would it not be more
               honorable for him to do so voluntarily in recognition of his
               wrongs than to endanger the life of the one who has the
               right to complain? As for the offended man, I concur that
               sometimes one might find oneself gravely insulted, either
               personally or regarding those who are dear to him. It is
               not only self-centeredness that comes into play; a heart
               is wounded and suffering. But besides being foolish for
               risking his life in confrontation with a wretch capable of an



                                              254




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 254                                       3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          LOVE YOUR ENEMIES



               infamy, if this wretch dies, will the affront – whatever it was
               – cease to exist? Does not spilt blood give more notoriety to
               a fact which, if false, would fall by itself, and if true, should
               be buried in silence? Thus, the only thing left would be
               that vengeance was satisfied. Alas! A sad satisfaction that
               frequently even in this life leaves bitter remorse. And if it is
               the offended party that dies, how will reparation be made
               to him?

                      When charity becomes the rule of conduct for humans,
               they will conform their words and actions to this maxim,
               “Do not do unto others what you would not want them to
               do unto you.” Then all causes of dissention will disappear,
               and with them, the causes of duels and wars – which are
               actually duels between peoples.

                                                 François-Xavier (Bordeaux, 1861)



               15. The man of the world, the happy man, who because of
               an offensive word or a slight matter throws away the life
               that has come to him from God, or who throws away the
               life of his fellow man, a life that belongs to God alone, is
               a hundred times guiltier than the wretch who, compelled
               by greed or sometimes by necessity, goes into someone’s
               home to steal what he covets and kills those who stand in
               his way. The latter is almost always an uneducated man
               with only imperfect notions of good and evil, whereas the
               dueler almost always belongs to the more educated class.
               One kills brutally, the other with method and politeness,
               which makes society excuse him. I would even add that
               the dueler is infinitely guiltier than the wretch who



                                                 255




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 255                                         3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          CHAPTER XII



               yields to a sentiment of revenge and kills in a moment of
               exasperation. The dueler cannot use a fit of passion as an
               excuse, because between the offense and the reparation,
               there is always time to reflect. Hence, he acts coldly and
               with premeditation; everything is calculated and studied
               in order to slay his adversary more surely. It is true that
               he also endangers his own life, and this is what justifies
               the duel in the eyes of the world, because it is seen as an
               act of courage and a disdain for one’s own life; however, is
               there true courage when one is sure of himself? The duel –
               a remnant of barbaric times, in which “might makes right”
               was the law – will disappear with a saner appreciation of
               the true point of honor, and to the degree that people put
               a more ardent faith in the future life.

                                                    Augustin (Bordeaux, 1861)



               16. Comment: Duels are becoming rarer and rarer, and
               if dolorous examples of them are still seen from time to
               time, their number cannot be compared to what it used
               to be. Formerly, a man could not leave his home without
               foreseeing an encounter, thus he always took precautions.
               A characteristic sign of the customs of those times and
               peoples was the habit of carrying concealed or unconcealed
               offensive or defensive weapons. The abolition of such usage
               demonstrates the softening of customs, and it is interesting
               to follow this gradation, from the time in which knights
               did not ride out except covered in armor and clutching a
               lance to when men started carrying a simple sword more
               as a decoration and a blazon than a weapon of aggression.



                                              256




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 256                                     3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          LOVE YOUR ENEMIES



               Another indication regarding customs is that, formerly,
               one-on-one combat took place right in the street in front
               of a crowd that stayed back in order to leave the area free,
               whereas nowadays all is done in secret. Nowadays, the
               death of a man is an event that causes a commotion and
               it is talked about; in the past no one would have paid any
               attention to it. Spiritism will remove these last vestiges of
               barbarity, instilling humankind with the spirit of charity
               and fraternity.




                                                 257




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 257                                    3/7/2009 18:00:30

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 258   3/7/2009 18:00:30

               CHAPTER XIII


               Do not let your left hand
               know what your right
               hand is doing
                      x Do good without ostentation

                      x Hidden misfortunes

                      x The widow’s mite

                      x Invite the poor and the lame. Give without expecting
                      recompense



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                       Material charity and moral charity

                      x Beneficence

                      x Compassion

                      x Orphans

                      x Beneficence repaid with ingratitude

                      x Exclusive beneficence




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 259                                     3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                           CHAPTER XIII



               DO GOOD WITHOUT OSTENTATION


                      1. Be careful not to do your good works before men in order to
                      be seen by them; otherwise, you will not receive recompense
                      from your Father in heaven. Thus, whenever you give alms,
                      do not sound the trumpet before you as the hypocrites do in
                      the synagogues and streets in order to be praised by men.
                      Verily, I say to you that they have received their reward. But
                      whenever you give alms, do not let your left hand know what
                      your right hand is doing so that your alms will be in secret,
                      and your Father, who sees in secret what has happened, will
                      reward you. (Mt. 6:1-4)

                      2. After Jesus had come down from the mountain, a large
                      crowd of people followed him. At the same time, a leper came
                      to meet him and worshiped him, saying, “Lord, if you will,
                      you can heal me.” Jesus reached out to him, touched him
                      and said, “I will it; be healed.” In that same instant, the
                      leprosy was healed. Then Jesus said to him, “Do not tell
                      anyone about this, but go and show yourself to the priests
                      and offer the gift prescribed by Moses so that it may serve as
                      a testimony to them. (Mt. 8:1-4)

               3. Doing good without ostentation holds great merit;
               hiding the hand that gives is even more meritorious. It
               is an incontestable sign of great moral elevation, for in
               order to view things from a higher state than the ordinary,
               one must look past the present life and identify with the
               future life; in other words, one must place oneself above
               humanity in order to renounce the satisfaction that seeks
               to be witnessed by others, and to wait for approval from
               God. Those who prefer others’ approval to God’s approval
               show that they have more faith in others than in God and


                                                260




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 260                                            3/7/2009 18:00:30

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               that the present life is worth more than the future life – or
               even that they do not believe in the future life at all. If they
               say otherwise, they act as if they do not believe in what
               they say.

                      How many there are who give only in the hopes that
               the beneficiary will shout the benefit from the rooftops;
               who give large sums in broad daylight, but would not give
               a cent in darkness! This is why Jesus stated that those
               who do good ostentatiously have already received their
               reward. In fact, those who seek their own glorification on
               earth because of the good they do have already been paid;
               God owes them nothing more; the only thing that remains
               for them to receive is punishment for their pride.

                      Do not let your left hand know what your right hand is
               doing is an image that wonderfully characterizes modest
               beneficence. However, if there is such a thing as true
               modesty, there is also such a thing as feigned modesty –
               the simulation of modesty. There are people who hide the
               hand that gives, letting a small portion to be shown while
               looking to see if anyone is watching them hide the rest of
               it. An unworthy parody on the maxims of Christ! If prideful
               benefactors are despised by other people, how will they be
               regarded by God? They have also received their reward on
               earth. They have been seen and they are satisfied because
               of it. That is all they will have.

                      And what will be the reward for those who make their
               benefits weigh heavily on their beneficiaries, those who in
               some way demand to be acknowledged by them, making
               them feel their position by extolling the price of the sacrifices



                                             261




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 261                                        3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          CHAPTER XIII



               they have imposed on themselves for their sake? Oh! There
               is not even an earthly reward for these givers because
               they are deprived of the sweet satisfaction of hearing their
               name blessed; and that is the first punishment for their
               pride. Instead of rising up to heaven, the tears they dry in
               the interest of their vanity fall back upon the heart of the
               afflicted and ulcerate it. The good they do is without profit
               to themselves, for it is deplored, and every deplored benefit
               is a false and worthless coin.

                      Kindness without ostentation has a two-fold merit:
               besides material charity, it portrays moral charity; it
               spares the susceptibility of its beneficiaries and enables
               them to accept the benefit without bruising their self-
               esteem, and it safeguards their human dignity, because
               they will accept a service but not a handout. Now, changing
               a service into a handout because of the way it is rendered
               is to humiliate the one who receives it, and there is always
               pride and malice involved in humiliating another person.
               True charity, on the other hand, is sensitive and skillful in
               concealing the benefit rendered and in avoiding the least
               harmful appearances, since any moral offense adds to the
               suffering born from need. This sort of charity is able to find
               kind and affable words that put beneficiaries at ease in
               the presence of their benefactors, whereas prideful charity
               crushes them. The sublime aspect of true generosity is
               present when benefactors switch roles and find a way for
               they themselves to appear to be the actual beneficiaries
               of those to whom they render their service. That is the
               meaning of the words, “Do not let your left hand know
               what your right hand is doing.”


                                              262




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 262                                     3/7/2009 18:00:30

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               HIDDEN MISFORTUNES


               4. Charity manifests during great calamities and one
               can see a generous drive to repair the damage. However,
               alongside these general disasters there are thousands of
               private ones that go unnoticed, of people lying on beds
               of misery without complaining. These discreet and hidden
               misfortunes are the ones that true generosity knows how
               to find without waiting for their victims to come asking for
               assistance.

                      Who is this woman of distinction, dressed in a simple
               but careful manner, accompanied by a girl also dressed
               modestly? She enters a squalid-looking house where she is
               obviously well-known, because she is greeted respectfully
               at the door. Where is she going? She goes up to the garret:
               a mother is living there, surrounded by little children. At
               the woman’s arrival, joy shines on those gaunt faces. She
               has come to soothe all their pain; she has brought what
               they need, along with gentle and consoling words that
               enable them to accept the benefit without being ashamed,
               for these unfortunates are not professional beggars. The
               father is in the hospital, and during this time the mother
               cannot provide for their needs. Thanks to this woman, these
               poor children will experience neither cold nor hunger; they
               will go to school dressed warmly, and their mother’s milk
               will not dry up for the littlest ones. If any of them are ill,
               no material care will be denied. From there, this woman
               goes to the hospital to bring a little comfort to the father
               and to put his mind at ease regarding his family’s state of
               affairs. On the street corner waits a carriage, which is a


                                            263




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 263                                     3/7/2009 18:00:30

                                          CHAPTER XIII



               veritable stockroom of everything she takes to the many
               wards whom she visits one after the other. She asks them
               neither about their beliefs nor their opinions, for to her all
               people are brothers and sisters; all are children of God.
               When she has finished her rounds, she tells herself: My day
               has begun very well. What is her name? Where does she
               live? No one knows. For the unfortunates, it is a name that
               reveals nothing; however, she is the angel of consolation,
               and at night, a symphony of blessings rises to the Father
               on her behalf: Catholics, Jews, Protestants – all bless her.

                      Why does she dress so simply? It is because she
               does not wish to insult poverty with luxury. Why does her
               young daughter accompany her? In order to learn how
               beneficence should be practiced. The daughter also wants
               to practice charity, but her mother asks her, “What could
               you give, my child, since you have nothing of your own?
               If I give you something to pass on to others, what merit
               will you have? In reality, I would be the one practicing
               charity in that case; if you were to receive the merit, it
               would not be just. When we visit the sick, you help me
               care for them, and giving of oneself is to give something.
               Doesn’t that seem sufficient to you? Well then, nothing
               could be simpler. Learn to make useful articles and make
               clothes for the little ones. That way, you will be giving
               something that has come from you yourself.” Thus, this
               truly Christian mother is educating her daughter in the
               practice of the virtues taught by Christ. Is she a Spiritist?
               What does it matter!?

                      At home, she is a woman of the world because her



                                              264




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 264                                       3/7/2009 18:00:31

                          DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                      RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               position requires it. However, the world does not know
               what she does, because she wants no other approval
               except from God and her own conscience. However, one
               day an unforeseen turn of events brings one of her wards
               to her home, selling hand-made articles. She recognizes
               her benefactress and wants to bless her: “Hush!” says her
               benefactress. “Do not tell anyone.” Jesus also spoke in
               such a manner.



               THE WIDOW’S MITE


                       5. Jesus was seated opposite the offertory box, watching the
                       way in which people dropped their money into it, and noticing
                       that many of the wealthy were putting in large amounts. A
                       poor widow also came and put in only two small coins in the
                       amount of a farthing1. Then, having called his disciples, he
                       said to them, “Verily I say to you that this poor widow has
                       given more than what all the others have put into the offertory
                       box, for they have all given of their abundance, whereas she
                       has given of her poverty – everything she had and everything
                       that was left for her to live on.” (Mk. 12:41-44; Lk. 21:1-4)

               6. Many people regret not being able to do as much good
               as they would like because they lack sufficient resources;
               if they desire wealth, they say it is so that they can put
               it to good use. Their intention is of course praiseworthy
               and might be quite sincere for some; however, could it
               be, without question, completely disinterested? Might
               there not be those who, even though desiring to do good

               1
                   Farthing is an old word meaning a fourth or a quarter. – Tr.


                                                    265




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 265                                                3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                               CHAPTER XIII



               to others, would be quite happy to start by doing good to
               themselves, to give themselves a few more pleasures and
               to obtain a few of the superfluities they now lack, saving
               the leftovers to give to the poor? Such ulterior motives,
               which they perhaps conceal but which they could find in
               the depths of their heart – if they were willing to search
               there – annul the merit of the intent, for true charity entails
               thinking of others before thinking of oneself. The sublimity
               of charity in this case would be to find within their own
               work, and by using their own strength, intelligence and
               talents, the resources they lack to accomplish their
               generous intentions; that would be the sacrifice most
               pleasing to the Lord. Unfortunately, the majority dream
               about the easiest way to become suddenly rich without
               having to make any sacrifice. They run after chimeras
               such as hidden treasures, some favorable random chance,
               an unexpected inheritance, etc. What is to be said of those
               who hope to find helpers among the spirits to assist them
               in searches of such a nature? Obviously, they neither
               know nor understand the sacred objective of Spiritism,
               and even less the mission of the spirits whom God allows
               to communicate with human beings; in this, they are also
               punished by deceit. (The Mediums’ Book, nos. 294, 295)

                      Those whose intentions are pure of any personal
               interest       ought       to   console   themselves   with   their
               powerlessness to do all the good they would like to do; they
               should think of the mite of the poor who give by depriving
               themselves, but which weighs more on God’s scales than
               the gold of the rich who give without denying themselves
               anything. The satisfaction would of course be great in


                                                   266




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 266                                          3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               being able to alleviate poverty on a large scale, but if it is
               not allowed, one must accept the fact and limit oneself to
               doing what is possible. Moreover, is gold the only thing
               that can dry tears and must one remain inactive by not
               possessing it? Those who sincerely desire to be useful to
               their brothers and sisters will find a thousand opportunities;
               let them seek and they will find them, if not in one way
               then in another, for there are none who, enjoying the full
               use of their faculties, cannot render some sort of service,
               provide some consolation, mitigate physical or mental
               suffering, or do something useful. In spite of a lack of
               money, cannot everybody give a portion of the effort, time
               and repose they have available? This is also the obol of the
               poor, the widow’s mite.



               INVITE THE POOR AND THE LAME. GIVE WITHOUT
               EXPECTING RECOMPENSE


                      7. He also said to the one who had invited him, “Whenever
                      you give a dinner or a supper, do not invite your friends, your
                      brothers, your relatives or your wealthy neighbors, so that
                      they will invite you in their turn and thus repay what they
                      received from you. But whenever you give a banquet, invite
                      the poor, the lame, the maimed and the blind, and you will be
                      happy because they have no means of repaying you, for you
                      will be rewarded at the resurrection of the righteous.”

                      Having heard these words, one of those who were at the table
                      said to him, “Happy is he who eats bread in the kingdom of
                      God!” (Lk. 14:12-15)


                                                267




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 267                                             3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                          CHAPTER XIII



               8. Whenever you give a banquet, says Jesus, do not invite
               your friends but the poor and lame instead. These words
               are absurd if taken literally but are sublime if one searches
               for the spirit in them. Jesus could not have meant to say
               that, instead of friends, one must bring to his or her table
               beggars off the street. His language was nearly always
               figurative, and for people incapable of grasping the delicate
               nuances of thought, he used forceful imagery, producing
               the effect of blaring colors. The foundation of his thought
               is revealed in these words, “You will be blessed because
               they have no means of repaying you,” which means that
               one should not do good with recompense in mind, but for
               the sole pleasure of doing it. In order to provide a lively
               comparison, he said to invite the poor to your banquets
               because you know that they can do nothing to repay you.
               By banquets one must understand not a repast per se, but
               rather participation in the abundance that one enjoys.

                      These words may also be applied in a more literal
               sense, however. How many persons invite to their tables
               only those who can “do them the honor” – as they say – or
               who can invite them in their turn! Others, on the other
               hand, find satisfaction in inviting less fortunate relatives
               or friends. Well, who does not have such persons in his or
               her own family? It is at times a way to render them a great
               service without showing it. Without going out to bring in the
               blind and the lame, they practice Jesus’ maxim if they do
               it out of benevolence and without ostentation, and if they
               know how to disguise the benefit with sincere cordiality.




                                              268




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 268                                    3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               MATERIAL CHARITY AND MORAL CHARITY


               9. “Let us love one another and do unto others what we
               would want them to do unto us.” Every religion, every moral
               possible is contained in these two precepts. If you were to
               abide by them in this world, you would be perfect. There
               would be neither hatred nor dissent. Furthermore, I will
               say that there would be no more poverty, because, from
               the surplus of the table of each rich person, many poor
               people would be fed, and in the dark backstreets where I
               lived during my last incarnation you would not see poor
               mothers dragging along their miserable children in need
               of everything.

                      You who are rich! Think about this a bit: help
               unfortunates as much as you can; give so that one day
               God will repay the good you have done, and when you leave
               your earthly envelope, you will find a cortege of thankful
               spirits who will receive you at the threshold of a more
               blessed world.

                      If only you could know the joy I experienced in meeting
               on the other side those whom I was able to help during my
               last life!

                      Therefore, love your neighbor. Love him or her as you
               love yourself, because you now know that that unfortunate
               fellow you are rejecting and keeping away is perhaps a
               brother, a father or a friend; and then, what despair you
               will feel upon recognizing him in the world of spirits!




                                             269




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 269                                     3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                          CHAPTER XIII



                      I want you to understand fully what moral charity
               entails, the type that everyone can exhibit and which costs
               nothing materially, but which is nonetheless very difficult
               to put into practice.

                      Moral charity consists in giving support to one
               another, and it is what you practice the least on the low
               order world where you are incarnate for now. Believe me;
               there is great merit in knowing how to keep quiet and let
               a more ignorant person speak; this is yet another kind of
               charity. Knowing how to turn a deaf ear when a mocking
               word escapes the mouth accustomed to scorn; not paying
               any attention to the smirk of disdain that greets your entry
               amongst persons who often wrongly think they are above
               you, whereas in the spirit life – the only true life – they are
               sometimes far from it: these are meritorious acts, not of
               humility but of charity, because not paying attention to
               someone else’s wrongs portrays moral charity.

                      This sort of charity, however, must not hinder the
               other kind; remember especially not to neglect your
               neighbor. Remember all that I have told you. You must
               always remember that the poor person whom you reject
               perhaps houses a spirit who used to be dear to you, and
               who, for the time being, is in a position beneath yours. I
               myself met again one of the poor of your earth, whom I had
               fortunately been able to help a few times, and from whom
               I must now, in turn, ask for help.

                      Remember that Jesus said that we are all brothers
               and sisters; always think about that before rejecting the



                                              270




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 270                                      3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               leper or beggar. Goodbye. Think of those who suffer and
               pray for them.

                                                  Sister Rosalie (Paris, 1860)



               10. My friends, I have heard many of you say to yourselves:
               How can I practice charity? Often, I don’t even have enough
               myself!

                      Charity, my friends, may be practiced in many ways.
               You can practice charity in thought, word and deed: in
               thought by praying for the forsaken poor who have died
               without having even seen the light; a prayer from the heart
               will console them; in words by providing your everyday
               companions some good advice, by saying to people
               embittered through desperation and deprivation, and who
               blaspheme the name of the Most High, “I was once as
               you are; I suffered and was unfortunate, but I believed in
               Spiritism, and as you can see, I am fortunate now.” To the
               elderly who say to you, “It’s useless; I’m at the end of my
               journey; I will die as I have lived,” you can say, “God holds
               out the same justice for all of us; remember the workers of
               the last hour.” To youths who are already corrupted by the
               company they keep and who wander along life’s pathways
               ready to yield to evil temptations, say, “God is watching
               you, my dear children.” And do not be afraid to repeat these
               gentle words to them often; they will end up germinating
               in their young minds, and instead of little thugs, you will
               have made men and women of them. This is also a form
               of charity.



                                           271




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 271                                      3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                          CHAPTER XIII



                      Many among you say, “Nonsense! There are so many
               of us on the earth, God cannot possibly see all of us.” Listen
               well, my friends: When you are on the top of the mountain,
               don’t you see the billions of grains of sand covering that
               mountain? Well then! God sees you in the same way. He
               allows you your free will just as you let those grains of
               sand move about at the whim of the wind that scatters
               them, except that God, in his infinite mercy, has placed
               at the bottom of your heart a watchful sentinel called
               conscience. Listen to it; it will offer you only good counsel.
               Sometimes, you deaden it by opposing it with the spirit of
               evil, and then it falls silent. Nonetheless, you can be sure
               that your poor forsaken conscience will make itself heard
               as soon as you allow it to perceive the shadow of remorse.
               Listen to your conscience, question it and you will often
               find yourselves comforted by its counsels.

                      My friends, a general furnishes a new banner for each
               new regiment. I offer you this maxim of Christ: “Love one
               another.” Practice this maxim; gather around its standard
               and you will receive happiness and consolation.

                                                A Protector Spirit (Lyons, 1860)



               BENEFICENCE


               11. In this world, my friends, beneficence will give you the
               purest and sweetest joys, those joys of the heart that are
               disturbed neither by remorse nor indifference. Oh! If you
               could but comprehend all that is great and gentle in the
               generosity of beautiful souls, that sentiment that makes


                                              272




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 272                                        3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               people look at one another in the same way that they look at
               themselves, joyfully shedding their clothes in order to give
               their brother or sister something to wear! My friends, if only
               you could have no sweeter occupation than that of making
               others happy! What worldly festivities could compare to
               those blissful moments, when, as representatives of the
               Divinity, you deliver joy to families who have known only
               the vicissitudes and bitterness of life; when you suddenly
               see these emaciated faces brighten with hope because
               they had no bread; these unfortunates and their children,
               who, not knowing that living means to suffer, scream, cry
               and repeat these words that pierce their mother’s heart
               like a sharp dagger: “I’m hungry!...” Oh! Understand well
               how delightful are the feelings of those who see joy reborn
               where just moments before they saw only desperation!
               Understand what your obligations are toward your brothers
               and sisters! Go, go to meet misfortune; go especially to help
               hidden miseries, for they are the most heartbreaking. Go,
               my dear ones, and remember these words of the Savior:
               “Whenever you clothe one of these little ones, remember
               that you are doing it to me.”

                      Charity! O sublime word that summarizes all virtues,
               it is you who must lead the peoples of the world to
               happiness. By practicing you, they shall create infinite
               joys for themselves in the future, and during their exile on
               the earth, you shall be their consolation, the foretaste of
               the joys they shall delight in later when they are reunited
               in the bosom of the loving God. It was you, O divine virtue,
               who provided me with the only moments of happiness that
               I enjoyed on the earth. May my incarnate brothers and


                                            273




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 273                                     3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                             CHAPTER XIII



               sisters believe the voice of the friend who is speaking to
               them and tells them: It is in charity that you must seek the
               peace of the heart, the contentment of the soul, and the
               remedy for the afflictions of life. Oh! Whenever you are at
               the point of accusing God, cast an eye beneath you; behold
               how many miseries need relief, how many poor children
               have no families, how many old people do not have one
               friendly hand to help them or to close their eyes when
               death reclaims them! How much good there is to do! Oh!
               Do not complain; on the contrary, thank God and lavish
               handfuls of your sympathy, your love and your money on
               all those who, bereft of the things of the world, languish in
               suffering and loneliness! Then you shall reap in this world
               the sweetest joys, and later… only God knows! ...

                                          Adolphe, Bishop of Alger (Bordeaux, 1861)



               12. Be good and charitable; that is the key to heaven you
               hold in your hands. All the bliss of eternity is contained in
               this maxim: Love one another. The soul cannot lift itself
               to higher spiritual realms except by devotion to one’s
               neighbor; it does not find happiness and consolation except
               in charitable impulses. Be good, uphold your brothers and
               sisters, and root out the horrible scourge of selfishness. In
               fulfilling this duty, you will open to yourselves the way to
               eternal happiness. Besides, who among you has not felt
               the heart beat, its inner joy expand at hearing an account
               of noble self-sacrifice, of a truly charitable deed? If you
               would seek only the happiness that a good deed brings, you
               would remain on the path of spiritual progress. Examples



                                                  274




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 274                                           3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               are not lacking; what you lack is goodwill, which is very
               rare. Behold the multitude of righteous men and women,
               whose memory history has mercifully recorded.

                      Did Christ not tell you everything regarding the
               virtues of charity and love? Why do you put aside his
               divine teachings? Why do you close your ears to his
               divine words and your hearts to all his gentle maxims?
               I wish more interest and faith would be displayed in the
               gospels. But you have forsaken this book and have made
               it a hollow word, a closed letter; this marvelous code is
               left in forgottenness; your ills have come only from your
               intentional abandonment of this summary of the divine
               laws. So, read these ardent pages about Jesus’ devotion,
               and meditate on them.

                      Strong men and women, prepare yourselves; weak
               men and women, make your meekness and your faith
               your weapons. Be more persuasive, more constant in the
               spreading of your new Doctrine. It is not only encouragement
               that we have come to give you; it is not only to stimulate
               your eagerness and virtues that God has allowed us to
               manifest ourselves to you. If you would so desire, you
               would merely need God’s help and your own will; spirit
               manifestations are produced only for those whose eyes are
               shut and whose hearts are stubborn.

                      Charity is the fundamental virtue that must uphold
               the entire edifice of earthly virtues. Without charity, none
               of the others exist. Without charity, there is no hope for
               a better future, no moral interest to guide us. Without



                                           275




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 275                                   3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                          CHAPTER XIII



               charity there is no faith, for faith is nothing more than a
               pure ray of light that makes a charitable soul shine.

                      Charity is the eternal anchor of salvation on all worlds.
               It is the purest emanation of the Creator himself. It is his
               own virtue that he gives to his creatures. How can you fail
               to recognize such supreme goodness? With this thought
               in mind, what heart could be so wicked as to repress and
               expel this wholly divine sentiment? What child could be so
               evil as to rebel against the sweet caress that is charity?

                      I do not presume to speak of what I myself did,
               because the Spirits too are modest about their deeds;
               nonetheless, I believe that I began one of those works that
               shall contribute the most to relieving your fellow humans.
               I have frequently seen other spirits ask for the mission of
               continuing my task. I have seen them, my gentle and dear
               brothers and sisters, in their merciful and divine ministry,
               practicing the virtue I recommend to you, with all the joy
               that such a life of dedication and sacrifice entails. I feel
               great happiness at seeing how much their character is
               honored, how much their mission is loved and watched
               over. O righteous men and women of good and strong will,
               come together as one in order to broadly continue the work
               of spreading charity. In the very practice of this virtue you
               will find your recompense. There is no spiritual joy that
               will not be provided to you, starting in your present life.
               Remain united; love one another according to Christ’s
               precepts. Amen.

                                               St. Vincent de Paul (Paris, 1858)




                                              276




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 276                                        3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               13. I am called Charity and I am the main road leading
               to God. Follow me, for I am the goal toward which you all
               must strive.

                      This morning, I went on my usual rounds, and with
               an afflicted heart I have come to tell you: Oh! My friends:
               such misery, so many tears and so much you must do
               to dry them all! In vain, I tried to console poor mothers,
               telling them: “Courage! There are good hearts watching
               over you; you will not be forsaken. Patience! God is there;
               you are his beloved; you are his elect.” They seemed to
               hear me and turned toward me their big, worried eyes. I
               read on their poor faces that their body – that tyrant over
               the spirit – was hungry, and even though my words might
               have brought a little peace to their heart, it did not fill their
               stomach. I told them again: “Courage! Courage!” Then a
               very young, poor mother, who was nursing a baby, took it
               in her arms and held it out into empty space as if to ask
               me to watch over that little being who had received only
               insufficient nourishment from barren breasts.

                      Elsewhere, my friends, I saw poor elderly people out of
               work, and, consequently, homeless, tormented by all sorts
               of suffering arising from necessity, and, ashamed of their
               poverty and having never begged, they did not dare implore
               the mercy of passers-by. With a heart full of compassion,
               I, who have nothing, have made myself a beggar for them,
               and I go everywhere, encouraging beneficence and inspiring
               good thoughts in generous and compassionate souls. That
               is why I have come here, my friends, and I say to you:
               Everywhere abound unfortunates, whose cupboards are



                                             277




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 277                                        3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                           CHAPTER XIII



               without bread, whose hearths are without fire and whose
               beds are without blankets. I do not tell you what you
               should do; I leave the initiative to your good hearts. If I
               were to tell you how to proceed, you would derive no merit
               from your good deed. I will tell you only: I am Charity,
               and I hold out my hand to you on behalf of your suffering
               brothers and sisters.

                      But if I ask, I also give and I give much. I invite you to
               a great banquet and I furnish you with the tree from which
               you will all be filled! Behold how beautiful it is, how it is
               loaded with blossoms and fruit! Go; go, pick and take all
               the fruit off that lovely tree called beneficence. In place of
               the branches you have left bare I will attach all the good
               deeds you have done and will take this tree to God so that
               he may load it up again, for beneficence is inexhaustible.
               So, follow me, my friends, so that I may count you among
               those who rally around my banner. Fear not; I will lead you
               along the way of salvation, for I am Charity.

                                          Caritas, martyred in Rome (Lyons, 1861)



               14. There are many ways to practice charity, which many
               of you confuse with alms-giving; there is a big difference,
               however. Alms-giving, my friends, is useful sometimes
               because it brings relief to the poor; but it is nearly always
               humiliating both for the one who gives and the one who
               receives. Charity, on the other hand, links the benefactor
               to the beneficiary and can be disguised in many ways! One
               can be charitable even toward one’s family and friends by
               being indulgent toward them, forgiving their weaknesses,



                                                278




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 278                                         3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               and taking care not to wound their self-esteem. And
               you, Spiritists, can practice charity in the way you act
               toward those who do not think as you do; by leading the
               less-enlightened to believe but without shocking them and
               without attacking their convictions, but instead, by gently
               inviting them to our meetings, where they can listen to us,
               and where we will be able to find the way to their hearts.
               That is one aspect of charity.

                      Now, listen to what charity means for the poor, those
               disinherited by the world but recompensed by God if they
               can accept their poverty without complaining; and this will
               depend on you. I will make myself understood by using an
               example.

                      Several times each week, I see a meeting of ladies of
               all ages. To us, as you know, they are all sisters. What
               do they do? They work quickly, very quickly with their
               agile fingers. You can also see how radiant their faces are
               and how their hearts all beat as one! But what is their
               objective? They have seen that winter is approaching and
               that it will be hard on the homes of the poor. These “ants”
               have not been able to gather enough provisions during the
               summer and they have pawned most of their belongings.
               The poor mothers are upset and weeping, thinking about
               their little ones, who will be cold and hungry this winter!
               Be patient, poor mothers. God has inspired others who are
               more fortunate than you. They have joined together and
               are sewing small garments, and one of these days, when
               snow has covered the earth and you complain by saying
               “God is not just” – which is what those who suffer normally



                                            279




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 279                                   3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                          CHAPTER XIII



               say – one of the children of these good workers turned into
               servants of the poor will arrive at your doorstep. Yes, it is
               you for whom they are working, and your complaining will
               be turned into blessings, for love follows close behind hate
               in the hearts of the unfortunate.

                      Since all these workers need encouragement, I see
               communications from good spirits coming to them from
               far and wide. The men who take part in this group also
               provide their support in the form of readings that are
               so pleasing to all. And in order to reward the zeal of all
               and each one in particular, we ourselves promise these
               industrious workers a good clientele that will pay them
               with blessings, the only currency used in heaven.         We
               further assure them, without fearing to do so, that this
               currency will not be lacking for them.

                                                         Caritas (Lyon, 1861)



               15. My dear friends, every day I hear you say to one
               another, “I’m poor; I can’t practice charity,” and every day I
               see you lacking indulgence toward your fellow beings. You
               do not forgive them for anything and you turn yourselves
               into judges who are at times quite severe, without asking
               yourselves if you would be happy if they acted the same
               way toward you. Is not indulgence also charity? You who
               can only practice charity by being indulgent – do that, at
               least, but do it extensively. Regarding material charity, I
               would like to tell you a story from the other world.

                      Two men had just died. God had said previously,
               “While these two men are alive, all their good deeds are


                                              280




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 280                                     3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               to be placed in a bag, and at their death the bags will
               be weighed.” When both came to their final hour, God
               ordered the two bags to be brought to him. One was fat,
               voluminous and stuffed, resounding with the coins that
               filled it; the other was so small and thin that through the
               cloth one could see the few coins it contained. Each man
               recognized which bag was his. “That one is mine,” said the
               first. “I recognize it; I was rich and gave a lot.” “That one
               is mine,” said the other. “I was always poor; alas! I had
               almost nothing to share.” But oh, what a surprise! When
               the two bags were set on the scale, the fat one became light,
               whereas the small one became heavy so that it outweighed
               the one on the other side of the scale. Then God said to the
               rich man, “You have given much, it is true, but you gave
               to be ostentatious and to see your name displayed in all
               the temples of pride; moreover, while giving, you deprived
               yourself of nothing. Go to the left and be happy that your
               alms have counted for anything at all.” Then he said to
               the poor man, “You have given very little, my friend, but
               each one of those coins on the scale represents a privation
               for you. Even though you did not give alms, you practiced
               charity, and what is better still, you practiced it naturally,
               without thinking that it would be taken into account. You
               were indulgent and you did not judge your fellow beings;
               on the contrary, you offered excuses for all their actions.
               Go to the right and receive your recompense.”

                                               A Protector Spirit (Lyon, 1861)




                                            281




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 281                                      3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                          CHAPTER XIII



               16. Might not a rich, fortunate wife who does not have to
               spend her time doing housework dedicate a few hours of
               useful work to her fellow beings? With what she has left
               over from her pleasures, she could purchase clothes for
               the unfortunates that shiver in the cold. With her delicate
               hands, she could sew basic, yet warm clothing, and help a
               mother cover her child about to be born. If her own child
               has to do with a little less lace, the child of the poor woman
               will be a little warmer. To work for the poor is to work in
               the Lord’s vineyard.

                      And you, poor laborer, who have nothing superfluous,
               but who, full of love toward you brothers and sisters, also
               want to give a little of what you have, give a few hours
               of your workday, your time, which is your only treasure.
               Make some of those fancy handicrafts that tempt the
               wealthy. Sell these products of your evening time and you
               too will be able to provide your brothers and sisters with
               your share of aid. Perhaps you will have fewer ribbons, but
               you will have put shoes on someone who is barefoot.

                      And you, women devoted to God, you too work in
               his service; may your delicate and lavish creations not be
               solely for decorating your chapels or for calling attention
               to your skill and patience. Work, my daughters, and let
               the compensation of your undertakings be consecrated to
               helping your brothers and sisters in God. The poor are his
               beloved children; to work for them is to glorify him. Be unto
               them the Providence that says, “God gives nourishment to
               the birds of the sky.” May the gold and silver threads that
               are woven by your hands be transformed into clothing and



                                              282




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 282                                     3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               food for those who do not have them. Do these things and
               your work will be blessed.

                      All of you who can produce something, give; give of
               your talents, give of your inspirations, give of your hearts,
               which God will bless. Poets and authors, you who are read
               solely by the upper crust of society, go ahead and fill up
               their leisure time, but let the profit of some of your works
               be consecrated to the relief of the poor. Painters, sculptors
               and artists of all genres! May your intelligence also come to
               aid your brothers and sisters. You will have no less glory,
               and through your help there will be a little less suffering.

                      All of you can give. Whatever may be your social status,
               you have something you can share. Whatever God may
               have given you, you owe part of it to those who lack what is
               necessary, for if you were in their stead, you would be very
               happy if someone else were to share with you. Your earthly
               treasures will be a little less, but your heavenly treasures
               will be more abundant. There, you will reap a hundredfold
               what you have sown in good deeds on the earth.

                                                        Jean (Bordeaux, 1861)



               COMPASSION


               17. Compassion is the virtue that brings you closer to the
               angels; it is the sister of charity, which leads you to God.
               Ah! Allow your heart to be moved with compassion before
               the miseries and sufferings of your fellow beings. Your
               tears are a balm which you pour out on their wounds,



                                             283




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 283                                       3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                          CHAPTER XIII



               and when, out of kind sympathy, you manage to restore
               their hope and resignation, what delight you will feel! Such
               delight will of course contain a certain bitterness, because
               it is born alongside misfortune; however, since it does
               not have the acrid taste of worldly delights, neither does
               it have the pungent disappointments of emptiness that
               worldly pleasures leave in their wake; there is a penetrating
               gentleness that fills the soul with joy. Compassion,
               deeply felt, is love; love is devotion; devotion is forgetting
               oneself. And this forgetfulness, this self-denial on behalf
               of unfortunates, is virtue par excellence, the kind that the
               Divine Messiah practiced throughout his life and taught
               in his holy and sublime doctrine. Once this doctrine is
               returned to its primitive purity, when all peoples have
               accepted it, it will bring happiness to the earth, enabling
               harmony, peace and love to finally reign.

                      The most appropriate sentiment for enabling you to
               progress by subduing your selfishness and pride, the one
               that predisposes your soul to humility, beneficence and
               love for your neighbor, is compassion! That compassion
               which expresses itself within you at the sight of your
               brothers’ and sisters’ suffering, which impels you to reach
               out to them with a helping hand, and which moves you to
               tears of sympathy. Therefore, never smother this heavenly
               emotion in your hearts. Do not do like those hardened,
               selfish people who avoid the afflicted because the sight of
               their misery would upset them for a few moments of their
               carefree lives. Fear remaining indifferent when you could
               be useful. Peace of mind bought at the price of culpable
               indifference is the peace of mind of the Dead Sea, which
               hides fetid slime and decay in its depths.


                                              284




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 284                                     3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



                      However, how far compassion is from causing the
               trouble and annoyance the selfish person is so afraid of!
               Without a doubt, on contact with another’s misfortune,
               the soul rebounds upon itself and experiences a natural
               and profound ache that makes its entire being vibrate and
               affects it so painfully. But great will be the compensation
               when you manage to restore courage and hope to an
               unfortunate brother or sister who is moved by the contact
               of a friendly hand, and whose eyes, moist with emotion
               and acknowledgement, turn to you kindly before gazing
               into heaven in thankfulness for having sent a consoler,
               a support. Compassion is the melancholic but celestial
               precursor of charity, the first of all virtues. Compassion
               is the sister of charity, whose benefits she prepares and
               ennobles.

                                                   Michel (Bordeaux, 1862)



               ORPHANS


               18. My brothers and sisters, love all orphans. If you only
               knew how sad it is to be abandoned, especially in infancy!
               God allows there to be orphans in order to engage us to
               serve as their parents. What divine charity it is to help a
               poor abandoned child, to keep it from suffering hunger
               and cold, and to guide its soul so that it does not lose
               itself to vice! Those who reach out to an abandoned child
               are agreeable to God, for they understand and practice
               his law. Moreover, consider that many times the child you
               help may have been dear to you in another incarnation,



                                           285




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 285                                  3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                          CHAPTER XIII



               and if he or she could remember you, it would no longer
               be charity but an obligation. Thus, my friends, every
               sufferer is your brother or sister and has a right to your
               charity; but not the charity that wounds the heart or the
               alms that burn the hand in which they are deposited, for
               your alms are frequently quite bitter! How often these
               sufferers would refuse them if sickness and misery were
               not waiting for them at home! So, give delicately; add
               to your beneficent act the most precious of all acts: a
               good word, a pat, a friendly smile. Avoid the patronizing
               tone that twists the knife in a heart that is bleeding,
               and remember that in doing good you are working for
               yourself and your loved ones.

                                                    A Familiar Spirit (Paris, 1860)



               BENEFITS REPAID WITH INGRATITUDE


               19. What should be thought of persons whose beneficence
               has been repaid with ingratitude and who therefore no longer
               practice the good out of fear of meeting more ungrateful
               people?

                      These persons are much more selfish than charitable,
               since practicing the good only to receive signs of recognition
               is not to practice it disinterestedly, and disinterested
               beneficence is the only kind that is agreeable to God. The
               same applies to their pride, since they derive pleasure in
               the humility of the recipients who place their recognition
               at their feet. Those who seek recompense on the earth for
               the good they do will not receive recompense in heaven.


                                              286




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 286                                           3/7/2009 18:00:31

                         DO NOT LET YOUR LEFT HAND KNOW WHAT YOUR
                                     RIGHT HAND IS DOING



               However, God will take into account those who do not seek
               recompense on the earth.

                      You must always help the weak, even though you
               know beforehand that the recipients of the good you do will
               not be grateful. You can be certain that if those to whom
               you render a service forget about the benefit, God will take
               it more into account than if you had been recompensed by
               their gratitude. God sometimes allows you to be repaid with
               ingratitude in order to test your perseverance in practicing
               the good.

                      And moreover, how do you know if the momentarily
               forgotten act of beneficence might not produce good fruit
               later on? On the contrary, you can be certain that it is
               a seed that will germinate in time. Unfortunately, you
               always see only the present; you work for yourselves,
               and not with others in mind. Most assuredly, acts of
               beneficence end up softening the hardest hearts. They may
               be unappreciated in this world, but once the recipient’s
               spirit is rid of its corporeal envelope, it will remember,
               and that remembrance will be its punishment. Then, it
               will regret its ingratitude and will want to repair its wrong
               and pay its debt in another existence, often accepting a
               life of dedication toward its benefactor. Thus, without
               suspecting it, you will have contributed to that spirit’s
               moral advancement, and you will recognize later the truth
               of the maxim, “A benefit is never lost.” Moreover, you will
               have worked for yourselves, because you will have the
               merit of having done the good disinterestedly and without
               being discouraged by disillusionment.



                                           287




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 287                                    3/7/2009 18:00:31

                                          CHAPTER XIII



                      Ah! My friends, if you knew all the ties that in your
               present life bind you to previous ones; if you could grasp
               the multitude of relationships that connect people to one
               another for their mutual progress, you would admire even
               more the wisdom and goodness of the Creator, who allows
               you to live again and again to reach him in the end.

                                                 A Protector Guide (Sens, 1862)



               EXCLUSIVE BENEFICENCE


               20. Is beneficence rightly understood when practiced
               exclusively among persons of the same opinion, the same
               belief or the same political party?

                      No, because it is specially the spirit of sectarianism
               and political parties that must be abolished, for all humans
               are brothers and sisters. True Christians see only brothers
               and sisters in their fellow beings, and before helping those
               who are in need, they do not ask them about what their
               beliefs or opinions might be. Would Christians be obeying
               Jesus Christ’s precept that says to love even one’s enemies
               if they sent unfortunate individuals away because they
               profess a different belief system?

                      Therefore, help them without asking them to give an
               account of their conscience, for if they are an enemy of
               religion, it will be a way to lead them to love it; sending
               them away would cause them to hate it.

                                                         St. Louis (Paris, 1860)




                                              288




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 288                                        3/7/2009 18:00:31

               CHAPTER XIV


               Honor your father and
               mother
                      x Filial devotion

                      x Who is my mother and who are my brothers?

                      x Corporeal kinship and spirit kinship



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x Children’s ingratitude and family ties




                      1. You know the commandments: Do not commit adultery;
                      do not kill; do not steal; do not render false testimony; do
                      not speak ill of anyone; honor your father and your mother.
                      (Mk. 10:19; Lk. 18:20; Mt. 19:19)

                      2. Honor your father and your mother so that you may live
                      long in the land which the Lord your God shall give you.
                      (Decalogue, Ex: 20:12)




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 289                                          3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                          CHAPTER XIV



               FILIAL DEVOTION


               3. The commandment, “Honor your father and your
               mother” is a consequence of the general law of charity and
               love for one’s neighbor, for one cannot love one’s neighbor
               without loving one’s father and mother; however, the term
               honor includes an added duty in this regard: filial devotion.
               In this way, God wanted to show that to love, one must
               add respect, consideration, submission and acquiescence,
               which implies the obligation to fulfill toward them in
               an even stricter manner all that charity requires us to
               do for our neighbor. This duty naturally extends to the
               individuals who take the place of one’s father and mother,
               and who have even more merit because their devotion is
               less obligatory. God always severely punishes all violations
               of this commandment.

                      Honoring our father and mother does not only entail
               respecting them; it also means assisting them in their
               need, providing for their rest in old age, and surrounding
               them with the care they took of us in our childhood.

                      True filial devotion is displayed especially when
               parents are lacking in resources. Do persons really fulfill
               this commandment if they think they have done a great
               thing for having given their parents only what is necessary
               for them not to die of hunger, while they deprive themselves
               of nothing? Or if they relegate them to the worst rooms
               in the house so that they are not left out on the street,
               while reserving for their own use what is best and most
               comfortable? Such parents can even consider themselves



                                              290




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 290                                    3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                   HONOR YOUR FATHER AND MOTHER



               fortunate when this is not done out of ill will and if they
               are not made to pay for it for the rest of their lives by
               being put in charge of the housework! Is this the time of
               their lives when old and weak parents are to be servants
               of their younger and stronger children? Did their mother
               make them pay for her milk when they were in the cradle?
               Did she count the times she watched over them when
               they were ill or the steps she took to provide them with
               what they needed? No, children do not owe their poor
               parents only what is strictly necessary, but also all the
               sweet little extras possible, in token of the thoughtfulness
               and the loving care that represent the interest on what
               they themselves have received from them, the payment of
               a sacred debt. This is the only filial devotion accepted by
               God.

                      Woe, therefore, to those who forget what they owe to the
               ones who supported them in their weakness, who, besides
               their physical life gave them moral life also, and who often
               imposed harsh privations on themselves in order to ensure
               their well-being. Woe to such ingrates, for they themselves
               will be punished with ingratitude and abandonment; they
               will be struck in their dearest affections, sometimes in their
               current life, but certainly in another, when they themselves
               will bear what they made others bear.

                      It is true that some parents do not recognize their
               duties and are not what they should be for their children;
               however, it is for God to punish them and not their
               children. It is not the children’s place to reproach their
               parents, because they themselves perhaps deserve it to be



                                               291




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 291                                      3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                          CHAPTER XIV



               this way. If charity establishes as a law repaying evil with
               good, being indulgent toward the imperfections of others,
               not speaking ill of one’s neighbor, forgetting and forgiving
               wrongs and even loving one’s enemies, how much more
               do these obligations apply regarding one’s parents! Hence,
               children must take as their rule of conduct toward their
               parents all Jesus’ precepts concerning one’s neighbor,
               and tell themselves that every behavior that would be
               reprehensible toward strangers would be even more so
               toward their parents, and that what may be merely a wrong
               in the former instance may become a crime in the latter,
               because to the lack of charity one adds ingratitude.

               4. God said, “Honor your father and your mother so that
               you may live long in the land that the Lord your God shall
               give you.” But why does he promise earthly life as a reward
               and not heavenly life? The explanation is in these words,
               “that God shall give you,” which, omitted from the modern
               form of the Decalogue, denatures its meaning. In order
               to understand these words, one must recall the situation
               and ideas of the Hebrews at the time in which they were
               spoken. They did not yet understand the future life; their
               sight did not extend beyond the corporeal one. Thus, they
               had to be more strongly impressed by what they could
               see than by what they could not; that is why God spoke
               to them in a language appropriate for them, and as if
               speaking to children, did it in a manner that could satisfy
               them. At the time, they were in the desert, and the land
               that God shall give them was the Promised Land, the goal
               of their aspirations. They wanted nothing more than that,



                                              292




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 292                                   3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                   HONOR YOUR FATHER AND MOTHER



               and God told them that they would live a long time in it,
               meaning that they would possess it for a long time if they
               observed the divine commandments.

                      However, when Jesus came, their ideas had become
               more developed. The time having arrived to give them a less
               material nourishment, Jesus initiates them into the spirit life
               by telling them, “My kingdom is not of this world; it is there,
               and not on the earth, that you will receive recompense for
               your good deeds.” With these words, the physical Promised
               Land became a heavenly homeland. Furthermore, when
               he calls them to observe the commandment, “Honor your
               father and your mother,” it is no longer the earth that he
               promises them, but heaven. (See chaps. II and III)



               WHO IS MY MOTHER AND WHO ARE MY BROTHERS?


                      5. And arriving at the house, they found such a large crowd of
                      people gathered there that they could not even eat their meal.
                      When his family learned of this, they came to take charge of
                      him because they said that he had lost his mind.

                      Therefore, when his mother and brothers arrived, they
                      remained outside and asked for him to be called. Now the
                      people were seated around him and someone said to him,
                      “Your mother and brothers are outside calling for you.” But
                      he answered them, “Who is my mother and who are my
                      brothers?” And looking at those who were seated around
                      him, he said, “These are my mother and my brothers, for
                      whoever does God’s will is my brother, my sister and my
                      mother.” (Mk. 3:20,21, 31-35; Mt. 12:46-50)



                                                293




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 293                                            3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                          CHAPTER XIV



               6. Some of the words used by Jesus seem strange and
               appear to belie his goodness and inalterable benevolence
               toward everyone. Disbelievers never cease to use this
               as a weapon, stating that he contradicted himself. The
               undeniable fact, however, is that his doctrine has as its
               essential foundation and cornerstone the law of love and
               charity. Thus, he could not destroy on one hand what he
               established on the other, and we must therefore draw the
               unbending conclusion that, if some of his maxims are in
               contradiction with that basic principle, it is because the
               words attributed to him have been either wrongly conveyed,
               wrongly understood or were not his at all.

               7. It is understandably a cause for wonder that, in this
               circumstance, Jesus displays such indifference toward his
               family and in a certain way denies his own mother.

                      Regarding his brothers, it is said that they never held
               him in much esteem; being little-advanced spirits, they did
               not understand his mission; in their opinion, his behavior
               was bizarre and his teachings did not touch them, since
               he did not have one disciple from amongst them. It seems
               that to a certain extent they might even have shared
               the prejudices of his enemies. The fact of the matter is
               that they welcomed him more as a stranger than as a
               brother whenever he met with his family, and John states
               specifically that “they did not believe in him.” (Jn. 7:5)

                      As for his mother, no one could question her tenderness
               toward her son. However, one must also agree that she too
               seemed not to have had a very precise idea about Jesus’
               mission, as she was never known to follow his teachings



                                              294




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 294                                     3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                   HONOR YOUR FATHER AND MOTHER



               or give testimony regarding him as did John the Baptist;
               maternal solicitude was the sentiment that predominated
               in her. As far as Jesus is concerned, to believe that he
               denied his mother would be to show ignorance of his
               character: such an idea could not have animated the one
               who said, “Honor your father and your mother.” Hence, it
               is necessary to look for another meaning for his words,
               which were nearly always shrouded in the veil of allegory.

                      Jesus never wasted an opportunity to give a lesson;
               therefore, he took advantage of his family’s arrival to
               establish the difference between corporeal kinship and
               spirit kinship.



               CORPOREAL KINSHIP AND SPIRIT KINSHIP


               8. Blood ties do not necessarily establish ties among
               spirits. The body proceeds from the body, but the spirit
               does not proceed from the spirit, because the spirit already
               existed before the formation of the body. Parents do not
               create the spirit of their children; they do nothing except
               furnish them with their corporeal envelope, but it is their
               duty to aid in their intellectual and moral development in
               order to help them progress.

                      Spirits who incarnate in the same family – especially
               among close relatives – are most often sympathetic spirits,
               connected by previous relationships that are expressed by
               their mutual affection during earthly life. Nevertheless, it
               may also happen that such spirits are complete strangers
               to one another, divided by past-life antipathies that are


                                               295




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 295                                     3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                          CHAPTER XIV



               now expressed as animosity to serve as a trial. True family
               ties are not therefore blood ties, but ties of sympathy and
               similarity of ideas that connect spirits before, during and
               after their incarnations. It thus follows that two individuals
               born from different parents may be more like brothers
               through their spirits than if they were brothers through
               blood. They may attract each other, search for each other
               and feel happy together, whereas two brothers related by
               blood may repel each other – a fact attested to every day.
               This moral problem is one that only Spiritism can resolve by
               means of the plurality of existences. (See chap. IV, no. 13)

                      Consequently, there are two types of families: families
               through spirit ties and families through corporeal ties.
               The former are permanent, are strengthened through
               purification and are perpetuated in the spirit world through
               the many migrations of the soul. The latter are fragile like
               matter itself, are extinguished over time and often dissolve
               morally even in the current lifetime. This is what Jesus
               wanted to make understood by saying to his disciples,
               “Here are my mother and my brothers”; that is, my family
               through the ties of the spirit, because “all who do the will
               of my Father who is in heaven are my brother, my sister,
               and my mother.”

                      His brothers’ hostility is clearly expressed in Mark’s
               narrative, which states that their purpose was to take
               charge of him under the pretext that he had lost his
               mind. Upon being informed of their arrival, and knowing
               their sentiments toward him, it was natural that Jesus,
               speaking from a spiritual standpoint, would refer to his



                                              296




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 296                                       3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                   HONOR YOUR FATHER AND MOTHER



               disciples as “these are my true brothers.” His mother was
               with his brothers and thus Jesus generalizes his lesson,
               which in no way implies that he meant that his mother
               according to the body was nothing to him according to
               the spirit, and that he felt nothing but indifference toward
               her; his behavior on many other occasions proved quite
               the contrary.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               CHILDREN’S INGRATITUDE AND FAMILY TIES


               9. Ingratitude is one of the most immediate fruits of
               selfishness. It is always revolting to honest hearts. But
               the ingratitude of children toward their parents has an
               even more odious character. It is particularly from this
               point of view that we will look at ingratitude in order to
               analyze its causes and effects. In this case, as in all others,
               Spiritism has come to shed light on one of the problems of
               the human heart.

                      When the spirit leaves the earth behind, it takes with
               it the passions or virtues inherent to its nature, and goes
               into the spirit world either to perfect itself or to remain at a
               standstill until it desires to see the light. Some, therefore,
               depart carrying with them great hatred and insatiable
               desires for vengeance, but a few of these, more advanced
               than the others, are allowed to glimpse a bit of the truth.
               They realize the disastrous effects of their passions and
               then resolve to do better. They understand that, in order to
               reach God, there is one password only: charity. However,


                                               297




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 297                                       3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                          CHAPTER XIV



               there can be no charity without forgetting offenses and
               wrongs; neither can there be charity with hatred in the
               heart and without forgiveness.

                      Next, through an unprecedented effort, these spirits
               look at those they detested while on earth, but at such a
               sight, their animosity reawakens; they rebel against the idea
               of forgiveness and even more against self-denial, especially
               when it means loving those who perhaps destroyed their
               fortune, honor or family. In spite of this, however, the
               heart of these unfortunate spirits is shaken. They hesitate
               and waiver, troubled by their conflicting sentiments. If the
               resolution to do better wins, they pray to God and implore
               good spirits to give them strength at the most decisive
               moment of trial.

                      Finally, after years of meditation and prayer, the spirit
               profits from the use of a body that is to be born in the
               family of the one it used to hate, and it asks the spirits
               designated to transmit the divine orders to be allowed to
               fulfill on the earth the destiny of that body that is about
               to be formed. So, how will it behave as a member of this
               family? That will depend on the degree of persistence
               of its resolution to do better. The constant contact with
               individuals it used to hate is a terrible trial to which it
               succumbs sometimes if its will is not sufficiently strong.
               Thus, depending on whether its good or bad resolution
               prevails, it will either be a friend or enemy of those among
               whom it has been called upon to live. This is how one can
               explain those hatreds, those instinctive repulsions that
               may be observed in certain children and which no previous



                                              298




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 298                                       3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                   HONOR YOUR FATHER AND MOTHER



               act seems to justify. In fact, there is nothing in the present
               existence that could have caused such antipathy. In order
               to understand it, one must look to the past.

                      O Spiritists! You must understand humankind’s
               grand role; you must understand that, when you produce
               a body, the soul who incarnates in it has come from the
               spirit world in order to progress; know your duties and
               put all your love in leading that soul to God. This is the
               mission that has been entrusted to you and for which you
               will receive recompense if you faithfully fulfill it. The care
               and education you give it will help in its self-improvement
               and future well-being. Remember that God will ask every
               father and every mother, “What did you do for the children
               whom I entrusted into your care?” If because of your fault
               they have remained behind, your punishment will be to see
               them among the suffering spirits, when it depended on you
               for them to be happy. Hence, you yourselves, tormented by
               remorse, will ask to repair your wrong; you will ask for
               yourselves and for them another incarnation, in which you
               will surround them with more enlightened care, and, full
               of gratitude, they will surround you with their love.

                      Therefore, do not rebuff the little child who spurns its
               mother, nor the one who repays you with ingratitude. It
               was no accident that made it that way and gave it to you.
               An imperfect intuition about the past is being revealed,
               from which you may deduce that one or the other of you
               has hated much or has been greatly offended, and that
               one or the other has come to forgive or to expiate. Mothers!
               Embrace, therefore, the child who causes you trouble



                                               299




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 299                                      3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                          CHAPTER XIV



               and say to yourself: One of us was blameworthy! Make
               yourselves deserve the divine joys that God has bestowed
               upon motherhood by teaching your children that they
               are on the earth to improve themselves, to love, and to
               bless. But alas! Many of you, instead of using education
               to drive away the innate evil tendencies brought over from
               previous lifetimes, maintain and increase them because
               of a blameworthy weakness or because of negligence, and
               later on, your heart, ulcerated by the ingratitude of your
               children, will be for you, starting in this life, the beginning
               of your expiation.

                      The task is not as difficult as you might think,
               however. It does not require the wisdom of the world.
               The uneducated as well as the learned can fulfill it, and
               Spiritism has come to facilitate it by making known the
               cause of the imperfections of the human heart.

                      From infancy, children manifest the good or evil
               instincts they have brought from their previous existence,
               and it is necessary that we apply ourselves to studying
               them. All evils have their origin in selfishness and pride, so
               watch out for the least signs that reveal the seeds of these
               vices and take care to combat them without waiting for
               them to put down deeper roots. Do as good gardeners, who
               cut off the defective shoots as soon as they appear on the
               tree. If selfishness and pride are allowed to develop, do not
               be surprised if you are paid back later with ingratitude.
               When parents have done everything they should for their
               children’s moral advancement but are unsuccessful
               nonetheless, they have nothing to reproach themselves for



                                              300




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 300                                      3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                   HONOR YOUR FATHER AND MOTHER



               and their conscience can rest easy. But as for the very
               natural heartache they feel from the failure of their efforts,
               God reserves a great and immense consolation through the
               certainty that it is only a delay and that it will be given to
               them to achieve in another existence the work they began
               in this one, and that some day their ungrateful children
               will repay them with love. (See chap. XIII, no. 19)

                      God never imposes trials beyond the strength of
               those who ask for them; he only allows trials that can be
               accomplished. Regarding those who do not succeed, it is
               not because they lack the ability but because they lack
               the will, for there are many who, instead of resisting their
               evil tendencies, take pleasure in them. It is for these that
               tears and cries of anguish are reserved in later existences.
               Therefore, admire the goodness of God, who never shuts
               the door to repentance. A day will come when wrongdoers
               tire of suffering, when their pride is finally controlled, and
               that is when God opens his paternal arms to the prodigal
               son who throws himself at his feet. Harsh trials – hear me
               well – almost always indicate an end of suffering and of
               an improvement for the spirit when they are accepted out
               of love for God. It is a supreme moment, during which it
               is especially important not to fail by complaining if one
               does not want to lose the fruits of such trial and have
               to start it all over again. Instead of complaining, thank
               God for offering you the opportunity to triumph in order
               to award you with the prize of victory. Then, when you
               leave the whirlwind of the terrestrial world and enter the
               spirit world, you will be acclaimed like the soldier who has
               departed victorious from the midst of combat.


                                               301




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 301                                     3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                          CHAPTER XIV



                      Of all trials, the hardest are those that affect the heart.
               Some courageously bear misery and material privations
               but yield to the weight of domestic bitterness, bruised
               by the ingratitude of their loved ones. Oh! What pungent
               heartbreak that is! However, in such circumstances, what
               can better display moral courage than an understanding
               of the causes of evil and the certainty that even if there are
               long afflictions, despair does not last forever, for God cannot
               want one of his creatures to suffer eternally. What can be
               more consoling, more encouraging than the thought that
               it depends on your own efforts to shorten your suffering
               by destroying the causes of evil within yourselves? To do
               so, however, you cannot keep your gaze on the earth and
               see only one existence; lift yourselves up and hover in the
               infinity of the past and the future. Then God’s great justice
               will be revealed to you and you will wait patiently because
               you understand what seemed like monstrosities while on
               the earth, and the wounds you received there will seem
               like nothing more than scratches. In that glance cast over
               the whole, family ties will appear in their true light. They
               are no longer the fragile ties of matter connecting family
               members, but the lasting ties of the spirit, which continue
               and consolidate as they purify themselves instead of being
               broken through reincarnation.

                      Spirits whose similarity in tastes, identification in
               moral progress and affection are led to gather together to
               form families. During their earthly migrations, these same
               spirits seek one another out in order to group together
               as they did in the spirit world, and from this, united
               and homogenous families are born. And if during their


                                               302




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 302                                         3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                   HONOR YOUR FATHER AND MOTHER



               pilgrimages they are temporarily separated, they will find
               one another later, happy for their latest progress. But
               since they must not work only for themselves, God allows
               less-advanced spirits to incarnate among them in order
               to receive counsel and good examples in the interest of
               their own advancement. These spirits sometimes cause
               trouble, but that is what comprises the trial, that is where
               the task lies. Therefore, welcome them as brothers and
               sisters. Come to their aid, and later, in the world of spirits,
               the family will be happy for having saved castaways, who,
               in turn, will be able to save others.

                                                     St. Augustine (Paris, 1862)




                                               303




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 303                                        3/7/2009 18:00:32

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 304   3/7/2009 18:00:32

               CHAPTER XV


               Without 1 charity there is
               no salvation
                      x What is needed in order to be saved. Parable of the
                           Good Samaritan

                      x The greatest commandment

                      x The need for charity according to Paul

                      x Without the Church there is no salvation. Without
                          the truth there is no salvation



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x Without charity there is no salvation




               1
                 As will be seen, this is a play on the motto, “Without the Church
               there is no salvation,” (extra ecclesiam nulla salus) which is sometimes
               rendered as, “Apart from the Church…” or “Outside the Church…”
               The term without thus implies more of a sense of locale rather than
               possession, that is, without as opposed to within. – Tr.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 305                                               3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                            CHAPTER XV



              WHAT IS NEEDED IN ORDER TO BE SAVED. PARABLE
              OF THE GOOD SAMARITAN


                      1. Now, when the Son of Man comes in his majesty,
                      accompanied by all the angels, he will sit on the throne of his
                      glory; and all the peoples being gathered before him, he will
                      separate them from one another as a shepherd separates the
                      sheep from the goats, and he will place the sheep on his right
                      and the goats on his left.

                      Then, the King will say to those who are on his right, “Come,
                      you who are blessed by my Father; take possession of the
                      kingdom that has been prepared for you since the beginning
                      of the world, for I was hungry and you gave me to eat; I was
                      thirsty and you gave me to drink; I was in need of shelter
                      and you sheltered me; I was naked and you clothed me; I
                      was sick and you visited me; I was in prison and you came
                      to see me.”

                      Then, the righteous will answer him, “Lord, when was it that
                      we saw you hungry and gave you to eat, or thirsty and gave
                      you to drink? When was it that we saw you without a shelter
                      and sheltered you, or without clothes and clothed you? And
                      when was it that we saw you sick or in prison and came to
                      visit you?” And the King will respond to them, “Verily I say
                      to you, as often as you did it on behalf of the least of my
                      brothers, it was to me that you did it.”

                      Next, to those who are on his left he will say, “Away from me,
                      you who are accursed; go to the eternal fire that has been
                      prepared for the devil and his angels, for I was hungry and
                      you did not give me to eat; I was thirsty and you did not give



                                                   306




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 306                                             3/7/2009 18:00:32

                             WITHOUT CHARITY THERE IS NO SALVATION



                      me to drink; I needed shelter and you did not shelter me; I
                      had no clothes and you did not clothe me; I was sick and in
                      prison and you did not visit me.”

                      Then, these too will reply, “Lord, when was it that we saw
                      you hungry, thirsty, or without shelter, or sick or in prison and
                      we failed to help you?” But he will respond to them, “Verily I
                      say to you, as often as you failed to render this assistance to
                      one of the least of these, you failed to do it to me.”

                      And they will go to eternal punishment, and the righteous to
                      eternal life. (Mt. 25:31-46)

                      2.    Then, a doctor of the law stood up and said to him in
                      order to test him, “Master, what must I do to possess eternal
                      life?” Jesus answered him, “What is it that is written in the
                      Law? What have you read in it?” He responded to him, “You
                      shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your
                      soul, with all your strength, and with all your mind, and your
                      neighbor as yourself.” Jesus said to him, “You have answered
                      well; do so and you shall live.”

                      However, wanting to appear to be righteous, the man said
                      to Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?” And Jesus answering
                      said to him:

                      “A certain man was coming down from Jerusalem to Jericho
                      and fell into the hands of thieves, who stripped him of his
                      clothes, covered him with wounds and left him half-dead.
                      Afterward, it just so happened that a priest was coming
                      down by the same way, and having noticed him, passed him
                      by on the other side. A Levite, who also came to the same
                      spot, saw him but passed by on the other side. But when a




                                                 307




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 307                                               3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                             CHAPTER XV



                      Samaritan, who was on a journey, came to where the man
                      was and saw him, he was touched with great compassion.
                      He approached him and poured oil and wine on his wounds
                      and bandaged them. And putting him on his own animal,
                      took him to an inn and cared for him. The following day, he
                      took two silver coins and gave them to the innkeeper, saying,
                      ‘Take good care of this man and whatever more you spend I
                      will repay you when I return.’

                      “Which of these three seems to you to have been the neighbor of
                      the one who fell into the hands of the thieves?” The doctor of the
                      law responded to him, “The one who showed compassion on
                      him.” Jesus said to him “Go and do likewise.” (Lk. 10:25-37)

               3. All of Jesus’ morals are summed up in charity and
               humility, that is, in the two virtues contrary to selfishness
               and pride. In all his teachings, he points to these two
               virtues as being the way to eternal happiness. Blessed are
               the poor in spirit, he said, meaning the humble, for theirs
               is the Kingdom of Heaven; blessed are the pure in heart;
               blessed are the meek and the peace-loving; blessed are the
               merciful; love your neighbor as yourself; do unto others
               what you want them to do unto you; love your enemies;
               forgive offenses if you yourself want to be forgiven; practice
               the good without ostentation; judge yourselves before you
               judge others. Humility and charity are the things Jesus
               never ceased to recommend, and for which he himself
               gave the example. Pride and selfishness are the things he
               never ceased to combat. But he did more than recommend
               charity; he put it in clear and explicit terms as an absolute
               condition for future happiness.



                                                  308




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 308                                                3/7/2009 18:00:32

                             WITHOUT CHARITY THERE IS NO SALVATION



                      In the picture that Jesus portrays of the Final Judgment,
               it is necessary – as in many other cases – to separate
               symbol from allegory. To people such as the ones to whom
               he spoke, who were still incapable of understanding purely
               spiritual matters, he had to present physical imagery that
               was striking and capable of impressing them. To be better
               accepted, he could not depart very far from the form of
               current established ideas, always reserving for the future
               the true interpretation of his words and the points that he
               could not explain clearly at the time. However, alongside
               the supplementary and figurative part of the picture, one
               idea predominates: the happiness awaiting the righteous
               and the unhappiness reserved for the unrighteous.

                      In that final judgment, what will be taken into
               consideration in passing sentence? Upon what will
               the indictment be based? Will the Judge ask if one has
               fulfilled this or that formality, or observed such and such
               outward practice? No. He will ask about one thing only:
               the practice of charity. And in passing sentence he will
               say: You who assisted your brothers and sisters, go on the
               right; you who were harsh toward them, go on the left. Will
               he inquire as to the orthodoxy of their faith? Will he make
               a distinction between those who believe in one manner
               and those who believe in another? No, for Jesus places the
               Samaritan – regarded as a heretic, but who showed love
               toward his neighbor – above orthodoxy that lacks charity.
               Jesus thus did not make charity only one of the conditions
               for salvation, but the sole condition. If there were other
               conditions to fulfill, he would have mentioned them. If he
               places charity on the first plane of the virtues, it is because


                                              309




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 309                                       3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                          CHAPTER XV



               charity implicitly entails all the others: humility, kindness,
               benevolence, indulgence, justice, etc., and because it is
               the complete negation of pride and selfishness.



               THE GREATEST COMMANDMENT


                      4. But having found out that he had put the Sadducees
                      to silence, the Pharisees got together; and one of them,
                      who was a doctor of the law, came to ask this question
                      of him in order to test him: “Master, what is the greatest
                      commandment of the Law?” Jesus replied, “You shall
                      love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all
                      your soul and with all your mind. That is the greatest
                      and first commandment. And here is the second, which
                      is similar to that one: You shall love your neighbor as
                      yourself. All the Law and the prophets are contained in
                      these two commandments.” (Mt. 22:34-40)

               5. Charity and humility: that is the sole path to salvation;
               selfishness and pride: that is the sole path to perdition. This
               principle is formulated in precise terms in these words:
               “You shall love God with all your soul and your neighbor as
               yourself; all the Law and the prophets are contained in these
               two commandments.” And so that there may be no mistake
               about the interpretation of loving God and one’s neighbor,
               Jesus adds, “And this is the second commandment, which
               is similar to the first,” that is, one cannot truly love God
               without loving one’s neighbor, nor can one love one’s
               neighbor without loving God. Thus, everything that is done
               against one’s neighbor is also done against God. And since



                                              310




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 310                                        3/7/2009 18:00:32

                             WITHOUT CHARITY THERE IS NO SALVATION



               one cannot love God without practicing charity toward one’s
               neighbor, all of humankind’s duties are summed up in the
               maxim: WITHOUT CHARITY THERE IS NO SALVATION.



               THE NEED FOR CHARITY ACCORDING TO PAUL


                      6. Even if I were to speak all the languages of men and the
                      language of the angels themselves, if I did not have charity1,
                      I would be only like a sounding gong or a clanging cymbal.
                      And if I were to have the gift of prophecy and grasped all
                      mysteries, and if I had a perfect knowledge of all things; and
                      if I had all the faith possible to the point of moving mountains,
                      if I did not have charity, I would be nothing. And if I were to
                      distribute my belongings to feed the poor and delivered my
                      body to be burned, if I did not have charity, none of this
                      would be of any use to me.

                      Charity is patient; it is kind and benevolent; charity is not
                      envious; it is not rash or hurried; it is not full of pride; it is not
                      scornful; it does not look after its own interests. It does not
                      take offense or become upset by anything; it does not suspect
                      evil; it does not rejoice in injustice, but rejoices in the truth;

               1
                 Sacy’s version (as well as older English versions) uses the word charity for
               the Greek term agape, which in all other English versions is rendered as
               love. Charity derives from the Latin caritas, which is the Latin equivalent
               of agape. Webster’s states as one of the definitions of charity: Christian
               love; agape. – Tr.
                   Explanation of charity according to The Spirits’ Book in Question
               886: “What is the true meaning of the word charity, as Jesus understood
               it? “Benevolence towards everyone, indulgence for the imperfections of
               others and forgiveness for offenses.” – Tr.


                                                   311




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 311                                                     3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                            CHAPTER XV



                      it bears all things, believes all things, hopes for all things,
                      endures all things.

                      Now, these three virtues remain: faith, hope and charity, but
                      among them, the most excellent is charity. (I Cor. 13:1-7, 13)

               7. St. Paul understood this great truth so profoundly
               that he said: “Even if I were to speak the language of the
               angels themselves; if I were to have the gift of prophecy and
               grasped all mysteries; if I had all the faith possible to the
               point of moving mountains, but did not have charity, I would
               be nothing. Among these virtues: faith, hope and charity,
               the most excellent is charity.” Hence, without any doubt, he
               places charity above faith itself, because charity is within
               everyone’s reach: the ignorant and the learned, the rich
               and the poor, because it is independent of any particular
               belief system. He does even more: he defines true charity;
               he shows that it is not only displayed in beneficence, but in
               the gathering of all the qualities of the heart, in goodness
               and benevolence toward one’s neighbor.



               WITHOUT THE CHURCH THERE IS NO SALVATION.
              WITHOUT THE TRUTH THERE IS NO SALVATION


              8. While the maxim, “Without charity there is no salvation” is
              based on a universal principle and gives all God’s children
              access to supreme happiness, the dogma Without the Church
              there is no salvation is based not upon a fundamental faith
              in God and the immortality of the soul – a faith common to
              all religions – but instead upon the special faith in particular
              dogmas; it is exclusive and absolute. Instead of uniting


                                                 312




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 312                                                3/7/2009 18:00:32

                             WITHOUT CHARITY THERE IS NO SALVATION



               God’s children, it divides them; instead of stirring them to
               love their brothers and sisters, it maintains and sanctions
               the strife among the sectarians of various denominations,
               which mutually regard one another as damned for all
               eternity, even though they might be relatives and friends in
               this world. By misunderstanding the great law of equality
               before the grave, it separates people from one another even
               in the realm of repose. The maxim, “Without charity there
               is no salvation” is consecrated to the principle of equality
               before God and freedom of conscience. With this maxim
               as a rule, all men and women are brothers and sisters,
               and whatever may be the way in which they worship the
               Creator, they hold out their hands to one another and pray
               for one another. With the dogma Without the Church there
               is no salvation, they anathematize one other, persecute
               one another and live as enemies. The father does not
               pray for the son, nor the son for the father, nor the friend
               for a friend if they believe each other to be condemned
               forever. Therefore, this dogma is essentially contrary to the
               teachings of Christ and the law of the Gospel.

               9. Without the truth there is no salvation would be the
               equivalent of Without the Church there is no salvation,
               and would be equally exclusive because there is not one
               single denomination that does not claim to be privileged
               with the truth. What person could boast of possessing the
               whole truth, when the circle of knowledge is increasing
               constantly, and ideas are being rectified each and every
               day? The absolute truth is shared only among spirits
               of the highest order, and earthly humankind could not
               pretend to belong to that order, because it has not been


                                              313




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 313                                    3/7/2009 18:00:32

                                          CHAPTER XV



               given to it to know everything. Humans can aspire only
               to a relative truth proportional to their advancement. If
               God had made possessing the whole truth as an express
               condition for future happiness, this would be a sentence
               of general proscription, whereas charity, even in its
               broadest definition, may be practiced by all. Spiritism, in
               accordance with the Gospel, and believing that one can be
               saved whatever one’s belief may be, provided one observes
               God’s laws, does not state: Without Spiritism there is no
               salvation; and since it does not claim as yet to teach the
               whole truth, neither does it state: Without the truth there is
               no salvation,” a maxim that would divide instead of unite,
               and would perpetuate antagonism.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               WITHOUT CHARITY THERE IS NO SALVATION


               10. My children, in the maxim Without charity there is no
               salvation are contained the destinies of men and women
               on earth and in heaven; on earth, because in the shadow
               of this banner they will live in peace; in heaven, because
               those who have practiced it will find grace before the Lord.
               This motto is the heavenly light, the luminous pillar that
               guides them through the desert of life in order to lead
               them to the Promised Land. It shines in heaven like a
              saintly halo around the brows of the elect, and on earth
              it is engraved on the hearts of those to whom Jesus will
              say: Go to the right, you who are blessed of my Father.
              You will recognize them by the fragrance of charity that



                                             314




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 314                                     3/7/2009 18:00:33

                             WITHOUT CHARITY THERE IS NO SALVATION



               they spread around them. Nothing better expresses Jesus’
               thought, nothing better sums up the duties of men and
               women than this maxim of divine order. Spiritism could
               not prove its origin in any better way than by providing it as
               a rule, because is the reflection of the purest Christianity.
               With such a guide, people will never become lost. So, my
               friends, apply yourselves to grasping its profound meaning
               and consequences, and to discovering for yourselves all its
               applications. Submit all your actions to the test of charity
               and your conscience will respond to you. Not only will it help
               you to avoid practicing evil, but it will lead you to practice
               the good, for not to have a negative virtue is not enough; it
               is necessary to have an active one. In order to practice the
               good, the action of the will is always necessary, whereas
               in order not to practice evil, idleness and negligence are
               often enough.

                      My friends, give thanks to God, who has allowed you to
               enjoy the light of Spiritism, not because those who possess
               this enlightenment are the only ones who will be saved, but
               because, in helping you to understand Christ’s teachings
               more fully, it makes you better Christians. So, make every
               effort so that when others observe you, they can say that
               the true Spiritist and the true Christian are one and the
               same thing, for all who practice charity are Jesus’ disciples,
               whatever the denomination to which they belong.

                                                      Paul, Apostle (Paris 1860)




                                              315




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 315                                        3/7/2009 18:00:33

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 316   3/7/2009 18:00:33

               CHAPTER XVI


               You cannot serve both
               God and mammon
                      x The salvation of the rich

                      x Guard yourselves against avarice

                      x Jesus at Zacchaeus’ house

                      x Parable of the evil rich man

                      x Parable of the talents

                      x The providential usefulness of riches. The trials of
                      riches and poverty

                      x The inequality of riches



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x True ownership

                      x The use of riches

                      x Detachment from earthly possessions

                      x The transmission of wealth




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 317                                     3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                             CHAPTER XVI



               THE SALVATION OF THE RICH


                      1. No one can serve two masters, for he will either hate one
                      and love the other, or he will become attached to one and
                      despise the other. You cannot serve both God and mammon
                      at the same time. (Lk. 16:13)

                      2. Then a young man came to him and asked, “Good master,
                      what must I do to acquire eternal life?” Jesus answered
                      him, “Why do you call me good? Only God is good. If you
                      want to enter that life, keep the commandments.” “Which
                      commandments?” he asked. Jesus said to him, “You shall not
                      kill; you shall not commit adultery; you shall not steal; you
                      shall not bear false witness. Honor your father and mother
                      and love your neighbor as yourself.”

                      The young man answered him, “I have kept all those
                      commandments since my youth. What do I still lack?” Jesus
                      said to him, “If you want to be perfect, go and sell all you
                      have and give the money to the poor and you will have a
                      treasure in heaven. Then, come and follow me.”

                      Upon hearing these words, the young man went away very
                      sad because he had great wealth. And Jesus said to his
                      disciples, “Verily I say to you, it is very difficult for a rich man
                      to enter the kingdom of heaven. And I say this to you once
                      more: It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a
                      needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.1
                      (Mt. 19:16-24; Lk. 18:18-25; Mk. 10:17-25)


               1
                 This keen image may appear a bit forced because one might not be able
               to see any relation between a camel and a needle. However, in Hebrew,
               the same word serves to designate both a camel and a rope. In [Sacy’s]
               translation, the former meaning has been used, but Jesus probably
               meant to refer to the latter. That would at least be more natural. – Auth.


                                                   318




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 318                                                  3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



               GUARD YOURSELVES AGAINST AVARICE


                      3. Then, amidst the crowd, a man said to him, “Master, tell
                      my brother to divide with me the inheritance that will befall
                      us.” But Jesus said to him, “Man! Who made me to judge
                      you or decide your allotment?” Jesus then said to them, “Be
                      careful to guard yourselves against all avarice, for no matter
                      how much abundance a man may have, his life does not
                      depend on the riches he possesses.”

                      He then told them the following parable: There was a rich
                      man whose lands had produced extraordinarily; and so he
                      thought to himself, “What shall I do, because I do not have a
                      place where I can put all that I have reaped? Here is what I
                      shall do: I will tear down my barns and build bigger ones, into
                      which I can put my entire harvest and all my possessions.
                      And I will say to my soul: Soul, you have many possessions
                      saved up for many years; rest, eat, drink and enjoy. However,
                      at the same time, God said to the man, “How foolish you are!
                      Your soul shall be taken this very night, and then who will
                      possess what you have accumulated?”

                      “That      is   what   happens    to   those   who   accumulate
                      wealth for themselves but who are not wealthy before
                      God.” (Lk. 12:13-21)



               JESUS AT ZACCHAEUS’ HOUSE


                      4. Having entered Jericho, Jesus was walking through the
                      city. And there was a man named Zacchaeus, who was the
                      chief of the publicans and very wealthy, and who, wanting


                                                  319




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 319                                             3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                           CHAPTER XVI



                      to see Jesus in order to get to know him, was not able to
                      because of the crowd, for he was quite small. Therefore, he ran
                      ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see him, for he
                      would have to pass by there. Having come to that spot, Jesus
                      looked up, and seeing Zacchaeus said to him, “Zacchaeus,
                      make haste and come down, for I must stay at your house
                      today.” Zacchaeus came down at once and welcomed him
                      with joy. Seeing this, everyone murmured, saying, “He has
                      gone to stay at the house of a sinner.” (See Introduction, Item
                      Publicans)

                      Meanwhile, Zacchaeus stood before the Lord and said to him,
                      “Lord, I shall give half of what I own to the poor and if I
                      have caused harm to anyone, no matter who, I shall repay
                      him fourfold.” Jesus said to him, “This house has received
                      salvation today, because this man too is a son of Abraham,
                      for the Son of Man has come to seek and to save those who
                      were lost.” (Lk. 19:1-10)



               PARABLE OF THE EVIL RICH MAN


                      5. There was once a rich man who dressed in purple and
                      linen, and who treated himself magnificently every day. There
                      was also a poor man named Lazarus, who lay at his gate
                      completely covered with sores, and who hoped to mitigate his
                      hunger with the crumbs that fell from the rich man’s table.
                      However, no one gave him any and the dogs came to lick his
                      sores. It so happened that the poor man died and was taken
                      by the angels to the bosom of Abraham. The rich man also
                      died and had hell as his grave. While he was in torment, he



                                                  320




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 320                                             3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



                      lifted his eyes on high and saw Abraham far off with Lazarus
                      in his bosom; and he cried out, “Father Abraham, have mercy
                      on me and send me Lazarus so that he might wet the tip of
                      his finger in water to bring a little refreshment to my tongue,
                      for I am suffering awful torment in these flames.”

                      But Abraham answered him, “My son, remember that you
                      already received your riches during your lifetime and that
                      Lazarus had nothing but ills; that is why he is now being
                      consoled, whereas you are in torment.

                      “Moreover, there will forever be a large abyss between you and
                      us, such that those who would like to go from here to there
                      cannot, just as one cannot come here from where you are.”

                      The rich man said to him, “Then I beg you, Father Abraham,
                      to send him to my father’s house, where I have five brothers,
                      in order to attest to them about these things for fear that they
                      too might come to this place of torment.” Abraham replied to
                      him, “They have Moses and the prophets; let them listen
                      to them.” “No, Father Abraham, said the rich man, “but
                      if someone from the dead were to go to them, they would
                      repent.” Abraham responded to him, “If they do not listen
                      to Moses or the prophets, they will not believe anyone else,
                      even if someone from the dead were to come back to life.”
                      (Lk. 16:19-31)



               PARABLE OF THE TALENTS


                      6. The Lord acts like a man who, upon having to make a long
                      journey outside his country, called his servants and placed




                                                 321




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 321                                              3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                           CHAPTER XVI



                      his property in their hands. And having given five talents to
                      one, two to another and one to another, according to each
                      one’s different abilities, he departed immediately. Then, the
                      one who had received the five talents went out, did business
                      with the money and gained five more. The one who had
                      received two gained two more the same way. But the one who
                      had received only one talent dug a hole in the ground and
                      hid his lord’s money therein. Some time later, the servants’
                      master returned and called them to give an accounting. The
                      one who had received five talents came and presented him
                      with five more, saying, “Master, you placed five talents in my
                      hands; here are five more that I have gained.” His master
                      responded to him, “You good and faithful servant, since you
                      have been faithful in a small matter, I will entrust you with
                      many others; share in the joy of your master.” The one who
                      had received two talents soon presented himself, saying,
                      “Master, you placed two talents in my hands; here are two
                      more that I have gained.” His master responded to him, “You
                      good and faithful servant, since you have been faithful in
                      a small matter, I will entrust you with many others; enter
                      into the joy of your master.” Next, the one who had received
                      only one talent came and said to him, “Master, I knew that
                      you are a hard man, who reaps where you have not sown
                      and gathers where you have not scattered. Thus, since I was
                      afraid of you, I hid your talent in the ground. Here it is. I
                      am returning what is yours.” The master, however, answered
                      him, “You evil and lazy servant; you knew that I reap where
                      I have not sown and gather where I have not scattered; thus,
                      you should have at least put my money in the hands of the
                      bankers so that, upon my return, I could have withdrawn



                                                322




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 322                                            3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



                      with interest what was mine. Therefore, let his one talent be
                      taken from him and be given to the one who has ten, for to
                      those who already have more will be given and they shall
                      have in abundance, but for him who has nothing, even what
                      he seems to have will be taken from him. Let that useless
                      servant be cast into outer darkness, where there will be
                      weeping and gnashing of teeth.” (Mt. 25:14-30)



               THE PROVIDENTIAL USEFULNESS OF RICHES

               THE TRIALS OF RICHES AND POVERTY


               7. If wealth were an insuperable obstacle to the salvation of
               those who possess it, as might be inferred from certain
               words of Jesus if interpreted literally and not according to
               their spirit, then God, who grants riches, would have put in
               the hands of some an instrument of unavoidable perdition,
               a thought that is repugnant to reason. Undoubtedly, wealth
               is a very slippery trial, more dangerous than poverty because
               of its allure, the temptations it creates and the fascination
               it exerts. It is the supreme arouser of pride, selfishness and
               lust. It is the strongest tie that keeps humans bound to the
               earth and diverts their thoughts from heaven. It produces
               such giddiness that we often see that those who go from
               poverty to wealth soon forget their former condition, those
               who shared with them in it and those who helped them in
               it, and they become insensitive, selfish and vain. However,
               even though wealth makes the journey difficult, it does not
               follow that it makes it impossible or that it cannot become
               a means of salvation in the hands of those who know how



                                                323




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 323                                           3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                          CHAPTER XVI



               to use it, just as certain poisons can restore health if used
               purposefully and carefully.

                      When Jesus told the young man who had asked him
               about the means of inheriting eternal life, “Get rid of all
               you have and follow me,” he did not intend to establish
               an absolute principle that everyone must sell what they
               possess and that salvation can be obtained only at such
               a price; rather, he meant to show that the attachment to
               earthly riches is an obstacle to salvation. In fact, the young
               man believed he was in accord with the law because he
               had observed certain commandments, and he therefore
               recoiled from the notion of abandoning his wealth. His
               desire for eternal life did not go as far as making such a
               sacrifice.

                      What Jesus proposed to him was a decisive test meant
               to uncover what was at the core of his thinking. From the
               world’s point of view, he could undoubtedly have been a
               perfectly honest man who did not harm anyone, did not
               slander his neighbor, was neither vain nor proud, and who
               honored his mother and father. However, he did not practice
               true charity, because his virtue did not extend as far as
               self-sacrifice. That is what Jesus wanted to demonstrate.
               It was an application of the principle, “Without charity
               there is no salvation.”

                      If these words were taken literally, the consequence
               would be the abolition of wealth as detrimental to future
               happiness and as the source of a multitude of ills on earth.
               Furthermore, it would be the condemnation of the labor
               that could procure it. This would be an absurd consequence



                                              324




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 324                                     3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



               that would take humankind back to its primitive period
               and would in and of itself contradict the law of progress,
               which is a law of God.

                      If riches are the source of many ills, if they arouse
               so many evil passions, if they provoke so many crimes,
               riches per se are not to blame, but the human beings who
               abuse them as they do all God’s gifts. By this abuse, they
               render pernicious what would otherwise be very useful
               to them; but this is the result of the inferior state of the
               terrestrial world. If wealth could produce only evil, God
               would not have put it on the earth. It is up to humans to
               make it produce the good. If it is not a direct element for
               moral progress, it is undeniably a powerful element for
               intellectual progress.

                      The truth of the matter is that humans have the
               mission of laboring for the material improvement of the
               planet; they must reclaim it, cleanse it and make it suitable
               to someday receive the entire population that its range
               can bear. In order to feed this ever-increasing population,
               production must be increased. If one country’s production
               is insufficient, it will have to be sought elsewhere. For this
               very reason, relations between nations become a necessity.
               In order to facilitate such relations, it is necessary to
               destroy the physical barriers that separate nations and to
               render communication more rapid. For such endeavors –
               which are the work of centuries – humans have had to
               extract materials from the bowels of the earth; they have
               sought in science the means to execute their endeavors
               more safely and rapidly. However, to accomplish them,



                                            325




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 325                                     3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                          CHAPTER XVI



               resources are needed; necessity drove humans to create
               wealth, just as it drove them to discover science. The
               activity required by these endeavors has increased and
               developed their intelligence, and this intelligence, which
               they have concentrated primarily on satisfying their
               material needs, will help them later on to understand the
               great moral truths. Since wealth is the primary means of
               executing these tasks, without it there would be no more
               great endeavors, no more activity, no stimulus and no
               research. It is with good reason therefore that wealth is
               considered an element of progress.



               THE INEQUALITY OF RICHES


               8. The inequality of riches is one of those problems one
               tries in vain to resolve if one considers only the present
               life. The first question that presents itself is: Why are all
               humans not equally wealthy? They are not equally wealthy
               for one very simple reason: they are not equally intelligent,
               active and industrious enough to acquire wealth, or moderate
               and foresightful enough to preserve it. Furthermore, it is
               a mathematically demonstrated fact that if wealth were
               divided equally, it would give each person a minimal and
               insufficient portion; that if such division were carried
               out, the equilibrium would soon be shattered due to the
               diversity in character and aptitudes; that if the division
               were possible and lasting, with each person having only
               enough to live on, it would be the end of all the great
               endeavors that contribute to the progress and well-being



                                              326




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 326                                    3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



               of humankind; that if it provided each person with what
               is necessary, there would no longer be the stimulus that
               compels humans to great discoveries and worthwhile
               enterprises. If God concentrates wealth in certain areas, it
               is because from there it expands in sufficient quantities,
               according to the necessities.

                      In accepting this fact, one might ask why God grants
               wealth to persons who are incapable of making it fruitful
               for the good of all. This is yet another proof of God’s
               wisdom and goodness. By giving humans free will, God
               wanted them to reach the point where, through their own
               experience, they could distinguish between good and evil,
               and that the practice of the good be the result of their
               own efforts and will. Humans must not be fatalistically
               led either to good or evil or they would be nothing more
               than passive and irresponsible animal-like instruments.
               Wealth is a means of testing them morally; but since it
               is simultaneously a powerful means of inducing progress,
               God does not wish for it to remain unproductive for long,
               and thus moves it around incessantly. All persons will
               possess it at one time or another in order to try their
               hand at it, and to test the use they make of it. However,
               since it is physically impossible for all to possess it at the
               same time, and, moreover, if all did possess it, no one
               would work and the improvement of the planet would be
               compromised; each individual possesses it in turn. The one
               who does not possess it today has either had it already or
               will have it in a future life; and the one who possess it now
               might not have it tomorrow. There are both the rich and
               the poor, because, since God is just, each must work in


                                            327




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 327                                     3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                          CHAPTER XVI



               turn. Poverty is for some a test of patience and resignation;
               wealth is for others a test of charity and self-denial.

                      The lamentable use that some persons make of their
               wealth and the ignoble passions that greed provokes are
               rightly deplorable, and one might ask if God is really just
               in giving it to such persons. It is certain that if humans
               had only one life to live, nothing would justify such a
               division of earthly wealth; however, if instead of limiting
               our vision to the present life we would consider the whole
               sequence of lives, we would see that everything balances
               out justly. Hence, the poor no longer have reason to accuse
               Providence or to envy the rich, and the rich no longer have
               any reason to gloat over what they possess. If they abuse
               it, it is not with decrees or sumptuary laws that wrongs
               will be righted. Laws can temporarily change one on the
               outside, but they cannot change one’s heart; that is why
               these laws have a temporary duration and are always
               followed by a reaction even more unrestrained. The source
               of the evil resides in selfishness and pride. Abuses of every
               kind will cease by themselves when humankind rules itself
               according to the law of charity.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               TRUE OWNERSHIP


               9. Humans truly possess only what they can take with
               them from this world. What they find upon arriving and
               what they leave behind upon departing, they can only
               enjoy during their stay. However, since they are forced to


                                              328




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 328                                    3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



               abandon it, they can only enjoy it and not truly possess it.
               What, then, do they truly possess? Nothing that is for the
               use of their body, but everything that is for the use of their
               soul: intelligence, knowledge, moral qualities. These are
               what they bring with them and what they take back; what
               no one can take from them and what will be more useful
               for them in the other world than in this one. It is up to
               them to be wealthier upon departing than they were upon
               arriving, for their future situation will depend on whatever
               good they have acquired. Whenever people go to a far-off
               country, they place in their luggage objects that will be
               useful in that country; they do not carry anything that
               would be useless. Therefore, do likewise regarding your
               future life, and provide yourselves with everything that will
               be of use to you there.

                      Travelers who stop at an inn are given a nice room
               only if they can pay for it; those who have scanty resources
               are given a less agreeable one; as far as those who do not
               have any money at all, they sleep on a pile of straw. The
               same applies to humans when they arrive in the spirit
               world: their place there depends on their means; however,
               they will not pay with gold. They will not be asked, “How
               much did you have on earth? What position did you occupy
               there? Were you a prince or a laborer?” But they will be
               asked, “What have you brought back with you?” The value
               of things or titles will not be acknowledged, only the sum
               of their virtues. Thus, in this respect the laborer may be
               wealthier than the prince. In vain will the prince allege that,
               before his departure, he paid for his entry with gold. He will
               receive the response, “Places here cannot be purchased;


                                            329




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 329                                      3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                                CHAPTER XVI



               they are earned by the good one has done.” With earthly
               money you were able to purchase fields, houses, palaces;
               here, everything is paid for with the qualities of the heart.
               Are you rich in such qualities? Then you are welcome and
               may go to the highest place, where all kinds of happiness
               await you; Are you poor in these qualities? Then you must
               go to the lowest place, where you will be treated according
               to what you possess.

                                                                     Pascal (Geneva, 1860)



               10. The goods of the earth belong to God, who distributes
               them as he will, and humans are only their stewards,
               administrators             at   various     degrees   of   honesty    and
               intelligence. They are so little the individual property of
               humans that God often foils all foresight, and wealth
               escapes those who believe they are most entitled to it.

                      You might say that this is understandable in regards
               to inherited wealth, but the same does not apply to
               wealth acquired through one’s labor. Undoubtedly, if
               it is legitimate wealth, then it must have been honestly
               obtained, for property is only legitimately acquired when, to
               possess it, one has not done harm to anyone. There will be
               an accounting for every cent wrongly acquired in detriment
               to someone else. However, just because certain individuals
               owe their wealth to their own efforts, does that give them
               any power over it upon dying? Are not the precautions they
               take to transmit it to their descendants often useless? For
               if God does not want it to fall into their hands, nothing will
               prevail against his will. Can people use and abuse their


                                                     330




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 330                                                  3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



               wealth while alive without having to give an accounting?
               No. In allowing them to acquire it, God might have wished
               to reward their efforts, courage and perseverance over the
               course of their current life. However, if they use it only to
               satisfy their senses or their pride, or if it becomes a cause
               of failure in their hands, it would be better for them not to
               have possessed it at all; they lose on one hand what they
               have gained on the other, thereby annulling the merit of
               their labor. When they depart the earth, God will tell them
               that they have already received their reward.

                                          M., A Protector Spirit (Brussels, 1861)



               THE USE OF RICHES


               11. You cannot serve both God and mammon. Remember
               this well, you who are dominated by the love of gold, you
               who would sell your soul to possess treasures because they
               can set you above other people and provide you with the
               pleasures of the passions. No, you cannot serve both God
               and mammon! Therefore, if you feel your soul dominated by
               the covetousness of the flesh, make haste to rid yourselves
               of the yoke that crushes you, because the just and strict
               God will say to you, “What did you do with the wealth I
               entrusted to you, you unfaithful steward? Only to serve
               your personal satisfaction did you use that driving power
               for doing good deeds.”

                      What then is the best use of wealth? Seek in the words
               “Love one another” the solution to this problem. Therein
               lies the secret for the good use of riches. Those who are


                                              331




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 331                                         3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                          CHAPTER XVI



               animated by love for their neighbor have their course of
               action all traced out. The use of wealth that best pleases
               God involves charity; not that cold and selfish charity
               that consists in scattering around oneself the surplus of
               a golden existence, but rather the charity filled with love
               that seeks out the unfortunate and lifts them up without
               humiliating them. You who are rich: give of your superfluity.
               Do more: give something of what you consider necessary to
               you, because what is necessary to you is still superfluous.
               However, give wisely. Do not reject those who complain
               because you are afraid that you might be deceived; go to
               the source of the ill. First, seek to alleviate; next, gather
               information and see if work, counseling or even affability
               might not be more effective than your charitable donations.
               In addition to your wealth, spread all around you the love
               of God, the love of labor and the love for one’s neighbor.
               Set your riches upon a foundation which will never fail you
               and which will bring you the big profits of good deeds. The
               riches of intelligence should serve you just as the riches
               of gold. Spread the treasures of learning all around you;
               scatter the treasures of your love over your brothers and
               sisters and they will bear fruit.

                                                    Cheverus (Bordeaux, 1861)



               12. Whenever I consider how short life is, I am grievously
               impressed by your incessant preoccupation with your
               material welfare, whereas you attach so little importance
               and devote so little time to your moral improvement,
               which shall be counted to you for eternity. In seeing your


                                              332




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 332                                     3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



               industriousness, one might believe that it is connected
               with an issue of great interest for humankind, whereas in
               most cases it is nothing more than an attempt to satisfy
               exaggerated needs and vanity, or to give yourselves over to
               excesses. How much grief, worry and torment you inflict
               upon yourselves; how many sleepless nights to increase
               wealth that is often more than sufficient already! At the
               height of such blindness, one often sees those to whom an
               immoderate love for wealth and the pleasures it provides
               subjected to pain-filled labor, priding themselves of a life
               full of sacrifice and merit – as if they were actually working
               for others and not for themselves! Fools! Do you then
               really believe that the worries and efforts motivated by
               selfishness, greed or pride will be taken into account while
               you neglect the care for your future, as well as the duties
               that fraternal solidarity imposes on all those who enjoy the
               advantages of societal life? You have been thinking only
               of your own bodies, whose well-being and pleasures have
               been the sole object of your selfish solicitude. For your
               body, which dies, you have neglected your spirit, which
               will live forever. That master so cherished and cared for
               has become your tyrant. It commands your spirit, which
               has become its slave. Is that the purpose of the existence
               that God has given you?

                                             A Protector Spirit (Krakow, 1861)



               13. Since humans are the trustees and administrators of the
               wealth that God places in their hands, a strict accounting
               will be demanded of them regarding the use they have



                                            333




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 333                                      3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                          CHAPTER XVI



               made of it in virtue of their free will. A bad use consists in
               using it solely for their personal satisfaction; a good use,
               on the other hand, consists in all the times that it results
               in some good for someone else. The merit is in proportion
               to the sacrifice one imposes on oneself. Beneficence is only
               one way of employing wealth: it relieves misery, appeases
               hunger, saves from the cold and provides shelter to those
               who lack it. However, an equally pressing and meritorious
               obligation consists in preventing misery from occurring in
               the first place. It is there, principally, where the mission
               of the great fortunes lies, a mission to assist in all sorts
               of projects which such fortunes can help to execute. Were
               such projects to provide a legitimate profit, good would
               come of it nonetheless because labor develops the mind
               and exalts the dignity of people, who are always proud to
               be able to say that they have earned the bread they eat,
               whereas the receiving of alms humiliates and degrades
               them. Wealth concentrated in only one hand should be
               like a fount of living water that spreads fertility and well-
               being all around it. O you wealthy who employ your riches
               according to the designs of the Lord, your heart will be
               the first to quench its thirst at that beneficent fount. In
               this very lifetime you will enjoy the ineffable delights of the
               soul instead of the material delights of selfishness, which
               leave a void in the heart. Your name will be blessed on the
               earth, and when you depart it, the sovereign Lord will say
               to you as in the parable of the talents, “O good and faithful
               servant, enter into the joy of your Master.” In this parable,
               is not the servant who buried in the ground the money



                                              334




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 334                                      3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



               that had been entrusted to him the image of the greedy,
               in whose hands wealth remains unproductive? If Jesus
               speaks primarily of alms, it is because at the time and in
               the land in which he was living, one did not know about
               the work that the arts and industry would create later,
               and in which wealth could be usefully employed for the
               overall good of society. To all those who can give little or
               much I will say: Give alms when necessary, but as much
               as possible, convert them into wages so that those who
               receive them will not feel ashamed.

                                                         Fenelon (Alger, 1860)



               DETACHMENT FROM EARTHLY POSSESSIONS


               14. Brothers and sisters, my friends, I have come to
               bring my small contribution in order to help you advance
               fearlessly on the path of improvement onto which you have
               entered. We are indebted to one another; it is only through
               sincere and fraternal unity between spirits and incarnates
               that regeneration is possible.

                      Your love for earthly possessions is one of the biggest
               obstacles to your moral and spiritual advancement.
               Through this attachment to possessions you shatter your
               affective faculties, carrying them over to material things.
               Be honest with yourself: does wealth provide an unmixed
               happiness? Even when your coffers are full, is there not an
               emptiness in your heart? At the bottom of that basket of
               flowers is there not always a hidden serpent? I understand


                                             335




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 335                                      3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                          CHAPTER XVI



               justifiable satisfaction not felt by a person who, through
               diligent and honorable labor, has gained a fortune; however,
               from this satisfaction – very natural and approved by God
               – to an attachment that absorbs all other sentiments and
               paralyzes the impulses of the heart there is a great distance;
               the same great distance that separates sordid miserliness
               and exaggerated wastefulness: two vices betweenwhich
               God has placed charity, that holy and sound virtue that
               teaches the rich to give without ostentation so that the
               poor may receive without feeling debased.

                      Whether your fortune has come from your family or
               whether you have earned it from your labor, there is one
               thing that you must never forget: everything comes from
               God and returns to God. Nothing on earth belongs to you,
               not even your poor body: death will strip you of it, just as
               it will all other material possessions. You are trustees, not
               proprietors – do not delude yourselves. God has loaned
               them to you and you will have to return them; and God
               loans them on the condition that the surplus, at least,
               should go to those who lack what is necessary.

                      One of your friends lends you a certain sum. However
               dishonest you might be, you will scrupulously pay off the
               loan and will be grateful to him. Well then, that is the
               position of all who are wealthy. God is the heavenly friend
               who has loaned them their riches; he asks nothing for
               himself except love and acknowledgment, but he demands
               that the wealthy in turn give to the poor, who, like the rich,
               are just as much his children.




                                              336




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 336                                     3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



                      The possessions that God has entrusted to you arouse
               ardent and frantic greed in your hearts. Have you never
               thought about the fact that when you are immoderately
               attached to riches – as perishable and transitory as you
               yourselves are – the day will come when you will have to
               give an accounting to the Lord for what has come from
               him? Have you forgotten that, through wealth, you have
               been invested with the sacred character of ministers of
               charity on earth in order to be its intelligent distributors?
               What are you, then, but unfaithful trustees when you use
               solely for your own benefit what has been entrusted to
               you? What will result from your intentional neglect of your
               duties? Death, unyielding and unforgiving, will tear away
               the veil under which you hide, and will force you to give an
               accounting to the Friend who helped you out and who at
               that moment stands before you in the robe of a judge.

                      It is in vain that you try to delude yourselves while
               on earth, coloring with the name “virtue” what is often
               nothing more than selfishness; that you call “saving” and
               “foresight” what is only cupidity and greed, or “generosity”
               what is nothing but prodigality on your own behalf. For
               example, the father of a family abstains from practicing
               charity; he saves and piles up the gold, declaring that he
               is doing so in order to leave as much as possible to his
               children so that they will not fall into poverty. That is very
               just and fatherly, I agree, and one cannot blame him. But is
               that always the sole motive that guides him? Is it not often
               just a compromise with his conscience in order to justify



                                            337




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 337                                     3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                          CHAPTER XVI



               in his own eyes and the world’s his personal attachment to
               earthly possessions? Even so, admitting that his fatherly
               love is his sole motive, is that any reason for him to forget
               his brothers and sisters before God? When he already has
               a surplus, will he leave his children in poverty because
               they will have a little less of it? Instead, is it not really
               giving them a lesson in selfishness and hardening their
               hearts? Instead, is it not stifling in them the love for their
               neighbor? Fathers and mothers, you are greatly mistaken
               if you believe that by such means you will increase you
               children’s love for you. By teaching them to be selfish
               toward others, you teach them to be selfish toward you
               also.

                      Those who have worked hard and accumulated
               wealth by the sweat of their brow are commonly heard to
               say that when money is earned one grasps its value more
               fully. Nothing could be truer! Well then, may those who
               profess to fully grasp the value of money practice charity
               according to their means, and they will have greater merit
               than those who, born in abundance, know nothing about
               the hard fatigue of labor. But on the other hand, if these
               same persons who remember their sufferings and efforts
               are selfish and hard toward the poor, they are much guiltier
               than the others, for the more one knows from personal
               experience the hidden grief of poverty, the more one should
               be inclined to relieve it in others.

                      Unfortunately, there is always in those who are
               wealthy a sentiment as strong as their attachment to


                                              338




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 338                                     3/7/2009 18:00:33

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



               riches: the sentiment of pride. When the poor implore their
               assistance, it is not rare to see the newly rich wowing them
               with tales of their efforts and know-how, instead of coming
               to their aid, and then finishing by saying to them, “Do
               what I have done.” According to them, God’s goodness has
               nothing to do with their wealth. All the merit falls solely
               to them. Their pride casts a veil over their eyes and shuts
               their ears. In spite of all their intelligence and skill, they
               do not understand that God can undo them with a single
               word.

                      Squandering one’s wealth does not show a detachment
               from earthly possessions, but rather carelessness and
               indifference. As trustees of such possessions, humans
               have neither the right to squander them nor to confiscate
               them for their own profit. Prodigality is not generosity, but
               is often a form of selfishness. Those who scatter their gold
               by the handfuls in order to satisfy a fantasy will not give
               one cent to lend a helping hand. Detachment from earthly
               possessions consists in appreciating wealth for its true
               worth, in knowing how to use it for others and not only for
               oneself, in not sacrificing one’s interests in the future life on
               its behalf, and in losing it without complaining if it pleases
               God to take it away. If due to unforeseen misfortune you
               become another Job, say as he did, “Lord, you have given
               and you have taken away. May your will be done.” That is
               true detachment. First, be submissive; have faith in the
               One who, having given and taken it away, can restore it to
               you once again. Courageously resist the discouragement



                                             339




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 339                                        3/7/2009 18:00:33

                                          CHAPTER XVI



               and desperation that paralyze your strength. Never
               forget that whenever God causes you to suffer a blow, he
               always places consolation alongside the hardest trial. But
               remember, above all, that there are possessions infinitely
               more valuable that earthly ones, and this thought will help
               you detach from the latter. The less value one attributes to
               a thing, the less sensitive one becomes to its loss. People
               who become attached to earthly possessions are like
               children who cannot see but the present moment. Those
               who do not become attached are like adults who see the
               things that are most important by understanding these
               prophetic words of the Savior, “My kingdom is not of this
               world.”

                      The Lord orders none to get rid of what they possess
               and be reduced to voluntary beggary, because then they
               would become a burden on society. Proceeding in such
               a manner would be to misunderstand detachment from
               earthly possessions; it would be selfishness of another
               type, because it would imply exempting oneself from the
               responsibility that wealth weighs on those who possess
               it. God grants wealth to those who seem capable of
               administering it for the benefit of all. Thus, the rich
               have a mission, which they can render beautiful and
               advantageous for themselves. To reject wealth when God
               has given it to you is to renounce the benefits of the good
               you can do by administering it wisely. To know how to
               do without it when one does not have it, to know how to
               put it to good use when one does, and to know how to



                                              340




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 340                                   3/7/2009 18:00:34

                           YOU CANNOT SERVE BOTH GOD AND MAMMON



               sacrifice it when necessary, is to act in accord with the
               Lord’s designs. May those who receive what one calls in
               the world a good fortune say to themselves, “My God, you
               have sent me a new responsibility; give me the strength to
               carry it out according to your holy will.”

                      My friends, this is what I wanted to teach you regarding
               detachment from earthly possessions. I will summarize it
               by saying: Know how to be content with little. If you are
               poor, do not envy the rich, because wealth is not necessary
               for happiness. If you are rich, do not forget that your
               possessions have been entrusted to you, and that you
               must justify their use as if you were giving an accounting
               of expenditures. Do not be an unfaithful trustee by utilizing
               your possessions to satisfy your pride and sensuality. Do
               not think that you have the right to dispose for your sole
               use what is nothing but a loan, and not a gift. If you are
               unable to repay it, you do not have the right to ask for it
               in the first place; and remember that those who give to the
               poor are settling a debt they have contracted with God.

                                                Lacordaire (Constantine, 1863)




               THE TRANSMISSION OF WEALTH


               15. Does the principle according to which humans are only
               trustees of the wealth that God has allowed them to enjoy
               during their lives take away their right to transfer it to their
               descendants?



                                             341




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 341                                       3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          CHAPTER XVI



                      After their death, people can rightly transfer what
               they have enjoyed during their lives, because the effect of
               such right is always dependent on the will of God, who can
               prevent their descendants from enjoying it whenever he
               wants. That is why we see apparently solidly established
               fortunes crumble. The will of persons to keep their wealth
               in the hands of their descendants is therefore powerless,
               although this fact does not take away their right to transfer
               the loan they have received, since God will take it from
               their descendants if he deems it appropriate.

                                                        St. Louis (Paris, 1860)




                                              342




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 342                                       3/7/2009 18:00:34

               CHAPTER XVII


               Be perfect
                      x The characteristics of perfection

                      x Moral persons

                      x Good Spiritists

                      x Parable of the sower



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x Duty

                      x Virtue

                      x Superiors and subordinates

                      x The individual in the world

                      x Caring for the body and the spirit




               THE CHARACTERISTICS OF PERFECTION


                      1. Love your enemies; do good to those who hate you and
                      pray for those who persecute and slander you, for if you love
                      only those who love you, what reward will you have? Do not




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 343                                           3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          CHAPTER XVII



                      the publicans do the same? If you greet only your brothers,
                      what are you doing that is more than what others do? Do not
                      the pagans also do the same? Therefore, be perfect as your
                      heavenly Father is perfect. (Mt. 5:44, 46-48)

               2. Since God possesses infinite perfection in all things, the
               maxim, “Be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect,”
               if taken literally, would presuppose the possibility of
               attaining absolute perfection. If it were given to the creature
               to be as perfect as the Creator, the former would become
               equal to the latter, which is inadmissible. However, the
               people to whom Jesus spoke would not have understood
               this nuance; he limited himself to presenting them with a
               model and told them to put forth the effort to emulate it.

                      One must therefore understand these words to mean
               a relative perfection, which humanity is able to achieve
               and which brings it closest to divinity. What does such
               perfection consist of? Jesus said: “To love our enemies, to
               do good to those who hate us, and to pray for those who
               persecute us.” In this way he shows that the essence of
               perfection is charity in its broadest definition, because it
               entails the practice of all other virtues.

                      In fact, by observing the results of all vices – and even
               the simplest defects – one will realize that there is not one
               of them that does not alter the sentiment of charity to some
               degree, because they all have their origin in selfishness and
               pride, which are the opposites of charity. This is because
               everything that overexcites the sentiment of personality
               destroys or at least weakens the elements of true charity:
               benevolence, indulgence, self-denial and devotion. Taken
               so far as to loving one’s enemies, love for one’s neighbor


                                               344




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 344                                         3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                           BE PERFECT



               cannot ally itself with any defect contrary to charity, and
               therefore is always an indication of a greater or lesser moral
               ascendancy. Hence it follows that the degree of perfection
               is in direct proportion to the range of such love. This is
               why Jesus, after having given his disciples the guidelines
               of the most sublime charity, said to them, “Therefore, be
               perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect.”



               MORAL PERSONS


               3. Truly moral persons are those who practice the law
               of justice, love and charity in its greatest purity. If they
               question their conscience about their actions, they ask
               themselves if they have violated this law; if they have done
               any evil; if they have done all the good they could; if they
               have willingly disregarded any opportunity to be useful; if
               anyone might have a complaint about them; and, finally, if
               they have done unto others everything they would like to
               have done unto themselves.

                      They have faith in God, and in God’s goodness, justice
               and wisdom. They know that nothing happens without
               God’s permission, so they submit to the Divine Will in
               everything.

                      They have faith in the future; thus, they place spiritual
               possessions above temporal ones.

                      They know that all the vicissitudes of life, all its sorrows
               and all its disappointments are trials or expiations, and
               they accept them without complaining.



                                               345




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 345                                          3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          CHAPTER XVII



                      Persons imbued with the sentiment of charity and
               love for their neighbor do the good for its own sake without
               expecting anything in return, and they repay evil with good,
               defend the weak against the strong and always sacrifice
               their own interests to the interests of justice.

                      They find their satisfaction in the benefits they
               spread around, the service they render, the happiness
               they promote, the tears they dry and the consolation they
               provide to the afflicted. Their first impulse is to think of
               others before thinking of themselves and to attend to the
               interests of others before their own. The selfish, on the
               other hand, calculate the profits and losses entailed in
               every generous act.

                      Moral persons are kind, humane and benevolent
               toward all regardless of race or creed, because they regard
               all people as their brothers and sisters.

                      They respect all sincere convictions that others might
               hold to and they do not anathematize those who do not
               think like they do.

                      In all circumstances charity is their guide; they tell
               themselves that those who harm others with malevolent
               words, who hurt others’ feelings with their pride and
               disdain, who do not recoil from the idea of causing suffering
               or difficulty, however slight, when it could be avoided, fail
               in their duty of love for their neighbor and do not deserve
               the Lord’s clemency.

                      They hold no hatred or rancor, or desire for vengeance.
               Following Jesus’ example, they forgive and forget offenses,



                                              346




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 346                                     3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          BE PERFECT



               and remember only good deeds, because they know that
               they will be forgiven according to how they themselves
               have forgiven.

                      They are indulgent toward others’ weaknesses, for
               they know that they themselves need indulgence, and they
               recall these words of Christ, “Let him who is without sin
               cast the first stone.”

                      They never take pleasure in searching for defects in
               others or in calling attention to them. If necessity forces
               them to do so, they always look for the good that might
               mitigate the evil.

                      They study their own imperfections and strive
               incessantly to combat them. All their efforts are focused
               on being able to say to themselves tomorrow that they are
               better than they were yesterday.

                      They do not seek to exalt their spirit or talents at the
               expense of others; instead, they seize every opportunity to
               point out what is praiseworthy in other people.

                      They do not gloat over their wealth or their personal
               advantages, for they know that everything that has been
               given to them can be taken away.

                      They use but do not abuse the possessions that have
               been accorded to them, for they know that they are a trust
               for which they will have to render an accounting, and that
               the worst use of them in regard to themselves would be to
               use them to satisfy their passions.

                      If the social order has placed others under their
               tutelage, they treat them with kindness and benevolence,


                                             347




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 347                                      3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          CHAPTER XVII



               because they are their equals before God. They use their
               authority to lift their morale and not to squash them with
               their pride. They avoid anything that could render their
               subordinates’ position more painful.

                      Those who are subordinate, on the other hand,
               understand the duties of their position and are scrupulous
               in consciously fulfilling them. (See chap. XVII, no. 9)

                      Finally, moral persons respect in their fellow beings
               all the rights arising from the laws of nature, in the same
               way they wish their own to be respected.

                      This is not a list of all the qualities that define moral
               persons, but whoever makes an effort to possess them is
               on the road that leads to all the others.



               GOOD SPIRITISTS


               4. Spiritism, when well-understood, but especially when
               well-felt, inevitably leads to the results listed above,
               which characterize the true Spiritist as well as the true
               Christian, for they are one and the same. Spiritism does
               not create a new morality; it only makes it easier for
               people to understand and practice the morality of Christ
               by providing an unshakable and enlightened faith to those
               who doubt or waver.

                      Nonetheless, many of those who believe in spirit
               manifestations understand neither their consequences nor
               their moral implications, or if they do understand them,



                                              348




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 348                                       3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          BE PERFECT



               they do not apply them to themselves. To what may this
               be attributed? To a lack of precision in the Doctrine? No,
               because the Doctrine contains no allegories or symbols
               that could give way to erroneous interpretations. Clarity
               is its essence and that is what makes it powerful, for it
               goes directly to one’s intelligence. It contains nothing
               mysterious and its adherents do not possess any secret
               that is hidden from ordinary people.

                      Thus, is an exceptional intelligence needed to
               understand it? No, since one sees individuals with notable
               capacities who do not comprehend it, while average minds
               – even young people who have barely left adolescence –
               understand it in its most delicate nuances with admirable
               precision. This derives from the fact that the somewhat
               material aspect of the Spiritist science requires only eyes
              that can observe, whereas the essential aspect requires a
               certain degree of sensibility, which one might call maturity
               of the moral sense, regardless of age and level of education,
               because it is particularly inherent to the development of
               the incarnate spirit.

                      In some, the material ties are still too tenacious to
               allow the spirit to detach itself from the things of the world,
               because the fog that envelops them obscures their vision
               of the infinite. Consequently, they do not easily break with
               their tastes or their habits, as they do not understand
               anything better than what they have. The belief in spirits
               is for them a simple fact, but it does nothing or very little
               to change their instinctive tendencies. In other words,
               they see only a ray of light, insufficient to guide them



                                             349




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 349                                      3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                                  CHAPTER XVII



               and endow them with a powerful aspiration capable of
               overcoming their inclinations. These persons are much
               more interested in the phenomena than the morality,
               which seems banal and monotonous. They incessantly
               demand that spirits introduce them to new mysteries,
               without asking if they are worthy of grasping the secrets
               of the Creator. These individuals are imperfect Spiritists,
               some remaining stationary or distancing themselves from
               their brothers and sisters in the faith, recoiling at the
               obligation of reforming themselves, or otherwise reserving
               their sympathies for those who share their weaknesses or
               prejudices. Nevertheless, acceptance of the principles of
               the Doctrine is a first step that will make the second easier
               in a future existence.

                      Those who may rightfully be regarded as true
               and sincere Spiritists are at a higher degree of moral
               advancement.               Their   spirit    dominates   matter   more
               completely, thus giving them a clearer perception of the
               future. The principles of the Doctrine make fibers vibrate
               within them that remain dormant in the former. In short,
               their heartstrings are touched; therefore, their faith is
               unshakable. Some are like the musician who is moved by
               certain chords, when others hear only the sounds. True
               Spiritists are recognized by their moral transformation and
               the efforts they make to overcome their evil inclinations.
               While the former are content with their limited horizon,
               the latter understand that there is something better, they
               make the effort to free themselves and they always reach
               their goal if they maintain a firm will.




                                                      350




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 350                                             3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                           BE PERFECT



               PARABLE OF THE SOWER


                      5. On that same day, Jesus, having left the house, sat down
                      close to the sea; and a large crowd of people gathered around
                      him. Therefore, he climbed into a boat and sat down, while
                      the people remained on the shore. He then told them many
                      things in parables, speaking to them in this way:

                      “A sower went out to sow; and as he was sowing, some of
                      the seed fell by the wayside and the birds of the sky came
                      and ate them.

                      Other seed fell upon stony places where there was not much
                      earth; they soon sprouted because the soil was not very deep.
                      But when the sun came up, it scorched them, and since they
                      had no roots, they withered.

                      Still other seed fell among thorns, and when they began to
                      grow, the thorns choked them.

                      Finally, some seed fell on good ground and produced a crop,
                      some rendering a hundred to one, others sixty and others
                      thirty.

                      He who has ears, let him hear.” (Mt. 13:1-9)

                      “Hear therefore the parable of the sower.

                      Whoever hears the word of the kingdom but does not heed it,
                      the evil spirit comes and takes away what had been sown
                      in his heart. This is the one who received the seed by the
                      wayside.

                      He who received the seed among the stones is the one who
                      hears the word and receives it joyously as soon as he hears



                                                351




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 351                                           3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                            CHAPTER XVII



                      it. But he has no roots in himself, and it lasts only for a while.
                      And when he is overcome by obstacles and persecutions on
                      account of the word, he soon regards it as an object of offense
                      and ruin.

                      He who receives the seed among the thorns is the one who
                      hears the word, but then the cares of the times and the
                      illusions of riches choke the word within him, rendering it
                      unfruitful.

                      But he who receives the seed on good soil is the one who
                      hears the word, who heeds it and who produces a crop,
                      rendering a hundred or sixty or thirty to one. (Mt. 13:18-23)



               6. The parable of the sower represents perfectly the nuances
               that exist in the ways one profits from the teachings of the
               Gospel. How many people there are, in fact, for whom the
               Gospel teachings are only a dead letter which, like the seed
               that has fallen on the stony soil, produces no crop!

                      This parable finds a no less correct application in the
               different categories of Spiritists. Is it not a symbol of those
               who are interested only in the physical phenomena but
               derive nothing of consequence from them because they see
               them as nothing more than an object of curiosity? Of those
               who seek nothing but the wonder in spirit communications,
               who are interested in them only to the extent that they
               satisfy their imagination, but who, after having received
               them, are as cold and indifferent as they were in the first
               place? Of those who find the counsels to be very good
               and admirable, yet apply them only to others and not to



                                                  352




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 352                                                3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          BE PERFECT



               themselves? And of those, finally, for whom the teachings
               are like the seed that falls on good soil and yields a crop?



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               DUTY


               7. Duty is an individual’s moral obligation, first toward
               him or herself and toward others immediately thereafter.
               Duty is the law of life; it is found in the smallest details
               as well as in the most elevated acts. I want to speak here
               only about moral duty and not the type imposed by the
               professions.

                      In the order of sentiments, duty is very difficult to
               fulfill because it is contrary to the seductions of self-
               interest and the heart. Its victories have no witnesses
               and its failures undergo no repression. People’s inner
               duty is left to their free will. The sting of conscience – that
               guardian of inner rectitude – warns and upholds them,
               but it is held back, often powerless before the sophistry
               of passion. When faithfully obeyed, the duty of the heart
               uplifts people; but how is such a duty determined? Where
               does it begin? Where does it end? Duty begins precisely at
               the point in which you threaten your neighbor’s happiness
               or peace-of-mind; it ends at the limit you would not want to
               see surpassed regarding yourselves.

                      God created all humans equal regarding pain. Small
               or great, ignorant or educated, they all suffer for the same
               reasons so that each may judiciously determine the evil



                                             353




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 353                                       3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                           CHAPTER XVII



               he or she might do. The same criterion, however, does not
               exist regarding the good, which is infinitely more varied
               in its expressions. Equality in the face of pain is a sublime
               provision by God, who wishes that all his children, taught
               by common experience, would not commit evil alleging
               ignorance of its effects.

                      Duty is the practical summary of all moral speculation;
               it is the courage of the soul who confronts the distress
               of life’s struggles; it is both strict and yielding; ready to
               adapt itself to diverse complications; it remains unbending
               before temptation. Persons who fulfill their duty love God
               more than they love other individuals, and they love others
               more than they love themselves; they are at the same time
               judge and slave in their own cause.

                      Duty is the most beautiful laurel of reason, and
               depends on it like a child depends on its mother. Humans
               should love duty, not because it preserves them against
               life’s evils – humankind cannot avoid those – but because
               it provides the soul with the strength it needs for its
               development.

                      Duty grows and radiates under a more elevated form
               at each of the higher stages of humanity. Individuals’
               moral obligation toward God never ceases; they should
               reflect the virtues of the Eternal One, who does not accept
               an imperfect sketch, because he wants the beauty of his
               work to be resplendent before him.

                                                          Lazare (Paris, 1863)




                                               354




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 354                                      3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          BE PERFECT



               VIRTUE


               8. In its highest expression, virtue encompasses all the
               essential qualities that comprise the good person. To be
               good, charitable, hard-working, reasonable and modest
               are the qualities of a virtuous individual. Unfortunately,
               they are frequently accompanied by small moral ills that
               tarnish and weaken them. Those who parade their virtues
               are not virtuous, since they lack the principal quality,
               which is modesty, and display the vice most contrary to it,
               which is pride. A virtue truly worthy of its name does not
               like to show itself off; one might divine it, but it hides itself
               in obscurity and flees from the admiration of the masses.
               St. Vincent de Paul was virtuous; the praiseworthy priest
               of Ars was virtuous, and many others little known to the
               world but known to God. All these individuals were unaware
               that they were virtuous; they allowed themselves to be
               carried along by the stream of their saintly inspirations
               and practiced the good with complete disinterestedness
               and self-forgetfulness.

                      It is to virtue thus understood and practiced that I
               invite you, my children; it is to this truly Christian and
               truly Spiritist virtue that I advise you to devote yourselves.
               But keep from your hearts the thoughts of pride, vanity and
               self-centeredness, which always tarnish the most beautiful
               qualities. Do not imitate those who set themselves up as
               models, and who extol their own qualities before all who
               are complacent enough to listen. This virtue of ostentation
               often hides a multitude of small turpitudes and hateful
               weaknesses.


                                             355




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 355                                        3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                            CHAPTER XVII



                      In principle, individuals who exalt themselves, who
               erect a statue to their own virtue, annul by this very act
               any real merit they might have. However, what can I say
               about those whose whole worth is to appear to be what they
               are not? I want to believe that individuals who practice the
               good feel an inner satisfaction at the bottom of their heart,
               but whenever such satisfaction is exteriorized in order to
               receive praise, it degenerates into self-centeredness.

                      O all of you whom the Spiritist faith has warmed
               with its rays, and who know how far humans are from
               perfection, do not yield to such folly! Virtue is a grace that
               I desire for all sincere Spiritists, but I will say to them:
               Better to have less virtue with modesty than more with
               pride, for it is through pride that successive humanities
               have been lost, and it is through humility that they will
               some day be redeemed.

                                          François-Nicholas-Madeleine (Paris, 1863)



               SUPERIORS AND SUBORDINATES


               9. Authority, as much as wealth, is a trust for which
               those who have been vested with it will have to render an
               accounting. Do not think that it is given to them to provide
               them with the vain pleasure of command, nor should you
               be like most of the power-holders of the earth who wrongly
               believe that it is a right, a property. God, meanwhile,
               provides them with proof enough that it is neither, for he
               takes it from them at will. If it were a privilege inherent to



                                                  356




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 356                                           3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          BE PERFECT



               them, it would be inalienable. However, no one can say
               that something belongs to them when it can be taken from
               them without their consent. God gives authority either as
               a mission or a trial when he deems it appropriate, and
               takes it away in the same manner.

                      All those who are trustees of authority to whatever
               extent – from masters over their servants to sovereigns
               over their people – should not forget the fact that it is souls
               who are under their charge; that they will answer for the
               good or bad guidance they have given to their subordinates,
               and that the wrongs their subalterns might commit and
               the vices to which they might yield as a result of such
               guidance or bad examples will fall upon them, whereas
              they will reap the fruits of their kindness for leading them
              to the good. All people on earth have a mission, great or
              small; whatever it may be, it is always given for the purpose
              of goodness; to deviate it from its principle, therefore, is to
              fail in fulfilling it.

                      If God asks the wealthy, “What did you do with the
              wealth that in your hands should have been a source for
              spreading prosperity all around you?” he will ask of those
              who possessed some degree of authority, “What did you
              do with that authority? What evils did you prevent? What
              progress did you foster? If I gave you subordinates, it was
              not so that you could make them slaves to your will or
              tame instruments for your whims or your greed. I made
              you strong and entrusted you with those who were weak in
              order to uphold them and help them ascend to me.”



                                             357




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 357                                      3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          CHAPTER XVII



                      Superiors who conform to the words of Christ despise
               none of those who are beneath them, for they know that
               social distinctions mean nothing before God. Spiritism
               teaches them that if their subordinates obey them today,
               they might have commanded them in the past or might
               do so in the future, and that they will then be treated
               according to how they have treated their subalterns.

                      If superiors have duties to fulfill, subordinates, on
               their part, have theirs also, and they are no less sacred.
               If the latter are Spiritists, their conscience will tell them
               even more strongly that they are not exempted from their
               duties, even when their superiors fail to fulfill theirs,
               because Spiritists know that one must not repay evil with
               evil and that the wrongs of some do not authorize the
               wrongs of others. If their position entails suffering, they tell
               themselves that they most assuredly must have warranted
               it because they perhaps abused their authority in the past
               and must in turn feel the improprieties they made others
               suffer. If they are forced to endure such a position because
               they cannot find a better one, Spiritism teaches them to
               resign themselves to it as a trial for the humility needed for
               their advancement. Their belief guides their conduct; they
               act as they would want their subordinates to act toward
               them if they were their boss. For this reason they are
               more scrupulous in fulfilling their obligations, since they
               understand that any negligence in the work that has been
               entrusted to them is harmful to those who pay them and
               to whom they owe their time and efforts. In other words,
               Spiritists are guided by the sentiment of duty that their


                                              358




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 358                                       3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          BE PERFECT



               faith gives them, along with the certainty that any detour
               from the straight and narrow will be a debt that will have
               to be paid sooner or later.

                      François-Nicholas-Madeleine, Cardinal Morlot (Paris, 1863)



               THE INDIVIDUAL IN THE WORLD


               10. A sentiment of compassion must always animate the
               hearts of those who gather under the Lord’s sight to implore
               the assistance of good spirits. Therefore, purify your heart;
               do not let any mundane or futile thought linger in it. Lift up
               your spirit to those you are calling, so that, finding in you
               the proper dispositions, they may profusely sow the seed
               that should germinate in your soul and produce within it
               the fruit of charity and justice.

                      Therefore, do not think that in incessantly exhorting
               you to prayer and mental evocation we wish to advise you
               to live a mystic life that keeps you outside the laws of the
               society in which you have been condemned to live. No. Live
               with the men and women of your time in the way that men
               and women should live. Observe the social necessities –
               even the frivolities – of the day, but do it with a sentiment
               of purity, which may sanctify them.

                      You have been called to enter into contact with spirits
               of different natures and opposite characters; do not clash
               with any of those with whom you might find yourself. Be
               cheerful and happy, but of the cheerfulness provided by a
               clear conscience, and the happiness of the heirs of heaven


                                              359




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 359                                        3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                           CHAPTER XVII



               counting the days that will draw them nearer to their
               inheritance.

                      Virtue does not consist in assuming a stern and
               gloomy face, or in rejecting the pleasures that your human
               conditions allow. It is sufficient to report all the actions
               of your life to the Creator who has given such life. It is
               sufficient when one begins or finishes a deed to lift one’s
               thought to that Creator and to ask him, in an impulse of
               the soul, to grant his watch-care for carrying it out, and to
               grant his blessing for finishing it. In all that you do, look
               to the Source of all things; do not do anything without the
               thought of God purifying and sanctifying your acts.

                      As Christ said, perfection is found entirely in the
               practice of absolute charity, but the duties of charity extend
               to all social positions from the lowest to the highest. Those
               who live in isolation would have no charity to practice. It is
               only through contact with their fellow beings in the most
               arduous struggles that they find an opportunity to practice
               it. Thus, those who isolate themselves intentionally deprive
               themselves of the most powerful means of perfection; since
               they have only themselves to think of, their lives are those
               of a selfish person. (See chap. V, no. 26)

                      Do not imagine, therefore, that in order to live in
               constant communication with us, to live in the Lord’s sight,
               that you must put on the cilice1 and cover yourselves with
               ashes. No, no, and once more no! Be happy in accordance
               with the needs of humankind, but may your happiness

               1
                   A garment or undergarment made of coarse cloth or animal hair (a
               hairshirt). – Tr.


                                                360




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 360                                           3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          BE PERFECT



               never hold a thought or commit an action that might offend
               God, or anything that might cloud the face of those who
               love and guide you. God is love, and he blesses all those
               who love virtuously.

                                            A Protector Spirit (Bordeaux, 1863)



               CARING FOR THE BODY AND THE SPIRIT


               11. Does moral perfection consist in the mortification of
               the body? In order to resolve this question, I will rely on
               elementary principles and will begin by demonstrating
               the need for caring for the body, which, according to the
               alternatives of health and infirmity, influences in a very
               important way the soul, which must be regarded as a
               prisoner in the flesh. In order for this prisoner to live,
               move about and even conceive of the illusion of freedom,
               the body must be sound, of good disposition and vigorous.
               Let us establish a comparison, supposing that body and
               soul are both in a perfect state. What should they do to
               maintain the balance between their aptitudes and needs
               so different in nature?

                      Here two systems confront each other: that of the
               ascetics, who want to bring down the body, and that of
               the materialists, who want to bring down the soul: two
               forms of violence, each almost as foolish as the other. And
               alongside these two large groups swarm the countless
               multitudes of the indifferent, who, with neither conviction
               nor compassion, love with tepidness and are sparing
               with their joys. Where then is wisdom? Where then is the


                                             361




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 361                                       3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          CHAPTER XVII



               science of living? Nowhere. And this big problem would
               have remained entirely unsolved if Spiritism had not come
               to assist those who study the issue by showing them the
               relationship between the body and the soul, and to tell
               them that since they are necessary for each other, both
               must be cared for. So love your soul but care also for your
               body, the soul’s instrument. Being heedless of the needs
               that are indicated by nature itself means to be heedless of
               the law of God. Do not punish your body for the wrongs
               that your free will has made it commit and for which it
               is no more responsible than a badly ridden horse for any
               accident it might cause. Hence, will you be more perfect
               if you torture your body but remain no less selfish and
               proud, nor more charitable toward your neighbor? No,
               perfection does not lie in this; it lies entirely in the reforms
               to which you submit your spirit. Discipline it, subjugate
               it, humiliate it and mortify it: that is the way to make it
               docile before God’s will and the only way that leads to
               perfection.

                                          Georges, A Protector Spirit (Paris, 1863)




                                                362




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 362                                           3/7/2009 18:00:34

               CHAPTER XVIII


               Many are called but
               few are chosen
                      x Parable of the wedding feast

                      x The narrow door

                      x Not all those who say, “Lord! Lord!” will enter the
                          kingdom of heaven

                      x Much will be asked of him who has received much



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x To him who already has, more will be given

                      x Christians shall be recognized by their deeds




              PARABLE OF THE WEDDING FEAST


                      1. Speaking further through parables, Jesus said to them,
                      “The kingdom of heaven is like a king, who, wanting to give
                      his son a wedding feast, sent his servants to call on those
                      whom he had invited; however, they refused to come. The




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 363                                         3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                           CHAPTER XVIII



                      king then sent other servants with orders to tell the invitees,
                      “I have prepared the feast; I have slaughtered my cattle and
                      what I have ordered to be fattened. Everything is ready; come
                      to the wedding feast.” However, they were not concerned
                      and one went to his house in the country and another to his
                      business. The others seized his servants and killed them
                      after having badly mistreated them. When the king found
                      out, he was filled with anger, and having sent his armies, he
                      exterminated those murderers and burned their city.

                      He then said to his servants, “The wedding feast has been
                      fully prepared, but those who had been invited were not
                      worthy of it. So go to the crossroads and call to the wedding
                      feast all whom you meet.” His servants then went into the
                      streets and gathered all those whom they met, both good and
                      bad. And the wedding hall was filled with people who sat at
                      the table.

                      The king then entered to see those who were at the table, and
                      noticing a man who was not wearing a wedding garment,
                      he said to him, “My friend, why have you come in without
                      a wedding garment?” The man remained silent. Then the
                      king told his servants, “Bind his hands and feet and cast
                      him into outer darkness; there, there shall be weeping and
                      gnashing of teeth, for many are called but few are chosen.”
                      (Mt. 22:1-14)

               2. Disbelievers smile at this seemingly childishly naïve
               parable because they cannot understand why so many
               problems could arise regarding a feast, and even less why
               the invitees would extend their resistance to the point
               of massacring those sent by the master of the house.



                                                364




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 364                                             3/7/2009 18:00:34

                              MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN



               “Parables,” they say, “are of course figurative, but even so,
               they shouldn’t go beyond the limits of plausibility.”

                      The same can be said about all allegories as well as
               the most ingenious fables if one does remove their outer
               covering in order to find their hidden meaning. Jesus
               composed his with the commonest habits of life and
               adapted them to the customs and character of the people
               to whom he spoke. Most of his parables were meant to
               instill in the masses the idea of the spiritual life; their
               meaning often seems unintelligible only because they are
               not regarded from this point of view.

                      In this particular parable, Jesus compares the kingdom
               of heaven – where everything is joy and happiness – to a
               feast. In speaking of the first invitees, he makes an allusion
               to the Hebrews, whom God called first to the knowledge of
               his Law. Those sent by the master are the prophets, who
               came to exhort them to follow the way of true happiness,
               but their words were listened to very little; their warnings
               were scorned; many were even massacred like the servants
               in the parable. The invitees who made excuses under the
               pretext of looking after their fields and their businesses
               symbolize persons of the world, who, absorbed by earthly
               matters, are indifferent toward heavenly matters.

                      Among the Jews back then, it was a common belief
               that their nation was to achieve supremacy over all others.
               Had not God, in fact, promised Abraham that his progeny
               would cover the entire earth? However, as always, taking
               the form for the substance, they believed in an actual,
               material domination.



                                             365




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 365                                     3/7/2009 18:00:34

                                          CHAPTER XVIII



                      Before the coming of Christ, and except for the Hebrews,
               all other peoples were idolatrous and polytheistic. If a few
               extraordinary individuals conceived of the idea of divine
               oneness, this idea remained in the state of a personal theory
               and was in no way accepted as a fundamental truth, except
               by a few initiates who hid their knowledge under a veil of
               mystery impenetrable by the masses. The Hebrews were
               the first to publicly practice monotheism. It was to them
               that God transmitted his divine law, first through Moses,
               then through Jesus. From this tiny focal point began the
               light that was to spread over the entire world, triumph
               over paganism, and give Abraham a spiritual progeny “as
               numerous as the stars in the firmament.” Although they
               had rejected idolatry, the Jews had neglected the moral
               law, adhering instead to the easier practice of outward
               forms. Evil had reached its peak; the nation had been
               conquered and was split by factions and divided by sects;
               disbelief itself had even entered the sanctuary. It was
               then that Jesus appeared. He was sent to remind them to
               observe the Law, and to open to them the new horizons of
               the future life. The first to be invited to the great banquet
              of universal faith, they rejected the word of the heavenly
              Messiah and put him to death. Thus, they lost the fruit
              they were to have reaped from their own initiative.

                      It would be unjust, however, to accuse an entire
              people for such a state of affairs. That responsibility fell
              mainly to the Pharisees and Sadducees, who sacrificed
              their nation due to the pride and fanaticism of the former
              and the disbelief of the latter. They are the ones whom


                                              366




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 366                                      3/7/2009 18:00:35

                              MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN



               Jesus compares above all to the invitees who refuse to
               come to the wedding feast. He then adds, “The Master,
               upon seeing this, ordered all those who could be found in
               the crossroads to be invited, both good and bad.” With this
               he wanted to say that the word would be proclaimed to all
               other peoples, both pagan and idolatrous, and that, upon
               believing, they would be admitted to the feast in the place
               of those who had been invited first.

                      Nevertheless, it is not enough simply to be invited; it
               is not enough simply to take the name Christian, nor to sit
               at the table to take part in the heavenly banquet. Before
               anything else and as an express condition, it is necessary
               to be dressed in a wedding garment, which means to have
               a pure heart and to practice the Law according to its spirit.
               This law is contained in its entirety in these words: Without
               charity there is no salvation. Among all those who hear the
               divine word, however, how few there are who keep it and
               practice it! How few make themselves worthy to enter the
               kingdom of heaven! That is why Jesus said: Many will be
               called but few chosen.



               THE NARROW DOOR


                      3. Enter through the narrow door, for the door to perdition
                      is wide and the path leading to it is broad, and there are
                      many who enter through it. How small is the door to life! How
                      narrow is the path that leads to it! And how few there are
                      who find it! (Mt. 7:13, 14)




                                                    367




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 367                                           3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          CHAPTER XVIII



                      4. Someone asked him this question: “Lord, will only a few
                      be saved?” He responded, “Strive to enter through the narrow
                      door, for I assure you that many will try to enter through it
                      but will not be able to. And once the father of the family has
                      entered and shut the door, and you, being outside, start
                      knocking, by saying, ‘Lord, open to us,’ he will answer, ‘I
                      do not know where you have come from.’ Then you will say,
                      ‘We ate and drank with you and you taught us in our public
                      squares,’ and he will respond, ‘I do not know where you
                      have come from; away from me, all you who have practiced
                      iniquity.’”

                      “Then, there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth when
                      you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and all the prophets in the
                      kingdom of God, while you yourselves have been thrown out.
                      Many will come from the east and the west, from the north
                      and the south, those who will have a place at the feast in the
                      kingdom of God. Hence, those who are last shall be first and
                      those who are first shall be last.” (Lk. 13:23-30)

               5. The door to perdition is wide because the evil passions
               are many, and the pathway to evil is frequented by most.
               The door to salvation is narrow because those who want to
               go through it must make a great effort to control themselves
               in order to overcome their evil tendencies, and few resign
               themselves to doing so. It is the complement to the maxim:
               Many are called but few are chosen.

                      Such is the current state of earth’s humankind,
               because, since the earth is a world of expiation, evil
               predominates on it. When it is transformed, the pathway
               to goodness will be the one most frequented. These words,



                                                368




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 368                                            3/7/2009 18:00:35

                              MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN



               therefore, should be understood in the relative sense and
               not in the absolute sense. If this were to be the normal
               state of humankind, God would have intentionally
               condemned the vast majority of individuals to perdition,
               an unacceptable supposition if one acknowledges God as
               entirely just and good.

                      But of what evil actions could humankind make itself
               guilty to deserve such a sad fate in its present and in its
               future if it has been completely relegated to the earth and
               if the soul has not had other existences? Why are there so
               many obstacles sown along the way? Why such a narrow
               door that allows only a small number to pass through if the
               soul’s fate is sealed forever after death? In this way, with
               only one lifetime, humankind is in constant conflict both
               with itself and the justice of God. With the prior existence
               of the soul and the plurality of worlds, the horizon is
               broadened; light is shed on the most obscure points of
               the faith; the present and future are in solidarity with the
               past. Only then can one understand all the depth, all the
               truth and all the wisdom of Christ’s maxims.



               NOT ALL THOSE WHO SAY “LORD! LORD!” WILL
              ENTER THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN


                      6. Not all who say, “Lord, Lord,” will enter the kingdom of
                      heaven. Only those who have done the will of my Father
                      who is in heaven will enter. Many will say to me on that
                      day, “Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name? Did
                      we not cast out demons in your name and did we not



                                               369




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 369                                         3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          CHAPTER XVIII



                      perform many miracles in your name?” And I will tell them
                      clearly: Away from me, you who have done deeds of
                      iniquity. (Mt. 7:21-23)

                      7. Therefore, everyone who hears my words and practices
                      them may be compared to a wise man who built his house
                      upon a rock. When the rain fell, the rivers flooded and the
                      winds blew and battered the house, it did not fall because
                      it had been built upon the rock. But anyone who hears my
                      words and does not practice them is like a foolish man who
                      built his house upon the sand. When the rain fell, the rivers
                      flooded and the winds blew and battered it, it caved in, and
                      great was its ruin. (Mt. 7:24-27; Lk. 6:46-49)

                      8. He who breaks one of the least of these commandments
                      and teaches men to break them will be regarded as last in
                      the kingdom of heaven. But he who abides by and teaches
                      them will be great in the kingdom of heaven. (Mt. 5:19)

               9. All those who proclaim Jesus’ mission say, “Lord! Lord!”
              But what use is it to call him Master or Lord if they do not
              follow his precepts? Are Christians those who honor him
              with outward acts of devotion, but who at the same time
              yield to pride, selfishness, greed and all their passions?
              Are his disciples those who spend their days in prayer, but
              who, as a result, are no better, more charitable or more
              indulgent toward their fellow beings? No, because just like
              the Pharisees, their prayer is on their lips but not in their
              heart. They might impress others with their form, but not
              God. In vain they will say to Jesus, “Lord, we prophesied;
              that is, we taught in your name; we cast out demons in
              your name; we ate and drank with you.” He will answer
              them, “I do not know who you are. Away from me, you who


                                                370




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 370                                           3/7/2009 18:00:35

                              MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN



               committed iniquities, you who belied your words with your
               actions, you who slandered your neighbor, robbed widows
               and committed adultery. Away from me, you whose hearts
               distilled hatred and bile, you who spilt the blood of your
               brothers and sisters in my name, you who caused tears to
               run instead of drying them. For you, there shall be weeping
               and gnashing of teeth, for the kingdom of God is for those
               who are kind, humble and charitable. Do not expect to
               bend the Lord’s justice because of the multiplicity of your
               words and genuflections. The only way open to you for
               finding grace before God is that of sincerely practicing the
               law of love and charity.”

                      Jesus’ words are eternal because they are the truth.
               They are not only a surety for life in heaven, but a pledge of
               peace, tranquility and stability in matters regarding life on
               earth. That is why all human political, social and religious
               institutions that are based on his words will be as stable
               as the house built upon the rock. People will keep them
               because they will find happiness in them. However, those
               who are in violation of his words will be like the house
               built upon the sand: the winds of transformation and the
               river of progress will bring them down.



               MUCH WILL BE ASKED OF HIM WHO HAS RECEIVED
              MUCH


                      10. The servant who knew his master’s will but who
                      nevertheless neither prepared himself nor did what was
                      expected of him will be harshly punished. But he who did



                                             371




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 371                                      3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          CHAPTER XVIII



                      not know his master’s will, but who did things worthy of
                      punishment, will be punished less. Much will be asked
                      of him who received much and a greater accounting will be
                      required from those to whom many things were entrusted.
                      (Lk. 12:47-48)

                      11. I have come into this world to exercise judgment, so that
                      those who do not see may see and those who do see may
                      become blind. Upon hearing these words, certain Pharisees
                      who were with him said to him, “Then are we blind also?”
                      Jesus answered them, “If you were blind, you would not
                      have sinned, but you now say that you see and that is why
                      sin remains in you.” (Jn. 9:39-41)

               12. These maxims find their application especially in
               the Spirits’ teachings. All those who know the precepts
               of Christ are surely blameworthy if they do not practice
               them; but besides the fact that the Gospel that contains
               them has spread only in the Christian denominations, how
               many persons there are in them who do not read it, and
               of those who do read it, how many there are who do not
               understand it! The result is that Jesus’ own words have
               been lost to the majority.

                      The Spirits’ teachings, which reproduce these maxims
               under different forms, and which develop and comment
               on them in order to put them within everyone’s reach,
               have the particularity of not being at all circumscribed,
               and everyone, literate or illiterate, believing or disbelieving,
               Christian or not, can receive them because spirits
               communicate everywhere. None who receive them either
               directly or through an intermediary can claim ignorance



                                                372




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 372                                           3/7/2009 18:00:35

                              MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN



               of them. They cannot offer as an excuse either their lack
               of instruction or the obscurity of the teachings’ allegorical
               meaning. Thus, those who do not take advantage of the
               teachings for their advancement, who admire them as
               being interesting and curious, without their hearts being
               touched by them, who are no less vain, no less proud,
               no less selfish, no less attached to material possessions,
               or who are not better toward their neighbor, are all the
               more guilty because they have a greater means of knowing
               about the truth.

                      Mediums who receive good communications are even
               more blameworthy for persisting in evil, for often they
               write their own condemnation, and if they were not so
               blinded by pride, they would realize that the Spirits are
               addressing them personally. However, instead of applying
               to themselves the lessons they write, or those they see
               written, their sole thought is to apply them to others,
               thereby confirming these words of Jesus: “You see a speck
               in your neighbor’s eye but you do not see the log in your
               own.” (See chap. X, no. 9)

                      Through these words: “If you were blind, you would
               not have sinned,” Jesus meant that blameworthiness is
               proportional to one’s enlightenment. Thus, the Pharisees,
               who had the intention of being – and actually were – the
               most enlightened individuals of their people, were more
               reprehensible in God’s eyes than the unlearned people.
               The same applies today.

                      Therefore, much will be asked of Spiritists because
               they have received much; but also to those who have taken
               advantage of the teachings much will be given.


                                             373




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 373                                    3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                           CHAPTER XVIII



                      The first thought of all sincere Spiritists should be to
               find out if in the Spirits’ counsels there is not something
               that might apply to themselves.

                          Spiritism has multiplied the number of those
               who are called. Because of the faith provides, it will also
               multiply the number of those who are chosen.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               TO HIM WHO ALREADY HAS, MORE WILL BE GIVEN


                      13. His disciples approached him and asked, “Why do you
                      speak to them in parables?” He responded, “Because to you
                      it has been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
                      heaven, but to them it has not been given. For to him who
                      already has, more will be given and he will have in abundance;
                      but regarding him who does not have, even what he has will
                      be taken away. That is why I speak to them in parables;
                      for seeing, they see nothing, and hearing, they neither hear
                      nor understand. And the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled in
                      them when he said, ‘You will hear with your ears but will not
                      understand; you will see with your eyes but will not perceive
                      anything.’” (Mt. 13:10-14)

                      14. Pay close attention regarding what you hear, for the same
                      measure will be used on you that you have used to measure
                      others, and you will be given even more; for to him who already
                      has, more will be given and regarding him who does not have,
                      even what he has will be taken away. (Mk. 4:24-25)




                                                374




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 374                                             3/7/2009 18:00:35

                              MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN



               15. “It will be given to him who already has and it will be
               taken away from him who does not have.” Meditate on these
               great teachings, which have so often seemed paradoxical
               to you. Those who have received are those who understand
               the meaning of the divine word; they have received solely
               because they have tried to become worthy, and the Lord, in
               his merciful love, encourages efforts that lead to goodness.
               These firm and persevering efforts attract the Lord’s
               blessings; they are a magnet that attracts progressive
               advancement and the abundant blessings that render you
               strong enough to climb the holy mountain, where at the
               summit is repose after labor.

                      “From him who has nothing, or who has little, it shall
               be taken away.” This should be understood as a figurative
               opposite. God does not take away from his creatures the
               good he has consented to give them. O blind and deaf
               humanity! Open your mind and your heart; see with your
               spirit; understand with your soul and do not interpret in
               such a coarsely unjust manner the words of him who has
               made God’s justice shine resplendently in your sight. It is
               not God who takes from those who have received little; it
               is their own spirit, which, wasteful and careless, does not
               know how to preserve what it has, and by nurturing it,
               increase the mite dropped in their heart.

                      Those who do not cultivate the field which their father’s
               efforts earned for them, and which they have inherited,
               see that field become covered with weeds. Is it their father
               who takes away the harvest that they did not want to
               prepare? If they allowed the seeds meant to grow in that



                                              375




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 375                                       3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          CHAPTER XVIII



               field to wither from lack of care, should they accuse their
               father if they produce nothing? No, of course not. Instead
               of accusing the one who had prepared everything for them
               of taking away his endowment, let them accuse the true
               author of their miseries, and let them then, repentant and
               industrious, courageously get to work; let them break the
               thankless soil with the effort of their will; let them plow
               deeply with the help of repentance and hope; let them
               confidently sow the seed that they have chosen as good
               from among the bad; and let them water it with their love
               and charity. Then God, the God of love and charity, will
               give to them who have already received. And then they
               will see their efforts crowned with success, and one grain
               will produce a hundred and another a thousand. Courage,
               O workers! Take up your hoes and your plows; till your
               hearts; pull up the weeds from it; sow there the good seed
               that the Lord has entrusted to you, and the dew of love will
               enable it to produce the fruits of charity.

                                                A Spirit Friend (Bordeaux, 1862)



               CHRISTIANS SHALL BE RECOGNIZED BY THEIR
               DEEDS


               16. “Not all those who say to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter the
               kingdom of heaven, but only the one who has done the will
               of my Father who is in heaven.”

                      Listen to these words of the Lord, all you who reject
               the Spiritist Doctrine as a work of the Devil. Open your
               ears, for the time to listen has come.


                                              376




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 376                                        3/7/2009 18:00:35

                              MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN



                      Is it enough to wear the uniform of the Lord to be a
               faithful servant? Is it enough to say, “I am a Christian” to
               follow Christ? Look for the true Christians and you will
               recognize them by their deeds. “A good tree cannot bear
               bad fruit, nor can a bad tree bear good fruit.” “Any tree
               that does not bear good fruit is cut down and cast into
               the fire.” These are the Master’s words; disciples of Christ,
               understand them well! What are the fruits that the tree
               of Christianity must bear, that mighty tree whose leafy
               branches cover part of the world with its shade, but which
               as yet does not shelter all those who should gather around
               it? The fruits of the tree of life are the fruits of life, hope
               and faith. Christianity, as it has done for many centuries,
               preaches these three divine virtues; it seeks to spread these
               fruits, but how few pick them! The tree is always good,
               but the gardeners are bad. They have wanted to fashion
               it according to their own ideas; they have wanted to mold
               it in accordance with their own needs; they have cut it,
               diminished it and mutilated it; its barren branches do
               not bear bad fruit; they no longer bear any at all. Thirsty
               travelers who stop in its shade to look for the fruit of hope
               that ought to restore their strength and courage see only
               dry twigs announcing the coming storm. In vain they look
               for the fruit of life on the tree of life: its leaves fall dry;
               human hands have tampered with them so much that
               they have withered them!

                      Therefore, open your ears and your hearts, dearly
               beloved! Cultivate that tree of life, whose fruits give life
               eternal. The One who planted it invites you to care for it
               with love, and you will see it once again bearing its divine


                                             377




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 377                                      3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          CHAPTER XVIII



               fruit in abundance. Keep it just as Christ gave it to you. Do
               not mutilate it; it wants to cast its immense shade over the
               entire universe; do not cut off its branches. Its beneficent
               fruit falls abundantly to nourish hungry travelers who
               want to reach their objective. Do not pick this fruit in
               order to hoard it and allow it to rot so that it is of no use
               to anyone. “Many are called but few are chosen.” This is
               because there are monopolizers of the bread of life just as
               often there are of material bread. Do not align yourselves
               with them. The tree that bears good fruit must give it to
               all. So go and seek out those who are hungry. Lead them
               beneath the branches of the tree and share with them the
               shelter it offers. “Grapes cannot be gathered from thorns.”
               My brothers and sisters, distance yourselves therefore
               from those who call you to show you the thorns along the
               way, and follow those who lead you to the shade of the tree
               of life.

                      The divine Savior, the righteous one par excellence,
               spoke and his words shall not pass away, “Not all those who
               say to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter the kingdom of heaven,
               but only those who have done the will of my Father who is
               in heaven.”

                      May the Lord of blessings bless you; may the God of
               light illumine you; may the tree of life abundantly shed its
               fruit over you! Believe and pray.

                                                      Simeon (Bordeaux, 1863)




                                              378




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 378                                     3/7/2009 18:00:35

               CHAPTER XIX



               Faith moves mountains
                      x The power of faith

                      x Religious faith. The state of the unshakable faith

                      x Parable of the withered fig tree



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x Faith: the mother of hope and charity

                      x Divine faith and human faith




               THE POWER OF FAITH


                      1. When he came to meet the people, a man approached him,
                      fell to his knees at his feet and said to him, “Lord, have mercy
                      on my son, who is insane and suffers much because he often
                      falls into the fire and often into the water. I presented him to
                      your disciples but they could not heal him.” Jesus answered,
                      saying, “O disbelieving and perverse generation, how long
                      will I be with you? How long must I endure you? Bring the
                      child to me.” And when Jesus threatened the demon, it came




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 379                                              3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                            CHAPTER XIX



                      out of the child, who was healed the same instant. Then the
                      disciples came to Jesus in private and said to him, “Why
                      could we not expel the demon?” Jesus answered, “Because
                      of your disbelief. For verily I say to you: if you had faith as a
                      mustard seed, you would say to this mountain, ‘Move from
                      here to there’ and it would move, and nothing would be
                      impossible for you.” (Mt. 17:14-20)

               2. In its proper acceptation, it is certain that confidence
               in our own abilities renders us capable of accomplishing
               physical things that we would not be able to do if we doubted
               ourselves. However, here it is only in the moral sense
               that these words should be understood. The mountains
               that faith moves are difficulties, resistance and ill will; in
               other words, all the things found among humans, even
               when it concerns the best of things. Everyday prejudices,
               material interests, selfishness, the blindness of fanaticism
               and prideful passions are other such mountains that bar
               the way to all who are working for humankind’s progress.
               Robust faith provides the perseverance, strength and
               resources that enable us to overcome the obstacles in little
               as well as in big matters. Faith that is faltering provides
               uncertainty and hesitation, which strengthen the barriers
               we wish to overcome; this faith does not choose the means
               to win, because it does not believe in the possibility of
               victory.

               3. In another acceptation, faith means the confidence one
               has in accomplishing something, the certainty of achieving
               a particular purpose. It provides a kind of lucidity that
               enables one to see in thought the end which is intended



                                                 380




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 380                                               3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          FAITH MOVES MOUNTAINS



               and the means to reach it, in such a way that the one
               who possesses it proceeds, in a manner of speaking,
               with absolute certainty. In either case, faith enables the
               accomplishment of great things.

                      Sincere and true faith is always calm. It provides the
               patience that knows how to wait, because having its point
               of support in the mind and in the understanding of things,
               it carries the certainty of arriving at its objective. Hesitant
               faith senses its own weakness. When it is stimulated by
               interest, it becomes incensed and thinks it can supply the
               strength it lacks by means of force. Calmness in the midst
               of struggle is always a sign of strength and confidence;
               force, on the other hand, is proof of weakness and self-
               doubt.

               4.    One       must       guard   against   confusing   faith   with
               presumptuousness. True faith allies itself with humility;
               those who have it put their trust in God more than in
               themselves, because they know that they are simple
               instruments of God’s will and can do nothing without
               God. That is why good spirits come to their aid.
               Presumptuousness is less faith than pride, and pride is
               always punished sooner or later by the disappointment
               and failures inflicted upon it.

               5. The power of faith receives a direct and special application
              in magnetic action. Through faith, humans act upon the
              fluid – the universal agent – modifying its qualities and
              giving it an impulse that is irresistible, so to speak. Thus,
              those who combine a normally large fluidic power with an
              ardent faith can, solely by their will directed toward the



                                                   381




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 381                                            3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          CHAPTER XIX



               good, perform the remarkable phenomena of healing and
               other phenomena formerly regarded as miracles, but which
               are nothing more than the consequences of a natural law.
               That is why Jesus told his apostles: If you could not heal
               it was because you did not have faith.



               RELIGIOUS FAITH. THE STATE OF UNSHAKABLE
               FAITH


               6. From the religious point of view, faith is the belief in the
               particular dogmas that comprise the different religions;
               all religions have their articles of faith. From this aspect,
               faith may be either rational or blind. Blind faith examines
               nothing, accepts both the false as well as the true without
               verification, and clashes at every step with evidence and
               reason. Taken to the extreme, it produces fanaticism.
               Whenever faith rests upon error, it collapses sooner or
               later. Faith that is based on the truth is the only kind
               assured of the future, because it has nothing to fear from
               the progress of enlightenment, since whatever is true in
               obscurity is also true in full light. Every religion claims to
               be in exclusive possession of the truth; however, to profess
               blind faith on a point of belief is to confess one’s inability
               to demonstrate that one is right.

               7. It is commonly stated that faith cannot be prescribed,
               from which many people declare that it is not their
               fault if they do not have faith. Of course faith cannot be
               prescribed, and what is even more correct is that faith
               cannot be imposed. No, it cannot be prescribed but only



                                              382




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 382                                      3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          FAITH MOVES MOUNTAINS



               acquired, and no one will be refused to possess it, even
               amongst those who are most resistant. We are speaking
               about fundamental spiritual truths and not this or that
               particular belief. It is not faith that should seek out these
               individuals; rather, they should seek out faith, and if they
               sincerely search for it, they will find it. Hence, you can be
               certain that those who say, “We would like nothing better
               than to believe, but we cannot,” say it only with their lips
               and not with their heart, because by saying it, they are
               plugging their ears. The proofs meanwhile multiply around
               them; why do they refuse to see them? On the part of
               some, it is indifference; for others, the fear of being forced
               to change their habits; for the majority, their pride refuses
               to acknowledge a higher power because they would have
               to bow before it.

                      For some individuals, faith almost seems to be innate;
               a spark is enough to develop it. Such ease in assimilating
               spiritual truths is an obvious sign of previous progress.
               For others, on the other hand, spiritual truths are difficult
               to absorb: a no less evident sign of an unevolved nature.
               The former have already believed and understood; upon
               being reborn, they bring with them the intuition of what
               they know: they have accomplished their education. The
               latter must learn everything: they are yet to accomplish
               their education; but they will do so, if not in this lifetime,
               then in another.

                      We must agree that the resistance of disbelievers often
               has less to do with them per se than the way in which
               things are presented to them. Faith requires a foundation,



                                                   383




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 383                                     3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                           CHAPTER XIX



               and such foundation is the perfect understanding of that
               which is to be believed; in order to believe, it is not enough
               simply to see; it is essential above all to understand. Blind
               faith is no longer appropriate for this century, and it is
               precisely the dogma of blind faith that produces the greatest
               number of disbelievers nowadays, because it wishes to
               impose itself and requires the abdication of two of the most
               precious prerogatives of human beings: reason and free
               will. It is mainly against this type of faith that disbelievers
               rebel, and about which it is true to say that faith cannot be
               prescribed. By not accepting proof, it leaves a void in the
               mind that gives room to doubt. Rational faith, that which
               is based on facts and logic, leaves no darkness in its wake;
               one believes because one is sure, and no one can be sure
               unless they have understood. That is why rational faith
               does not collapse, for unshakable faith is the kind that can
               stand face to face with reason in all human epochs.

                      Spiritism leads to such a result and it also triumphs
               over disbelief as long as it does not encounter systematic
               and self-serving opposition.



               PARABLE OF THE WITHERED FIG TREE


                      8. When they left Bethany, he was hungry. And seeing a fig
                      tree some way off, he went to see if he could find something
                      on it; and having come to it, he only found leaves, because it
                      was not the season for figs. Then Jesus said to the fig tree,
                      “May no one eat any more fruit from you,” which his disciples
                      heard. On the following day, as they passed by the fig tree,


                                                384




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 384                                            3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          FAITH MOVES MOUNTAINS



                      they saw that it had become withered down to its roots. And
                      remembering Jesus’ words, Peter said to him, “Master, look
                      how the fig tree that you cursed has become withered.” Jesus
                      answered him, saying, “Have faith in God. Verily I say to
                      you that whoever says to that mountain: ‘Be uprooted and
                      cast yourself into the sea,’ without any doubt in his heart but
                      firmly believing that what he has said will happen, will see it
                      actually happen.” (Mk. 11:12-14; 20-23)

               9. The withered fig tree symbolizes persons who have
               only the appearances of goodness, but who in reality
               produce nothing that is worthwhile: orators who are more
               flashy than substantial, whose words display the varnish
               of superficiality; they please the ears but upon close
               examination nothing substantial for the soul is found
               in them. After hearing them, one asks what benefit was
               derived from listening to them.

                      It is also the symbol of all persons who have the means
               to be useful but are not; all the utopias, all the empty
               theories and all the doctrines that lack a solid foundation.
               What is most often lacking is true faith, productive faith,
               the faith that stirs the fibers of the soul; in other words,
               the faith that moves mountains. They are trees that have
               leaves but no fruit. That is why Jesus condemns them
               to barrenness, for a day will come in which they will
               become withered down to their roots, which means that
               all the theories, all the doctrines that have not produced
               any good for humankind will fall into nothingness; that
               all deliberately useless human beings, for lack of having


                                                   385




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 385                                             3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          CHAPTER XIX



               put into practice the resources they had in them, will be
               treated like the withered fig tree.

               10. Mediums are the interpreters of spirits, supplying the
               physical organs that they lack to transmit their teachings
               to us; that is the reason mediums have been endowed with
               faculties to this effect. In these times of social renewal,
               they have a particular mission: they are the trees that
               must provide spiritual nourishment to their brothers and
               sisters. They are multiplying in number in order for this
               nourishment to be abundant. They are found everywhere,
               in all countries, among all social classes, among the rich
               and the poor, the great and the small, so that none are
               disinherited, and to prove to humankind that all are called.
               However, if they divert from its providential purpose the
               priceless faculty that was conceded to them, if they make
               it serve pointless or harmful matters, if they put it in the
               service of worldly interests, if instead of healthy fruit they
               bear unhealthy fruit, if they refuse to render it useful
               to others, if they derive from it no benefit for improving
               themselves, they are like the barren fig tree. God will take
               away a gift that has become useless in their hands: the
               seed they have not been able to bring to fruition, and God
               will let them become the prey of evil spirits.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               FAITH: THE MOTHER OF HOPE AND CHARITY


               11. In order to be profitable, faith must be active. It must
               not grow numb. Mother of all the virtues that lead to God, it


                                              386




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 386                                     3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          FAITH MOVES MOUNTAINS



               must watch carefully over the development of the children
               it generates.

                      Hope and charity are a consequence of faith; these
               three virtues form an inseparable trinity. Is it not faith that
               provides the hope of seeing the Lord’s promises fulfilled?
               Because, if you do not have faith, what do you hope for? Is
               it not faith that provides love? Because, if you do not have
               faith, what appreciation will you have, and, consequently,
               what love?

                      Faith, divine inspiration from God, awakens all the
               noble instincts that lead humans toward the good; it is the
               foundation of regeneration. Thus, this foundation must be
               strong and durable, for if the least doubt shakes it, what
               will become of the edifice that you built upon it? Therefore,
               construct the building upon unshakable foundations; let
               your faith be stronger than the sophisms and ridicule
               of disbelievers, for faith that cannot stand up to human
               ridicule is not true faith.

                      Sincere faith is alluring and contagious; it communicates
               itself to those who did not have it, or even would not desire to
               have it. It finds persuasive words that go to the soul, whereas
               apparent faith uses only sonorous words that leave their
               listeners cold and indifferent. Preach through the example
               of your faith in order to give it to others. Preach through the
               example of your deeds in order to enable others to see the
               merit of faith. Preach through your unshakeable hope in
               order to enable others to see the trust that strengthens and
               encourages you to battle all the vicissitudes of life.



                                                   387




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 387                                       3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                              CHAPTER XIX



                      Therefore, have faith in all that it contains of beauty
               and goodness, in its purity and in its reasoning. Do not
               accept faith that cannot be substantiated, the blind
               daughter of blindness. Love God but know why you do;
               believe in his promises but know why you believe in them.
               Follow our counsels but be aware of the objective we show
               you and the means we provide for you to reach it. Believe
               and hope without losing heart; miracles are the deeds of
               faith.

                                          Joseph, A Protector Spirit (Bordeaux, 1862)



               DIVINE FAITH AND HUMAN FAITH


               12. Faith is the innate sentiment in human beings of
               their future destiny; it is the awareness they have of the
               immense faculties whose seed was deposited in them, first
               in a latent state, and which they now must make blossom
               and grow by their active will.

                      Until now, faith has not been understood except from
               the religious aspect, because Christ extolled it as a powerful
               lever and because he has been seen only as the head of a
               religion. But Christ, who performed material miracles, has
               demonstrated through these same miracles what humans
               can do when they have faith; that is, the will to wish and
               the certainty that such will can obtain its fulfillment. By
               following his example, did not the apostles also perform
               miracles? Well, what were those miracles except natural
               effects whose cause was unknown to humans back then,
               but which today have been largely explained and which


                                                   388




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 388                                             3/7/2009 18:00:35

                                          FAITH MOVES MOUNTAINS



               will be fully understood through the study of Spiritism and
               magnetism?

                      Faith is either human or divine, depending on whether
               people apply their faculties to their earthly needs or to their
               heavenly and future aspirations. Individuals of genius
               who pursue the accomplishment of some great enterprise
               triumph if they have faith, because they feel within
               them that they can and must reach it, and this certainty
               provides them with immense power. Moral persons, who
               believe in their heavenly future and who want to fill their
               lives with noble and beautiful actions in the certainty of
               the happiness that awaits them, draw from their faith the
               strength they need, thereby accomplishing the miracles of
               charity, devotion and selflessness. Finally, with faith there
               are no evil tendencies that cannot be overcome.

                      Magnetism is one of the greatest proofs of faith put
               into action. It is through faith that magnetism heals and
               produces the remarkable phenomena that formerly were
               regarded as miracles.

                      I will repeat: faith is both human and divine. If all
               incarnates were fully persuaded of the power they have
               within them, and if they wanted to put their will in the service
               of that power, they would be capable of accomplishing
               what until today have been called prodigies, and which
               are actually nothing more than a development of human
               faculties.

                                                     A Protector Spirit (Paris, 1863)




                                                   389




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 389                                             3/7/2009 18:00:36

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 390   3/7/2009 18:00:36

               CHAPTER XX



               Workers of the last
               hour
                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x The last shall be first

                      x The mission of Spiritists

                      x Workers of the Lord




                      1. The kingdom of heaven is like the father of a family, who
                      went out at daybreak in order to hire workers to work in his
                      vineyard. Having agreed with the workers that he would pay
                      them one denarius per day, he sent them to the vineyard.
                      He went out again at the third hour of the day, and seeing
                      others who were in the square not doing anything, he said to
                      them, “You go also to my vineyard and I will give you what
                      is reasonable.” And they went there. Again, he went out at
                      the sixth and ninth hours of the day and did the same. And
                      having gone out at the eleventh hour, he found others who
                      were without anything to do and said to them, “Why have
                      you stood around all day without working?” They told him




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 391                                          3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                            CHAPTER XX



                      that it was because no one had hired them. He then said to
                      them, “You too go to my vineyard.”

                      When evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to the
                      one who was taking care of his business, “Call the workers
                      and pay them, from the last to the first.” Thus, those who had
                      not come to the vineyard except when the eleventh hour was
                      near received one denarius each. Those who were hired first
                      came in their turn, believing they would be given more, but
                      each one received no more than one denarius. Upon receiving
                      it, they complained against the father of the family, saying,
                      “These last worked only one hour and you have made them
                      equal to us who bore the load and heat of the day.”

                      But in response, he said to one of them, “My friend, I have
                      done you no wrong. Did you not agree with me on one
                      denarius for your day’s work? Take what belongs to you and
                      go; as for me, I wish to give to the last as much as to you. Is
                      it not permitted to me to do what I want? And is your eye evil
                      because I am good?”

                      Thus, the last shall be first and the first shall be last, for
                      many are called but few are chosen. (Mt. 20:1-16. See also
                      Parable of the Wedding Feast, chap. XVIII, no. 1)



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               THE LAST SHALL BE FIRST


               2. The workers of the last hour have a right to their wages,
               but their willingness has to have put them at the disposal
               of the master who was to hire them, and their tardiness



                                                392




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 392                                             3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          WORKERS OF THE LAST HOUR



               must not have been the result of laziness or ill will. They
               have a right to their wages because, since daybreak, they
               had been waiting impatiently for someone who would
               finally call them to work: they were hard-working; they
               only lacked work.

                      However, if they had refused work at each hour of the
               day; if they had said, “Let us be patient; repose is pleasing;
               when the last hour sounds, it will be time to think about
               today’s wages; what need is there for us to inconvenience
               ourselves for a master whom we neither know nor respect?
               The later the better!” These, my friends, would not have
               received the wages of work, but that of laziness.

                      What would have become of these workers if, instead
               of only remaining idle, they had used the hours of the day
               meant for labor to commit blameworthy acts; if they had
               blasphemed God by spilling the blood of their brothers and
               sisters, by causing problems among families, by ruining
               those who trusted them, by abusing the innocent, or by
               indulging in all the ignominies of humanity? What would
               have become of them? Would it be enough for them to have
               said at the last hour: “Sir, we have used our time badly.
               Use us until the end of the day so that we may do a little
               – although it will be very little of our part – but give us the
               wages of a worker of good will? No, no! The master would
               have said to them, “I do not have any work for you right
               now. You have squandered your time. You have forgotten
               what you have learned and you no longer know how to
               work in my vineyard. Therefore, begin to learn once more,
               and when you are more willing, come to me and I will open


                                                    393




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 393                                      3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                              CHAPTER XX



               my vast field to you, where you will be able to work at all
               hours of the day.”

                      Good Spiritists, my dearly beloved, you are all
               workers of the last hour. The one who says, “I began work
               at daybreak and I will finish only at nightfall” would be
               very proud. You all came when you were called – some a
               little earlier, some a little later – to the incarnation whose
               shackles you bear; however, for how many centuries has
               the Lord been calling you to his vineyard, without your
               wanting to enter it! Now is the time for you to receive your
               wages; employ the time you have remaining well, and never
               forget that your existence, no matter how long it may seem
               to you, is only a fleeting instant in the immensity of time
               comprising eternity for you.

                                      Constantin, A Protector Spirit (Bordeaux, 1863)



               3. Jesus loved the simplicity of symbols, and in his powerful
               language the workers who came at the first hour were
               Moses, the prophets and all the initiators who marked the
               stages of progress that has been continued down through
               the centuries by the apostles, martyrs, the Church Fathers,
               learned individuals, philosophers and, finally, Spiritists.
               Spiritists – the last to arrive – have been announced and
               foretold since the coming of the Messiah, and they will
               receive the same recompense. But what am I saying? A
               greater recompense. As the last to arrive, Spiritists profit
               from the intellectual endeavors of their predecessors,
               because humans must inherit from humans, and their


                                                   394




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 394                                             3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          WORKERS OF THE LAST HOUR



               endeavors and results are collective: God blesses solidarity.
               Furthermore, many among them are alive again today, or
               will come back in the future to complete the work they had
               formerly begun. More than one patriarch, more than one
               prophet, more than one disciple of Christ, more than one
               disseminator of the Christian faith may be found amongst
               Spiritists; however, they are now more enlightened, more
               advanced, no longer working on the foundation but on the
               top floor of the building. Their wages, therefore, will be in
               proportion to the merit of the work.

                      Reincarnation           –   that     wonderful   tenet   –   both
               immortalizes and defines spiritual affiliation. Called to
               give an accounting of its earthly mandate, the spirit
               understands the continuity of the task, interrupted but
               always resumed once again. It sees and senses that it has
               seized in its flight the thought of its predecessors. It enters
               the arena again, matured by experience, to advance a little
               more. And all, workers of the first and of the last hour,
               with their eyes opened to the profound justice of God, no
               longer complain, but simply worship.

                      This is one of the true meanings of this parable. Like all
               the parables that Jesus addressed to the people, beneath
               its forms and images it contains the seed of the future
               as well as the revelation of that magnificent unity that
               harmonizes all things in the universe, and that solidarity
               that reconnects all present beings to the past and future.

                                                               Henri Heine (Paris, 1863)


                                                     395




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 395                                                3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          CHAPTER XX



               THE MISSION OF SPIRITISTS


               4. Do you not already hear the rumbling of the tempest that
               must do away with the old world and engulf in nothingness
               the sum of earth’s iniquities? Ah! Bless the Lord, you who
               have put your faith in his sovereign justice, and who, as
               new apostles of the belief revealed by prophetic voices On
               High, go forth and preach the new tenet of reincarnation
               and of the elevation of spirits, according to whether they
               fulfilled their missions well or badly and how they bore
               their earthly trials.

                      Fear not! Tongues of fire are upon your heads. Oh!
               True followers of Spiritism, you are the chosen ones of
               God! Go and preach the Divine Word. The time has come
               in which you must sacrifice your habits, labors and futile
               concerns to its propagation. Go forth and proclaim it. Spirits
               from On High are with you. Of course, you will speak to
               individuals who will not want to listen to the voice of God,
               for that voice incessantly calls them to selflessness. You
               will proclaim disinterestedness to the greedy, abstinence
               to the dissolute, and kindness to domestic tyrants as well
               as to despots: wasted words, I know; but what does it
               matter! You must water with your sweat the ground that
               you must sow, for it will not produce a crop except through
               repeated efforts of the evangelical hoe and plow. Go forth
               and proclaim!

                      Yes, all you men and women of good faith, who are
               aware of how small you are as you look at other worlds
               scattered throughout the infinite, set out on a crusade



                                             396




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 396                                     3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          WORKERS OF THE LAST HOUR



               against injustice and iniquity. Go forth and reverse this
               worship of the golden calf, each day more and more
               encroaching. Go; God will guide you! Simple and unlearned
               men and women, your tongues will be loosened and you will
               speak as no other orator speaks. Go forth and proclaim,
               and attentive peoples will joyfully take in your words of
               consolation, fraternity, hope and peace.

                      What do the traps that will be set for you along your
               way matter! Only wolves fall into traps for wolves, because
               the shepherd knows how to defend his sheep against such
               murderous butchers.

                      Go forth, men and women who are great before God,
               and who, more blessed than St. Thomas, believe without
               asking to see, and accept the fact of mediumship even when
               you have never been successful in obtaining it yourselves.
               Go forth; the Spirit of God is leading you.

                      Press onward, magnificent phalanx of faith! And the
               great battalions of disbelievers will vanish before you like
               the morning mist at the first rays of the rising sun.

                      Faith is the virtue that moves mountains, Jesus said.
               However, impurity and all its vices lie heavier than the
               heaviest mountains on the heart of humankind. So, go forth
               with courage in order to move this mountain of iniquity,
               which future generations will know about only through
               legend, just as you yourselves know only very imperfectly
               about the period of time prior to pagan civilization.



                                                    397




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 397                                   3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          CHAPTER XX



                      Yes, moral and philosophical upheavals will occur
               at all points on the globe. The time approaches when the
               divine light will be shed over the two worlds.

                      Go forth, then, and take the Divine Word: to the great
               ones of the world, who will scorn it; to the learned, who will
               demand proof; to the small and simple, who will accept it,
               because it is especially among the martyrs of labor – that
               earthly expiation – that you will find zeal and faith. Go
               forth; with canticles of thanksgiving and songs of praise to
               God, they will receive the holy consolation you bring them,
               and they will bow their heads in thanks for their portion of
               earthly afflictions.

                      May your phalanx be armed with resolution and
               courage! Get to work! The plow is ready; the soil awaits
               you; now you must work!

                      Go forth and give thanks to God for the glorious task
               he has entrusted to you, but bear in mind that among
               those called to Spiritism, many have gone astray. So watch
               your course and follow the way of the truth.

                      Question: If many of those called to Spiritism have gone
               astray, by what signs do we recognize those who are on the
               righteous path?

                      Answer: You will recognize them by the principles
               of true charity that they profess and practice. You will
               recognize them by the number of afflicted to whom they
               take consolation. You will recognize them by their love
               for their neighbor, their selflessness and their personal
               disinterestedness. You will recognize them, finally, by the



                                             398




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 398                                      3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          WORKERS OF THE LAST HOUR



               triumph of their principles, for God wills the triumph of
               his law. Those who obey his laws are the elect, and he will
               give them victory. However, he will crush those who falsify
               the spirit of that law and who make it a stepping stone for
               satisfying their vanity and ambition.

                               Erastus, The Medium’s Guardian Angel (Paris, 1863)



               WORKERS OF THE LORD


               5. The time is near for the fulfillment of those things
               proclaimed for the transformation of humankind. Blessed
               will be those who have worked in the Lord’s field selflessly
               and with no other motive than charity! Their workdays
               will be paid a hundredfold more than what they expected.
               Blessed will be those who said to their fellow men and
               women, “Brothers and sisters, let us work together and
               combine our efforts so that the Master may find the work
               accomplished at his coming”; for the Master will say to
               them: “Come unto me, you who have been good servants,
               you who have known how to silence your jealousies and
               discords so that no harm would come to the work!” But
               woe unto those who, because of their dissentions, will
               have delayed the time of the harvest, for the storm will
               come and they will be swept away in the upheaval! They
               will cry, “Have mercy! Have mercy!” But the Lord will say
               to them, “Why do you ask for mercy, you who did not
               show mercy to your brothers and sisters; who refused
               to offer them a hand; who trampled the weak instead of
               upholding them? Why do you ask for mercy, you who



                                                    399




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 399                                         3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          CHAPTER XX



               sought your recompense in the delights of the earth and in
               the satisfaction of your pride? You have already received
               your recompense, such as you wanted it. Ask for nothing
               more. The recompenses of heaven are for those who did
               not ask for the recompenses of earth.”

                      At this moment, God is taking a census of his faithful
               servants and is taking note of those who only have the
               appearance of devotion so that they may not usurp the
               wages of the courageous servants, because it is for those
               who do not recoil before their tasks that God will entrust
               the most difficult positions in the great work of regeneration
               through Spiritism. And these words will be fulfilled: “The
               first will be last and the last will be first in the kingdom of
               heaven.”

                                                   Spirit of Truth (Paris, 1862)




                                             400




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 400                                        3/7/2009 18:00:36

               CHAPTER XXI


               There will be false
               christs and false
               prophets
                      x The tree is known by its fruit

                      x The mission of prophets

                      x Prodigies performed by false prophets

                      x Do not believe all spirits



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x False prophets

                      x The characteristics of the true prophet

                      x False prophets in the spirit world

                      x Jeremiah and the false prophets




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 401                            3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                            CHAPTER XXI



               THE TREE IS KNOWN BY ITS FRUIT


                      1. The tree that produces bad fruit is not good and the tree
                      that produces good fruit is not bad, for each tree is known
                      by its own fruit. Figs cannot be picked from thorn bushes,
                      nor can bunches of grapes be cut from briars. A good man
                      brings forth good things from the good treasure of his heart,
                      whereas the evil man takes evil things from the evil treasure
                      of his heart, for the mouth speaks from what fills the heart.
                      (Lk. 6:43-45)

                      2. Beware of false prophets who come to you covered in the
                      skins of sheep, but who on the inside are ravenous wolves.
                      You will know them by their fruit. Can grapes be picked from
                      thorn bushes or figs from briars? Thus, every tree that is
                      good produces good fruit and every tree that is bad produces
                      bad fruit. A good tree cannot produce bad fruit, nor can a
                      bad tree produce good fruit. Every tree that does not produce
                      good fruit will be cut down and cast into the fire. Hence, you
                      will know them by their fruit. (Mt. 7:15-20)

                      3. Take care so that no one deceives you, for many will come
                      in my name saying, “I am the Christ” and they will deceive
                      many.

                      Many false prophets will appear who will deceive many
                      people, and because iniquity will abound, the charity of
                      many will grow cold. But he who perseveres to the end will
                      be saved.

                      Therefore, if someone says to you, “The Christ is here, or the
                      Christ is there,” do not believe him, for false christs and false
                      prophets will appear and will perform great prodigies and


                                                 402




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 402                                               3/7/2009 18:00:36

                     THERE WILL BE FALSE CHRISTS AND FALSE PROPHETS



                      amazing things to the point of deceiving the elect themselves
                      if possible. (Mt. 24:4-5, 11-13, 23-24; Mk. 13:5-6, 21-22)



               THE MISSION OF PROPHETS


               4. Prophets are commonly perceived as possessing the
               gift of being able to reveal the future, so that the words
               prophecies and predictions have become synonymous.
               However, in its evangelical sense the word prophet has
               a broader meaning. It applies to all who have been sent
               by God with the mission of instructing humankind and
               revealing hidden the things and mysteries of the spiritual
               life. Hence, a person can be a prophet without making
               predictions. That was the notion of the Jews during the
               time of Jesus. Thus, when he was taken before the high
               priest, Caiaphas, the assembled scribes and elders spat
               in his face, struck him with their fists and insulted him
               by saying, “Christ, prophecy for us and tell us who struck
               you.” Nevertheless, there have been instances in which
               prophets have had foreknowledge of the future, whether by
               intuition or by providential revelation, in order to transmit
               warnings to humankind. Since such predicted events
               actually occurred, the gift of predicting the future came to
               be regarded as one of the attributes of a prophet.



               PRODIGIES PERFORMED BY FALSE PROPHETS


               5. “False christs and false prophets will appear, who
               will perform great prodigies and amazing things to the


                                                403




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 403                                            3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          CHAPTER XXI



               point of deceiving the elect themselves.” These words
               provide the true meaning of the term prodigy. According
               to the theological definition, prodigies and miracles are
               exceptional phenomena that occur outside the laws of
               nature. Since the laws of nature are the work of God
               exclusively, God could obviously derogate from them if so
               desired. However, simple common sense says that God
               could not have possibly given unevolved and perverse
               beings a power equal to the divine power, and even less
               the right to undo what God has done. Jesus could not
               have consecrated such a principle. If, according to the
               meaning that has been attributed to these two words, the
               Spirit of Evil has the power to perform such prodigies to
               the point that the elect themselves are deceived, the result
               would be that, being able to do what God does, prodigies
               and miracles are not the exclusive privilege of those sent
               by God. Moreover, they would not prove anything, since
               nothing would distinguish the miracles performed by
               saints from the miracles performed by the Devil. It is
               therefore necessary to look for a more rational meaning for
               these two words.

                      To uneducated common folk, every phenomenon
               with an unknown cause comes across as supernatural,
               extraordinary and miraculous. Once the cause is known,
               it is realized that the phenomenon, as extraordinary as
               it may seem, is nothing other than the application of a
               natural law. In this manner the circle of supernatural
               events shrinks to the extent that the circle of scientific
               knowledge broadens. For the advancement of their
               ambitions, interests and domination, humans in all eras


                                              404




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 404                                   3/7/2009 18:00:36

                     THERE WILL BE FALSE CHRISTS AND FALSE PROPHETS



               have exploited certain knowledge they possess in order to
               give themselves the prestige of a supposedly superhuman
               power or a supposed divine mission. These are the false
               christs and false prophets. The spreading of enlightenment
               destroys their credit, and that is why their numbers
               dwindle to the degree that people become enlightened. The
               fact that they perform what in the eyes of certain people
               come across as prodigies is not, therefore, the sign of a
               divine mission, since it could result from knowledge that
               anyone may acquire, or from special organic faculties
               that the most unworthy persons may possess as well as
               the most worthy. True prophets are recognized by more
               serious, exclusively moral characteristics.



               DO NOT BELIEVE ALL SPIRITS


                      6. Dearly beloved, do not believe all spirits, but test whether
                      the spirits are from God, for many false prophets have
                      appeared in the world. (I Jn. 4:1)

               7. Spirit phenomena, far from giving credibility to false
               christs and false prophets – as some people love to say
               – have, much to the contrary, come to deal them a final
               blow. Do not ask Spiritism for prodigies or miracles, since
               it formally declares that it does not perform them. Just as
               physics, chemistry, astronomy and geology have revealed
               the laws of the physical world, Spiritism has revealed
               other, unknown laws that govern relations between the
               corporeal and the spirit world, and which are laws of
               nature as much as are the laws of science. By providing



                                                405




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 405                                             3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          CHAPTER XXI



               an explanation for a certain order of phenomena that have
               been incomprehensible until now, Spiritism destroys what
               still remained in the realm of the extraordinary. This way,
               those who would be tempted to exploit such phenomena
               for their own profit and to pass themselves off as messiahs
               of God cannot abuse people’s credulity for long, and will
               soon be unmasked. Moreover, as has been stated, these
               phenomena per se prove nothing: a mission is proven by
               their moral effects, which are not given to just anyone to
               produce. This is one of the results of the development of
               the Spiritist science; by scrutinizing the cause of certain
               phenomena, it lifts the veil on many mysteries. Those who
               prefer the darkness to the light are the only ones interested
               in combating it; but the truth is like the sun: it dissipates
               the densest fog.

                      Spiritism has revealed another category much more
               dangerous than false christs and prophets; it is found not
               among humans, but among discarnates: that of deceiving,
               hypocritical, proud and pseudo-learned spirits who have
               passed from the earth to the spirit world and have adorned
               themselves with venerated names in order to seek – thanks
               to the mask with which they have covered themselves – to
               give credence to the most bizarre and absurd ideas. Before
               mediumistic interactions were known, such spirits exerted
               their actions in a less ostensive way, through inspiration
               or through unconscious hearing or speaking mediumship.
               The number of those who, at various times, but especially
               as of late, have presented themselves as certain ancient
               prophets, as Christ, as Mary, the mother of Christ, and
               even as God, is considerable. John’s letter warns against


                                              406




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 406                                    3/7/2009 18:00:36

                     THERE WILL BE FALSE CHRISTS AND FALSE PROPHETS



               them when he says, “Dearly beloved, do not believe all
               spirits, but test whether the spirits are from God, for many
               false prophets have appeared in the world.” Spiritism
               provides the means to test them by pointing out the
               characteristics by which good spirits can be recognized,
               characteristics that are always moral and never material.1
               It is in the distinguishing between good and evil spirits
               that these words of Jesus can be especially applied: “The
               quality of a tree can be recognized by its fruit; a good tree
               cannot produce bad fruit and a bad tree cannot produce
               good fruit.” Spirits are judged by the quality of their deeds,
               just as a tree by the quality of its fruit.



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               FALSE PROPHETS


               8. If they tell you, “The Christ is here,” do not go there;
               on the contrary, be on your guard because there will be
               many false prophets. Do you not see the leaves of the fig
               tree beginning to fade? Do you not see its many shoots
               awaiting the time of blossoming? And did not Christ say
               to you, “A tree is known by its fruit?” Thus, if the fruit is
               bitter, you say that the tree is bad, but if the fruit is sweet
               and healthful, you say: Nothing that is this pure could
               have come from a bad tree.

                      This is the way you must judge, my brothers and
               sisters; the deeds are what you must examine. If those who

               1
                See the way to distinguish spirits in The Mediums’ Book, Pt. 2, chaps.
               XXIV ff. – Auth.


                                                407




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 407                                              3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          CHAPTER XXI



               say they are vested with divine power are accompanied by
               all the signs of such a mission, that is, if they possess
               the highest degree of the eternal and Christian virtues:
               charity, love, indulgence, the goodness that reconciles all
               souls; if, in support of their words, they add actions, then
               you can say: These are truly messengers of God.

                      However, distrust sugary words; distrust the scribes
               and the Pharisees who pray in the public squares, dressed
               in long robes. Distrust those who claim to have the one
               and only monopoly on the truth!

                      No, no, Christ is not there, for those whom he sends
               to disseminate his holy doctrine and to regenerate his
               people by following his example will be kind and humble
               of heart above all else. Those who by their example and
               counsels must save humankind – quickly heading toward
               its perdition and roaming tortuous roads – will be above all
               else modest and humble. Run from those who display one
               atom of pride as if they were contagious lepers who infect
               everything they touch. Remember that all individuals bear
               on their brow, but more especially on their actions, the stamp
               of their greatness or decadence.

                      Go forth, therefore, my beloved children. Advance
               without hesitation, without ulterior motives, along the
               blessed course you have undertaken. Go forth, go forth
               always without fear. Courageously distance yourselves
               from anything that could hinder your progress toward the
               eternal objective. O travelers, you will be in the darkness
               and pain of trial for only a little while longer if you will
               allow your hearts to follow that gentle doctrine that has



                                              408




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 408                                     3/7/2009 18:00:36

                     THERE WILL BE FALSE CHRISTS AND FALSE PROPHETS



               come to reveal to you the eternal laws and to satisfy all
               the aspirations of your soul regarding the unknown. Right
               now you can give embodiment to those fleeting sylphs you
               have seen in your dreams, and which, being ephemeral,
               could only enchant your spirit without saying anything to
               your heart. Now, my dear ones, death has disappeared,
               giving way to the radiant angel you have come to know,
               the angel of re-encounter and reunion! Now, you who have
               well fulfilled the task imposed by the Creator, you have
               nothing more to fear of his justice, for he is the Father
               and always forgives his wayward children who clamor for
               mercy. Therefore, press on; advance without ceasing. Let
               your banner be progress, continual progress in all things,
               until you finally arrive at the happy destination where all
               those who have preceded you await.

                                                       Louis (Bordeaux, 1861)



               CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE PROPHET


               9. Distrust false prophets. This recommendation is useful
               at all times, but especially at times of transition, when, like
               this one, a transformation of humanity is in the making
               and a multitude of ambitious and scheming individuals
               set themselves up as reformers and messiahs. It is against
               such impostors that one must be on guard, and it is the
               duty of all honest persons to unmask them. You will
               undoubtedly ask how they can be recognized. These are
               their signs:



                                            409




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 409                                      3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          CHAPTER XXI



                      The command of an army is entrusted only to a
               competent general capable of leading it. So, do you think
               that God would be less prudent than humans? Be certain
               that he entrusts important missions only to those he knows
               are capable of fulfilling them, for great missions are heavy
               burdens that would crush individuals who are too weak
               to bear them. As in all matters, the master must know
               more than the apprentice; in order to enable humankind
               to advance morally and intellectually, individuals who are
               superior in morality and intelligence are required! That
               is why missions are always entrusted to spirits who are
               already very advanced after having completed their trials
               in previous lifetimes, and who now incarnate with this
               objective. If they are not superior to the environment in
               which they must act, their efforts will be fruitless.

                      That said, we must conclude that true missionaries of
               God must justify their mission by their ascendancy, virtues
               and greatness, and the results and moralizing influence of
               their deeds. Let us draw a further conclusion: if by their
               character, virtues and intelligence they are either beneath
               the role they attribute to themselves or the personage
               under whose name they harbor themselves, they are
               nothing but histrions of low rank, who do not even know
               how to emulate their model.

                      Another consideration is that most true missionaries
               of God are unaware of the fact; they carry out the mission
               to which they have been called through the force of
               their genius, seconded by a hidden power that inspires
               and guides them without their knowing it, and with no
               premeditated plan. In other words, true prophets are


                                              410




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 410                                   3/7/2009 18:00:36

                     THERE WILL BE FALSE CHRISTS AND FALSE PROPHETS



               revealed by their actions: they are discovered by others;
               whereas false prophets present themselves as messengers
               from God. The former are humble and modest; the latter are
               proud and full of themselves. They speak with arrogance,
               and like all deceitful persons, always seem fearful of not
               being believed.

                      We have seen some impostors passing themselves
               off as apostles of Christ, others as Christ himself; and
               what is shameful for humankind is that they have found
               people gullible enough to give credit to such turpitudes.
               Nevertheless, one very simple consideration should open
               the eyes of the most blind, which is, if Christ were to
               reincarnate on the earth, he would come with all his power
               and all his virtues, unless we were to believe that he had
               degenerated – which would be absurd. Now, in the same
               way that if just one of God’s attributes were taken away,
               you would no longer have God; if just one of Christ’s virtues
               were taken away, you would no longer have Christ. Do those
               who present themselves as Christ possess all his virtues?
               That is the question. Observe them; scrutinize their ideas
               and actions and you will realize that, more than anything
               else, they lack the distinctive qualities of Christ: humility
               and charity, whereas they do possess what he did not:
               greed and pride. Moreover, notice that at this very moment
               there are many supposed Christs in various countries,
               just as there are many supposed Elijahs, St. Johns or St.
               Peters, and that obviously they cannot all be true. You can
               be certain that they are individuals who are exploiting the
               credulity of others and who find it comfortable to live at
               the expense of those who listen to them.


                                           411




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 411                                    3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                             CHAPTER XXI



                       Therefore, distrust false prophets, especially during a
               time of renewal, because many impostors will say they are
               messengers from God. They provide themselves with vain
               satisfaction while on the earth, but a terrible justice awaits
               them; you can be sure of that.

                                                                 Erastus (Paris, 1862)



               FALSE PROPHETS IN THE SPIRIT WORLD


               10. False prophets are not found only among incarnates.
               They are also, and in much larger numbers, found among
               proud spirits, who, under the false appearance of love and
               charity, sow disunion and retard the work of humankind’s
               emancipation, infiltrating it with their absurd theories,
               which they make their mediums believe. And to better
               fascinate1 those they want to exploit in order to give
               more weight to their theories, they unscrupulously adorn
               themselves with names that humans do not pronounce
               except with respect.

                       These are the spirits who sow the seeds of antagonism
               among groups, who compel them to isolate themselves
               from each other and to look at each other with suspicion.
               This alone should be enough to unmask them because by
               acting in such a manner they themselves offer the most

               1
                   “Fascination… refers to a delusion created directly by a spirit in the
               thought of a medium, which in a certain manner paralyzes his or her
               capacity to judge the quality of the communications. Fascinated mediums
               do not believe themselves to be deceived.” (Kardec, Allan, The Mediums’
               Book, International Spiritist Council, 2006, p. 395) – Tr.


                                                   412




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 412                                                 3/7/2009 18:00:36

                     THERE WILL BE FALSE CHRISTS AND FALSE PROPHETS



               categorical denial of who they claim to be. Blind are those
               persons, therefore, who allow themselves to fall into such
               a blatant trap.

                      Furthermore, there are many other means for
               recognizing them. Spirits of the order to which they say
               they belong must not only be very good, but eminently
               rational as well. So then, pass their theories through the
               sieve of reason and common sense and you will see what
               remains of them. You will agree with me that every time a
               spirit indicates as a remedy for the ills of humankind, or
               as a means of achieving its transformation, utopian and
               impracticable things or childish and ridiculous measures,
               or when it formulates a theory contradicted by the most
               basic notions of science, it can only be an ignorant and
               deceitful spirit.

                      On the other hand, you can be sure that if the truth is
               not always appreciated by certain individuals, it is always
               appreciated by the good sense of the masses, which is one
               more criterion. If two principles contradict each other, you
               will have the measure of their intrinsic worth by seeking out
               which one enjoys greater significance and more sympathy.
               In fact, it would be illogical to believe that a doctrine that
               saw the number of its adherents diminish could be truer
               than another that sees its number increase. In wanting the
               truth to reach everybody, God does not confine it within a
               closed circle: he makes it appear at different points so that
               everywhere the light may be alongside the darkness.

                      Mercilessly shun all spirits who present themselves as
               exclusive counselors, preaching separation and isolation.



                                             413




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 413                                     3/7/2009 18:00:36

                                          CHAPTER XXI



               They are nearly always vain and mediocre spirits, who tend
               to impose themselves on weak and credulous individuals,
               lavishing exaggerated praise on them in order to fascinate
               them and keep them under their domination. They are
               usually spirits eager for power, and who as public or private
               despots during their lifetimes, once more want to have
               victims to tyrannize after their death. In general, distrust
               communications that entail a mystical or peculiar character,
               or that prescribe rituals and bizarre actions. There is always
               a legitimate motive for suspicion in such cases.

                      On the other hand, you may be sure that whenever a
               truth must be revealed to humankind, it is, so to speak,
               communicated instantaneously to all serious groups that
               have serious mediums, and not to this or that group to
               the exclusion of all others. No one is a perfect medium
               if obsessed, and there is manifest obsession whenever
               a medium is able to receive communications from only
               one particular spirit, no matter how high it tries to place
               itself. Consequently, all mediums or groups who believe
               themselves to be privileged by communications that
               only they can receive, or who are subjected to practices
               that emphasize superstition, are undoubtedly under the
               influence of a well-characterized obsession, especially
               when the dominating spirit adorns itself with a name that
               everybody, both spirit and incarnate, should honor and
               respect, and not allow to be degraded at any time.

                      It is incontestable that, by submitting all spirit
               phenomena and communications to the crucible of reason
               and logic, it will be easy to reject absurdity and error. One



                                              414




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 414                                     3/7/2009 18:00:36

                      THERE WILL BE FALSE CHRISTS AND FALSE PROPHETS



               medium can be fascinated and one group deluded; however,
               the strict assessment by other groups, the knowledge
               acquired, the high moral authority of group leaders, the
               communications of the principal mediums who receive
               a stamp of logic and authenticity from our best spirits,
               will render rapid justice to these deceitful and cunning
               communications originated by a horde of deceitful or evil
               spirits.

                                          Erastus, Disciple of St. Paul (Paris, 1862)

               (See     Introduction,     sect   II:   Universal control of the
               Spirits’ teaching; also, The Mediums’ Book, chap. XXIII,
               Obsession)



               JEREMIAH AND THE FALSE PROPHETS


                      11. This is what the Lord of Hosts says: Do not listen to
                      the words of prophets who prophesy and deceive you.
                      They publicize the visions of their hearts and not what they
                      have learned from the mouth of the Lord. They say to those
                      who blaspheme me, “The Lord says to you: ‘you shall have
                      peace,’” and to all those who walk in the corruption of their
                      hearts, ‘No evil will touch you.’ But who amongst them has
                      heeded the counsel of God? Who has seen him and listened
                      to what he has said? I have not sent such prophets; they run
                      by themselves; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesy
                      from their own head. I have heard these prophets, who
                      prophesy lies in my name, saying, “I dreamed; I dreamed.”
                      How long will this fantasy be in the hearts of prophets who
                      prophesy lies and whose prophesies are only the deceptions


                                                 415




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 415                                             3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                           CHAPTER XXI



                      of their own hearts? Therefore, if these people or a prophet or
                      a priest asks you and says, “What is the burden of the Lord?”
                      say, “You yourself are the burden and I shall cast you far
                      from me,” says the Lord. (Jer. 23:16-18, 21, 25-26, 33)

                      It is this passage from the prophet Jeremiah that I
               would like to discuss with you, my friends. Speaking
               through Jeremiah, God says, “It is the vision of their
               own hearts that makes them speak.” These words clearly
               indicate that at that time charlatans and impassioned
               persons abused the gift of prophecy and exploited it.
               Consequently, they abused the simple, nearly blind faith
               of the people by predicting good and agreeable things in
               return for money. This type of fraud was very widespread
               within the Jewish nation, and it is easy to understand that,
               in their ignorance, the poor were unable to distinguish
               good prophets from bad ones, and were more often than
               not deceived by these so-called prophets, who were
               nothing more than impostors or fanatics. There is nothing
               more significant than these words, “I have not sent such
               prophets; they run by themselves; I have not spoken to them,
               yet they prophesy.” Further on, he says, “I have heard
               these prophets, who prophesy lies in my name, saying,
               ‘I dreamed; I dreamed.’” This points out one of the ways
               they used in order to exploit the trust the people had in
               them. Always credulous, the multitudes did not even think
               about contesting the veracity of their dreams or visions;
               they found it very natural and were always inviting such
               prophets to speak.



                                                416




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 416                                             3/7/2009 18:00:37

                     THERE WILL BE FALSE CHRISTS AND FALSE PROPHETS



                      After Jeremiah’s words, listen to the wise counsels
               of the apostle John when he said, “Do not believe all
               spirits, but test the spirits to see if they are from God,”
               for amongst the invisible there are also those who love
               to delude when they get the chance. The deluded are
               obviously mediums who do not take enough precautions.
               This is unquestionably one of the biggest obstacles upon
               which many mediums stumble, especially if they are new to
               Spiritism. It is a trial for them and they can triumph over it
               only by using great prudence. Therefore, before anything
               else, learn to distinguish between good and evil spirits, so
               that you yourselves do not become false prophets.

                                          Luoz, A Protector Spirit (Karlsruhe, 1861)




                                                 417




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 417                                            3/7/2009 18:00:37

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 418   3/7/2009 18:00:37

               CHAPTER XXII


               Do not separate what
               God has joined
                      x The indissolubility of marriage

                      x Divorce




               THE INDISSOLUBILITY OF MARRIAGE


                      1. The Pharisees also came to him in order to test him,
                      saying to him, “Is it permitted for a man to divorce his wife
                      for whatever reason?” He responded to them, “Have you not
                      read that he who created man at the beginning created them
                      male and female, and that he said, ‘For this reason, a man
                      shall leave his father and mother and shall be joined to his
                      wife and the two shall become one flesh only?’ Hence, they
                      shall no longer be two but one flesh only. Therefore, let no
                      man separate what God has joined.”

                      They said to him, “But then why did Moses command that
                      the husband give his wife a letter of separation and divorce
                      her?” He responded to them, “It was because of the hardness
                      of your hearts that Moses permitted you to divorce your




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 419                                           3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                           CHAPTER XXII



                      wives, but in the beginning it was not like that. I also declare
                      to you that he who divorces his wife, except in the case of
                      adultery, and marries another, commits adultery; and that
                      he who marries the wife that another divorced also commits
                      adultery.” (Mt. 19:3-9)

               2. There is nothing immutable except what has come from
               God. Everything that is the work of humans is subject to
               change. The laws of nature are the same at all times and in
               all countries. Human laws change according to time, place
               and intellectual progress. In marriage, what is of divine
               order is the union of the sexes to carry out the replacement
               of people who die. However, the conditions that govern this
               union are of an order that is so human that throughout
               the entire world – even throughout Christendom – there
               are no two countries where such conditions are completely
               the same, nor is there one where they have not undergone
               change over time. The result is that, in the eyes of civil
               law, what is legal in one country and at a given time is
               adulterous in another country and at a different time. This
               is because civil law is meant to regulate family interests,
               and these interests vary according to customs and local
               needs. Thus it is, for example, that in certain countries,
               only religious marriage is legal; in others, a civil marriage is
               also required; in others, finally, a civil marriage is enough
               by itself.

               3. Nevertheless, in the union of the sexes, besides the divine
               physical law common to all living beings, there is another
               divine law, as immutable as all God’s laws, and exclusively
               moral: the law of love. God has willed for individuals to



                                                 420




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 420                                              3/7/2009 18:00:37

                              DO NOT SEPARATE WHAT GOD HAS JOINED



               be united not only through the ties of the flesh, but also
               through those of the soul, so that the mutual affection of
               the spouses is extended to their children, and that there
               should be two, instead of one, to love them, care for them
               and enable them to progress. In the conventional conditions
               of marriage, is this law of love taken into consideration?
               Not in the least. The affection of two individuals attracted
               to one other by a mutual sentiment is not confirmed,
               and in the majority of cases this affection is shattered
               for the sake of other interests.1 What is sought is not the
               satisfaction of the heart but the satisfaction of pride, vanity
               and cupidity; in short, the satisfaction of all interests of
               a material nature. When everything is well according to
               such interests, the marriage is said to be suitable, and
               when the material assets are well matched, it is said that
               the spouses are also suited for each other and ought to be
               very happy.

                       However, neither civil law nor the commitments that
               it contracts can replace the law of love if it does not preside
               over the union; the result is that what has been joined
               forcibly separates on its own; that the oaths sworn at the
               altar become perjury if they are pronounced as a banal
               formula. As a consequence, there are the unhappy unions
               that end up becoming criminal, a double disgrace that
               could be avoided if within the marriage the only law that
               sanctions it in God’s eyes were not left out: the law of love.
               When God stated, “The two shall become one flesh only,”

               1
                   Written in the 1800s; although still prevalent in some parts of the world,
               forced marriages are disappearing from the customs of the western
               world. – Tr.


                                                     421




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 421                                                     3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          CHAPTER XXII



               and when Jesus says, “Let no man separate what God has
               joined,” one must understand the union according to the
               immutable law of God and not according to the changeable
               law of human beings.

               4. Is the civil law, then, superfluous and should we return
               to marriages according to nature? Certainly not. The civil
               law is meant to regulate social relationships and family
               interests in accordance with the requirements of civilization;
               this is why it is useful and necessary, but variable. It must
               be provident because civilized human beings cannot live
               like primitives; but nothing – absolutely nothing – prevents
               it from being a corollary of the divine law. Obstacles to the
               fulfillment of the divine law arise from social prejudices,
               and not from the civil law. These prejudices, although still
               alive, have already lost much of their influence among
               enlightened cultures, and they will disappear altogether with
               moral progress, which will finally open people’s eyes to the
               countless ills, wrongs and crimes that result from unions
               entered into solely out of material interests. And someday
               we will ask ourselves if it is more humane, more charitable,
               more moral to chain to one another two individuals who
               cannot live together than to restore them their freedom, or
               if the perspective of an indissoluble chain does not increase
               the number of irregular unions.



               DIVORCE


               5. Divorce is a human law with the purpose of legally
               separating what is already separated in fact. It is not



                                              422




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 422                                     3/7/2009 18:00:37

                              DO NOT SEPARATE WHAT GOD HAS JOINED



               contrary to God’s law, since it merely reforms what humans
               have stipulated and is applicable only in cases in which
               the divine law has not been taken into account. If it were
               contrary to the divine law, the Church itself would have to
               consider as transgressors those of its leaders, who by their
               own authority and in the name of religion have imposed
               divorce on more than one occasion: a double transgression
               therefore, since it is practiced only with material interests
               in mind and not to satisfy the law of love.

                      However, Jesus himself did not consecrate the
               absolute indissolubility of marriage. Did he not say, “It
               was because of the hardness of your hearts that Moses
               permitted you to divorce your wives?” This means that,
               since the time of Moses, separation might have been
               necessary when mutual affection was no longer the sole
               objective of marriage. Jesus adds, however, “… but in the
               beginning it was not like that,” which means that at the
               origin of humankind, when people were not yet perverted
               by selfishness and pride, but lived according to God’s law,
               unions were based on reciprocal sympathy1 and not on
               vanity or ambition; thus, there was no room for divorce.

                      Jesus goes even further and specifies the case in
               which divorce can have a place: adultery. Now, there is
               no adultery where sincere mutual affection reigns. It is
               true that he prohibits any man from marrying a divorced
               woman, but one must keep in mind the customs and

               1
                 Sympathy: “Harmony of or agreement in feeling, as between persons or
               on the part of one person with respect to another. The harmony of feeling
               existing between persons of like tastes or opinion or of congenial disposi-
               tions” (Webster’s College Dictionary, 1991). – Tr.


                                                  423




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 423                                                  3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          CHAPTER XXII



               character of the people in those times. In cases of adultery,
               the Mosaic Law prescribed stoning. Jesus wanted to
               abolish a barbaric custom; hence, a penalty was needed,
               and he found it in the disgrace attached to the prohibition
               of a second marriage. It was in some ways one civil law
               replacing another civil law, but which, like all laws of such
               nature, had to endure the test of time.




                                              424




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 424                                    3/7/2009 18:00:37

               CHAPTER XXIII

               Strange morals
                      x Whoever does not hate his father and mother

                      x Forsaking father, mother and children

                      x Leaving to the dead the care of burying their dead

                      x I have not come to bring peace, but division




               WHOEVER DOES NOT HATE HIS FATHER AND
              MOTHER



                      1. A large crowd of people was walking with Jesus, when

                      he turned to them and said, “If anyone comes to me but does

                      not hate his father and mother, his wife and children, his

                      brothers and sisters, and even his own life, he cannot be

                      my disciple. And anyone who does not want to take up his

                      cross and follow me cannot be my disciple. Therefore, anyone

                      among you who does not renounce everything he has cannot

                      be my disciple. (Lk. 14:25-27, 33)




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 425                                          3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          CHAPTER XXIII



                      2. He who loves his father or mother more than me is not
                      worthy of me; he who loves his son or daughter more than me
                      is not worthy of me. (Mt. 10:37)

               3. Although very rare, certain words spoken by Christ
               make such a strange contrast that one instinctively rejects
               their literal meaning, and the sublimity of his doctrine
               does not suffer any harm because of it. Written after
               his death – none of the Gospels were written during his
               lifetime – one may be led to believe that, in this case, the
               depth of his thought was not well expressed, or, what is
               no less probable, the original meaning may have suffered
               an alteration in passing from one language to another. It
               is enough for an error to be committed just once for it
               to be repeated in subsequent copies, as is seen so often
               regarding historical facts.

                      The word hate in this verse from Luke: “If anyone comes
              to me and does not hate his father and mother,” is such a
              case; no one would even think of attributing it to Jesus, so
              it would be pointless to argue about it and even less to seek
              to justify it. One would first have to know if he did in fact
              state it, and if so, one would have to determine if, in the
              language in which he expressed himself, this word had the
              same meaning as in ours. In this verse from John, “He who
              hates his life in this world will save it for eternal life,” it is
              certain that it does not express the idea we attach to it.

                      The Hebrew language was not rich and contained
              many words with several connotations. One example of
              this is the word in Genesis that designates the phases
              of creation, and which also served to express a given



                                                426




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 426                                         3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          STRANGE MORALS



               period of time and the diurnal rotation; hence its later
               translation using the word day, and the belief that the
               world had been the work of six times twenty-four hours.
               The same applies to the word that meant either camel
               or rope (ropes were made from camel hair), and which
               was translated as camel in the allegory of the eye of a
               needle. (See chap. XVI, no. 2)1

                      Moreover, one must take into account the customs
               and character of peoples, which influence the particular
               meaning of their languages. Without this understanding,
               the true meaning of certain words is lost. From one language
               to another, the same term can assume different degrees
               of strength; it might be an insult or a blasphemy in one
               language but insignificant in another, depending on the idea
               attributed to it. Even in the same language, certain words
               lose their significance over time. That is why a strictly literal
               translation does not always express a thought precisely, and
               in order to be exact, one must sometimes use equivalents or
               paraphrases rather than cognates.

               1
                 Non odit in Latin, kai or misei in Greek, does not mean to hate, but to
               love less. What the Greek verb misein expresses, the Hebrew verb that
               Jesus must have used expresses even better: it not only means to hate,
               but to love less, not to love as much as, or not to love the same as another.
               In the Syriac dialect [a dialect of Aramaic, the mother tongue of Jesus –
               Tr.], which Jesus probably used more frequently, this is accented even
               more. It is in this sense that it is stated in Gen. 29:30, 31: “And Jacob
               loved Rachel more than Leah, and Yaweh, seeing that Leah was hated….”
               It is obvious that the true meaning here is loved less and that is how it
               should be translated. In many other Hebraic passages, and especially
               in Syriac ones, the same verb is employed in the sense of not to love
               as much as another, and it would be a misinterpretation to translate it
               as to hate, which has another well-defined meaning. Furthermore, the
               text from Matthew clears up all difficulty. – M. Pezzani. (This note was
               inserted by Kardec – Tr.)


                                                   427




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 427                                                    3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                           CHAPTER XXIII



                      These remarks find a special application in the
               interpretation of the Holy Scriptures, and the Gospels in
               particular. If one does not take into account the environment
               in which Jesus lived, one is exposed to errors regarding
               the significance of certain expressions and certain events
               due to the habit of comparing others to oneself. Therefore,
               one must rid the term hate of its modern acceptation as
               contrary to the spirit of Jesus’ teaching. (See also chap.
               XIV, no. 5 ff.)



               FORSAKING FATHER, MOTHER AND CHILDREN



                      4. Whoever has left his home, or his brothers, or his sisters,
                      or his father, or his mother, or his wife, or his children or his
                      lands for my name shall receive a hundredfold and shall
                      have eternal life as an inheritance. (Mt. 19:29)

                      5. Then Peter said to him, “As for us, you can see that we have
                      left everything and followed you.” Jesus said to them, “Verily
                      I say to you that no one will leave his home, his father, his
                      mother, his brothers, his wife or his children for the kingdom
                      of God, who will not receive much more in this world, and in
                      the time to come, eternal life. (Lk. 18:28-30)

                      6. Another said to him, “Lord, I will follow you, but first allow
                      me to dispose of what I have at home.” Jesus answered him,
                      “Anyone who has put his hand to the plow and looks back is
                      not fit for the kingdom of God. (Lk. 9:61-62)

                      Without arguing over words, here we must look for
               the thought, which was obviously this: The interests of


                                                 428




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 428                                               3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          STRANGE MORALS



               the future life should be placed above all human interests
               and considerations, because such thought is in accord
               with the substance of Jesus’ doctrine, whereas the idea of
               renouncing one’s family would be its negation.

                      Moreover, do we not have before us the application of
               these maxims in the sacrifice of our interests and family
               affections for our homeland? Would anyone blame a son
               for leaving his father, mother, siblings, wife and children to
               march in defense of his country? On the contrary, would he
               not be worthy of merit for leaving the sweetness of home and
               the warmth of affections in order to fulfill a duty? Hence,
               there are duties that are placed above others. Does not
               the law make it an obligation for the daughter to leave her
               parents in order to join her husband? The world is replete
               with cases in which the most heartbreaking separations
               are necessary; however, affections are not broken because
               of it. Distance does not lessen the respect or the solicitude
               that is owed to parents, nor the tenderness toward children.
               Thus, one can see that even if taken literally (except for
               the term hate) these words would be neither the negation
               of the commandment that orders the honoring of father
               and mother, nor the sentiment of parental affection – even
               more so if taken according to their spiritual meaning. These
               words had the purpose of using a hyperbole to show how
               imperative the duty was to concern oneself with the future
               life. Furthermore, they must have been less shocking in a
               culture and time in which, as a result of customs, family
               ties had less strength than in a morally more-advanced
               civilization. Such ties, weaker in early cultures, become
               strengthened with the development of sensibility and


                                               429




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 429                                     3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          CHAPTER XXIII



               moral sense. Separation itself is necessary for progress;
               it occurs in families as well as in cultures, which would
               degenerate if there were no intermingling, and if they
               did not incorporate one another. It is a law of nature, as
               much in the interest of moral progress as in the interest of
               physical progress.

                      These matters are examined here solely from the
               earthly point of view. Spiritism enables us to see them
               from higher up by showing that the true bonds of affection
               reside in the spirit and not in the body; that such bonds
               cannot be broken by separation, or even by the death of
               the body; and that they are strengthened in the spirit life
               through the spirit’s purification: a comforting truth that
               provides much strength for bearing life’s vicissitudes. (See
               chap. IV, no. 18; chap XIV, no. 8)



               LEAVE TO THE DEAD THE CARE OF BURYING THEIR
               DEAD

                      7. He said to another, “Follow me,” but he responded, “Lord,
                      first I must go and bury my father.” Jesus replied, “Leave to
                      the dead the care of burying their dead; as for you, go and
                      proclaim the kingdom of God. (Lk. 9:59-60).

               8. What could these words mean: “Leave to the dead the
               care of burying their dead?” The preceding considerations
               show first that, under the circumstances in which they
               were spoken, they could not express criticism against
               someone who regarded it a duty of filial devotion to go and
               bury his father. However, they entail a deeper meaning that



                                                430




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 430                                           3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          STRANGE MORALS



               can only be understood with a more complete knowledge
               of the spirit life.

                      Life in the spirit world is in fact the true life; it is the
               normal life of the spirit, whose earthly existence is only
               transitory and passing. It is a sort of death when compared
               to the splendor and activity of the spirit life. The body is
               nothing more than a coarse garment that temporarily
               cloaks the spirit, a true fetter that holds it imprisoned to
               the earth, and from which it is happy to be delivered. The
               respect one has for the dead is not bound to the physical
               matter of the body but to the remembrance of the absent
               spirit. It is analogous to that which we have for the objects
               that belonged to the deceased and were touched by him
               or her, and which are kept as remembrances. This is what
               this man could not understand by himself. Jesus teaches
               him by stating: Do not worry about the body, but think
               first of the spirit. Go and teach the kingdom of God. Go
               and tell others that their homeland is not on the earth but
               in heaven, for true life is found only there.



               I HAVE NOT COME TO BRING PEACE, BUT DIVISION



                      9. Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth; I
                      have not come to bring peace, but a sword; for I have come to
                      separate a man from his father, a daughter from her mother
                      and a daughter-in-law from her mother-in-law; and a man
                      will have as enemies those of his own house. (Mt. 10:34-36)


                                                431




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 431                                             3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                           CHAPTER XXIII



                      10. I have come to cast fire upon the earth; and what do I
                      desire except that it be lit? I must be baptized with a baptism,
                      and how I am in a hurry for it to be accomplished!

                      Do you believe that I have come to bring peace to the earth?
                      No, I assure you, but on the contrary, division; for from now
                      on if there are five persons in a home, they will be divided
                      against one another: three against two and two against three.
                      The father will be divided from his son and the son from his
                      father; the mother from her daughter and the daughter from
                      her mother; the mother-in-law from her daughter-in-law and
                      the daughter-in-law from her mother-in-law. (Lk. 12:49-53)

               11. Was it Jesus, the personification of tenderness and
               goodness, Jesus, who never ceased proclaiming love for
               one’s neighbor, who could say, “I have not come to bring
               peace, but a sword; I have come to separate son from
               father, husband from wife; I have come to cast fire upon
               the earth; and what do I desire except that it be lit?” Are
               not such words in flagrant contradiction with his teaching?
               Is there not blasphemy in attributing to him the language
               of a bloody and ruinous conqueror? No, there is neither
               blasphemy nor contradiction in these words, because it was
               he himself who spoke them and they bear witness to his
               great wisdom. It is solely the form, a bit ambiguous, that
               does not express his thought precisely, and this fact has
               given rise to misunderstandings as to their true meaning.
               Taken literally, they would tend to transform his wholly
               peaceful mission into a mission of subversion and discord –
               an absurd conclusion rejected by common sense, for Jesus
               would not have contradicted himself. (See chap. XIV, no. 6)



                                                 432




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 432                                              3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          STRANGE MORALS



               12. Every new idea encounters strong opposition and
               there is not one that has not been implemented without
               struggle. Resistance in such cases is always in proportion
               to the importance of the results foreseen, for the greater
               the idea, the more numerous the interests it will ruffle. If
               it is notoriously erroneous, if it is deemed inconsequential,
               no one will be concerned with it and will allow it to pass,
               knowing it has no viability. However, if it is true, if it
               sits on a solid base, if a future is foreseen for it, a secret
               presentiment warns its antagonists that it is a danger to
               them and to the order of things in whose maintenance they
               are interested. That is why they throw themselves against
               it and its adherents.

                      The measure of the importance and results of a
               new idea, therefore, may be found in the excitement
               that its appearance causes, the violence of opposition it
               provokes and the degree and persistence of the anger of
               its adversaries.

               13. Jesus came to proclaim a doctrine that would
               undermine the very base of the abuses upon which the
               Pharisees, scribes and priests of his time were living,
               so they killed him, believing they could kill the idea by
               killing the man. But the idea survived because it was true;
               it grew because it was in the designs of God, and upon
               leaving an obscure village in Judea, it planted its banner
               in the very capital of the pagan world in the face of its
               most obstinate enemies, those who had the most interest
               in combating it because it subverted the secular beliefs
               they held onto more out of self-interest than conviction.



                                               433




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 433                                     3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          CHAPTER XXIII



               The most dreadful struggles awaited its apostles there; the
               victims were innumerable, but the idea grew everyday and
               emerged triumphant, because, as the truth, it rose above
               its predecessors.

               14. It should be noted that Christianity arrived when
               paganism was already in decline and was struggling
               against the light of reason. It was still practiced in form,
               but faith in it had disappeared and only personal interests
               sustained it. As we know, interest is tenacious; it never
               yields to the evidence; it becomes angrier as the reasons
               that oppose it become more peremptory and better
               demonstrate its error. It knows very well that it is in error,
               but that does not bother it because true faith does not
               dwell in its soul. What interest fears most is the light that
               opens the eyes of the blind. The error is advantageous to
               it, so it holds onto and defends it.

                      Did not Socrates also teach a doctrine analogous to
               a certain degree to that of Christ? Why then did it not
               prevail in the midst of one of the most intelligent cultures
               on earth at the time? Because its time had not yet come.
               Socrates sowed on unplowed ground; paganism was not
               yet worn out. Christ received his providential mission at
               the proper time. Not all the people of his time – far from
               it – were up to the level of Christian ideas, but there was
               a more widespread aptitude for assimilating them due to
               the beginning of a sense of emptiness that popular beliefs
               left in the soul. Socrates and Plato had opened the way
               and had predisposed their spirits. (See in the Introduction,
               sect IV: Socrates and Plato: Precursors to the Christian idea
               and Spiritism)



                                              434




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 434                                     3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          STRANGE MORALS



               15. Unfortunately, the followers of the new doctrine were
               not able to agree on the interpretation of the Master’s
               words, most of which were veiled by allegory and figures
               of speech. From its very beginning, countless sects have
               flourished, all of them claiming that they alone possess
               the truth; not even eighteen centuries have managed to
               put them in agreement. Forgetting the most important
               of the divine precepts, the ones that Jesus had made the
               cornerstone of his building and the express condition of
               salvation: charity, fraternity and love for one’s neighbor,
               these sects have hurled anathemas at one another and
               have fought with one another, with the strongest crushing
               the weakest, stifling them in blood, torture and burnings
               at the stake. Victors over paganism, Christians went from
               being persecuted to being persecutors. It was with iron
               and fire that they planted the cross of the unblemished
               Lamb in the two worlds. It is a confirmed fact that religious
               wars have been the cruelest and have made more victims
               than political wars, and that in no other wars have more
               acts of atrocity and barbarity been committed.

                      Has it been the fault of Christ’s doctrine? Obviously
               not, since it formally condemns all violence. Did he ever
               tell his disciples: Go kill, massacre and burn those who
               do not believe as you? No, because he told them quite
               the contrary: All people are brothers and sisters, and
               God is supremely merciful; love your neighbor; love your
               enemies; do good to those who persecute you. He further
               said to them: Whoever kills with the sword shall die by
               the sword. The responsibility, therefore, does not fall to
               Jesus’ doctrine, but to those who have misinterpreted it and


                                               435




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 435                                    3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          CHAPTER XXIII



               have made it an instrument to serve their passions; those
               who have ignored these words: My kingdom is not of this
               world.

                      In his profound wisdom, Jesus foresaw what would
               occur. But such things were unavoidable because they
               were connected to the inferiority of human nature, which
               could not be transformed all of a sudden. Christianity
               had to pass through this long and cruel trial of eighteen
               centuries in order to show all its strength, since despite all
               the evil committed in its name, it has emerged pure from it.
               This has never been disputed. The blame has always fallen
               on those who abused it. Following every act of intolerance,
               it has always been stated: If Christianity were rightly
               understood and practiced, this would not have happened.

               16. When Jesus stated, “Do not believe that I have come to
               bring peace, but division,” his thought was the following:

                      “Do not believe that my doctrine will be established
               peacefully; it will bring bloody battles, using my name as
               a pretext, for humans will not have understood me or will
               not have wanted to understand me. Separated by their
               beliefs, brothers will unsheathe their swords against one
               another and division will reign in the midst of the same
               family, whose members do not share the same faith. I
               have come to cast fire upon the earth to clean it of error
               and prejudice, just as fire is put to a field in order to
               destroy the weeds; and I desire for it to be lit so that the
               purification may be quicker, for out of conflict the truth
               will emerge triumphant. Peace will follow war; universal
               fraternity will follow sectarian hatred; the light of faith


                                              436




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 436                                     3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          STRANGE MORALS



               will come after the darkness of fanaticism. Then, when
               the field has been prepared, I will send you the consoler,
               the Spirit of Truth, who will reestablish all things; that is,
               given to understand the true meaning of my words, more
               enlightened individuals will finally be able to understand,
               and will put an end to the fratricidal battle that divides
               the children of the same God. Finally, weary of a combat
               without result, which has left only desolation in its wake
               and has brought trouble into the midst of families, human
               beings will realize where their true interests lie regarding
               this world and the other. They will see on which side the
               friends and enemies of their peace of mind are located. All
               will then shelter themselves beneath the same banner, the
               banner of charity; and all things will be reestablished on
               the earth in accordance with the truth and principles that
               I have taught.”

               17. Spiritism has come at the right time to fulfill the
               promises of Christ. Nonetheless, it cannot do so without
               destroying abuses. Like Jesus, on its path Spiritism
               encounters pride, selfishness, ambition, cupidity and blind
               fanaticism, which, struck in their final defenses, attempt
               to bar its way and raise obstacles and persecutions against
               it. Therefore, it too must fight; but the time of struggle and
               bloody persecutions has passed. Those that it will have
               to endure are all of a moral nature, and their end is near.
               The former lasted for centuries; the latter will last only a
               few years, because the light, instead of starting from one
               single point, has sprung forth from all points of the globe
               and will more quickly open the eyes of the blind.


                                               437




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 437                                     3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                          CHAPTER XXIII



               18. These words of Jesus must therefore be understood as
               referring to the rage that his doctrine would provoke, the
               momentous conflicts that would be its consequence, the
               battles that would have to be borne before is was established
               – just as happened to the Hebrews before they entered the
               Promised Land – and not the result of a premeditated plan
               on his part to sow disorder and confusion. The evil would
               come from humans and not from him. He was like the
               doctor who comes to heal, but whose medicine provokes a
               healthful crisis in removing the ills of the patient.




                                              438




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 438                                    3/7/2009 18:00:37

               CHAPTER XXIV



               Do not hide your lamp
               under a bushel
                      x A lamp under a bushel. Why Jesus speaks in
                          parables

                      x Do not go to the Gentiles

                      x The healthy do not need a doctor

                      x The courage of faith

                      x Bear your cross. Whoever wants to save his life will
                          lose it




              A LAMP UNDER A BUSHEL. WHY JESUS SPEAKS IN
              PARABLES


                      1. No one lights a lamp to put it under a bushel; rather, he
                      puts it on a lamp stand so that it can illuminate all who are
                      in the house. (Mt. 5:15)

                      2. There is no one who, after having lit a lamp, covers it with a
                      vase or puts it under a bed; he puts it on a lamp stand so that




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 439                                               3/7/2009 18:00:37

                                           CHAPTER XXIV



                      those who enter can see its light; because there is nothing
                      secret that may not be discovered, nor anything hidden that
                      may not be known and made public. (Lk. 8:16-17)

                      3. His disciples approached him and asked, “Why do you
                      speak to them in parables?” And he answered them: “Because
                      to you it has been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom
                      of heaven, but to them it has not been given. I speak to them
                      in parables, because seeing, they do not see, and hearing,
                      they neither hear nor understand. In them the prophecy of
                      Isaiah is fulfilled when he said, “You will hear with your ears
                      but you will not understand; you will look with your eyes
                      but you will not see. Because the hearts of this people have
                      been deadened, their ears have become deaf and they have
                      shut their eyes tight lest their eyes see, their ears hear, their
                      hearts understand, and being converted, I may heal them.
                      (Mt. 13:10-15)

               4. One may be surprised to hear Jesus say that a lamp
               should not be put under a bushel, when he himself
               continually hides the meaning of his words under veils
               of allegory that could not be understood by everyone. He
               explains himself to his disciples: I speak to them in parables
               because they are in no condition to understand certain
               things. They see, they hear, but they do not understand;
               thus, it would be pointless to tell them everything for
               now. But I do tell you because it has been given to you
               to understand these mysteries. Jesus acted toward the
               people as one does toward children, whose ideas are not
               yet developed. In this way he points out the true meaning
               of the maxim: “One must not put a lamp under a bushel



                                                 440




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 440                                               3/7/2009 18:00:38

                             DO NOT HIDE YOUR LAMP UNDER A BUSHEL



               but upon a stand so that all who enter may see.” This
               does not mean, however, that one should inappropriately
               reveal everything. Every teaching must be proportional to
               the intelligence of those to whom it is directed, since there
               are persons whom a radiant light would blind without
               enlightening.

                      The same thing happens with people in general
               and individuals in particular. Generations go through
               childhood, adolescence and adulthood. Each thing must
               come in its time, for the seed planted out of season will not
               grow. However, what prudence orders to be momentarily
               hidden must be discovered sooner or later, because, after
               reaching a certain degree of development, people search
               for the living light by themselves; darkness weighs on
               them. Since God has given them intelligence in order to
               understand and to guide them in the things of heaven and
               earth, they want their faith to be rational, and it is at this
               point that the lamp should not be put under a bushel, for
               without the light of reason, faith grows weak. (See chap.
               XIX, no. 7)

               5. Therefore, if in its prudent wisdom Providence does not
               reveal truths except gradually, it always reveals them to
               the degree that humankind matures enough to receive
               them. Providence holds them in reserve, and not under
               a bushel. However, for the most part, the individuals who
               do possess them hide them from the common folk in order
               to control them. These are the ones who truly put the
               light under the bushel. That is why all religions have had
               their mysteries, whose questioning they have proscribed.



                                             441




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 441                                     3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          CHAPTER XXIV



               However, whereas these religions lagged behind, science
               and intelligence have advanced and torn away the veil
               of mystery. Having entered adulthood, the common folk
               wanted to grasp the basis of things and therefore rejected
               from their faith what was contrary to observation.

                      There can be no absolute mysteries, and Jesus is
               correct when he states that there is nothing secret that
               must not become known. Everything that is hidden will
               be revealed one day, and whatever people cannot yet
               comprehend on the earth will be subsequently revealed
               to them on more advanced worlds and when they have
               become purified. Down on this world, they are still in the
               fog.

               6. One might ask what advantage the common folk could
               have derived from this multitude of parables whose
               meaning remained hidden to them. It should be noted that
               Jesus did not express himself in parables except regarding
               certain abstract parts of his doctrine. But having made
               charity and humility toward one’s neighbor the express
               condition for salvation, everything he said in this regard
               is perfectly clear, explicit and unambiguous. And it had to
               be this way because it was the rule of conduct, a rule that
               everyone had to understand in order to observe. It was
               what was essential for the ignorant multitudes, to whom
               he limited himself to stating: This is what you must do in
               order to gain the kingdom of heaven. Regarding the other
               parts, he revealed his thought only to his disciples. Since
               they were more advanced morally and intellectually, Jesus
               could initiate them into more abstract truths. Thus, he



                                              442




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 442                                  3/7/2009 18:00:38

                             DO NOT HIDE YOUR LAMP UNDER A BUSHEL



               said, “To those who already have, even more will be given.”
               (Chap. XVIII, no. 15)

                      Nonetheless, even with the disciples he remained
               reticent regarding many points, the complete knowledge of
               which was reserved for later times. These points were what
               gave way to such diverse interpretations until science on
               one hand and Spiritism on the other came to reveal the
               new laws of nature, thereby rendering their true meaning
               comprehensible.

               7. Spiritism has come to shed light on a multitude of obscure
               points; however, it does not shed it indiscriminately. The
               Spirits proceed in their teachings with admirable prudence.
               Only successively and gradually have they broached the
               various subjects of the Doctrine, and it is thus that the
               others will be revealed to the degree that the time comes for
               bringing them out of the darkness. If they had presented
               the Doctrine completely at the start, it would have been
               accessible only to a small number; moreover, it would have
               alarmed those who were not yet prepared, which would
               have harmed its spread. Thus, if the Spirits have not yet
               said everything ostensibly, it is not because there are
               mysteries in the Doctrine reserved only for the privileged
               or because they have placed the lamp under a bushel, but
               because each thing must arrive at the appropriate time.
               The Spirits allow each idea time to mature and spread
               before they present another, and for events to prepare its
               acceptance.




                                             443




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 443                                    3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          CHAPTER XXIV



               DO NOT GO TO THE GENTILES


                      8. Jesus sent out his twelve (the disciples) after having
                      given them the following instructions: “Do not go to the
                      Gentiles, and do not enter the cities of the Samaritans.
                      Instead, go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and
                      wherever you go, preach, saying that the kingdom of heaven
                      is near.” (Mt. 10:5-7)

               9. In many circumstances, Jesus shows that his sights are
               not limited to the Jewish people, but that they encompass
               all humankind. Therefore, if he told his disciples not to
               go to the pagans, it was not that he disdained converting
               them – which would have been uncharitable – but because
               the Jews, who believed in the oneness of God and awaited
               the Messiah, had been prepared by the Law of Moses and
               the Prophets to receive his word. Among the pagans, where
               even the base was lacking, everything needed to be done,
               and the disciples were not yet sufficiently enlightened for
               such a weighty task. That is why he told them: Go to the
               lost sheep of Israel; that is, go and sow on ground that
               has already been prepared, knowing that the conversion
               of the Gentiles will come in its own time. Later, in fact,
               the apostles would plant the cross right in the midst of
               paganism.

               10. These words may be applied to the followers and
               propagators of Spiritism. Systematic disbelievers, obstinate
               scoffers and self-centered adversaries are to them what
               the Gentiles were to the disciples. Thus, in following their
               example, they first seek to make converts among persons



                                               444




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 444                                        3/7/2009 18:00:38

                             DO NOT HIDE YOUR LAMP UNDER A BUSHEL



               of goodwill, those who desire the light, in whom a fertile
               seed may be found and whose numbers are great, without
               wasting their time on those who refuse to see or hear, and
               who, the more importance is attached to their conversion,
               are all the more obstinate out of pride. It is worth more to
               open the eyes of a hundred blind persons who desire to see
               clearly than one person who takes pleasure in darkness,
               because doing so increases to a greater proportion the
               number of those who will support the cause. Leaving the
               others alone is not indifference but good policy. Their time
               will come when they are persuaded by general opinion
               and when they hear the same thing constantly repeated
               around them. Then they will believe they have accepted
               the idea voluntarily and by themselves and not due to the
               pressure of someone else. Furthermore, the same thing
               applies to ideas as applies to seeds: they cannot germinate
               before the right season and only in prepared soil. That is
               why it is better to wait for the propitious time and to first
               cultivate those that germinate, thus avoiding aborting the
               others by pushing them too hard.

                      In the time of Jesus, and as a consequence of the
               narrow-minded and materialistic ideas of those days,
               everything was circumscribed and localized. The house
               of Israel was a small nation; the Gentiles were small
               nations surrounding it. Today, ideas are universalized and
               spiritualized. The new light is not a privilege of any one
               nation. There are no barriers to it; it shines everywhere
               and all humans are brothers and sisters. Moreover, the
               Gentiles are no longer a people, but an opinion that is
               found everywhere and over which the truth triumphs little


                                             445




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 445                                    3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          CHAPTER XXIV



               by little, just as Christianity triumphed over paganism.
               They are no longer combated with weapons of war, but
               with the power of an idea.



               THE HEALTHY DO NOT NEED A DOCTOR


                      11. While Jesus was at table in the home of this man
                      (Matthew), many publicans and sinners came to join Jesus
                      and his disciples. Upon seeing this, the Pharisees said to his
                      disciples, “Why does your Master eat with publicans and
                      sinners?” But upon overhearing them, Jesus answered, “The
                      healthy do not need a doctor, but the sick.” (Mt. 9:10-12)

               12. Jesus addressed mainly the poor and disinherited
               because they were the ones in greatest need of consolation;
               and the blind of good faith and humility because they asked
               to see, and not the proud who believed they possessed the
               full light and were in need of nothing. (See the Introduction:
               Publicans, Tax Collectors)

                      These words, like so many others, find their application
               in Spiritism. Sometimes people wonder why mediumship
               is granted to unworthy persons capable of making a bad
               use of it. It seems – they say – that a faculty this valuable
               should be the exclusive attribute of those of greater merit.

                      Let us first state that mediumship is connected to an
               organic disposition, with which any person may be endowed
               – just as that of seeing, hearing and speaking. People are
               capable of abusing any of them through their free will, and
               if God had granted speech, for example, only to those who



                                                446




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 446                                            3/7/2009 18:00:38

                             DO NOT HIDE YOUR LAMP UNDER A BUSHEL



               were incapable of saying bad things, there would be more
               mute than speaking individuals. God has given faculties
               to humans and leaves them free to use them; however, he
               always punishes those who abuse them.

                      If the ability to communicate with spirits were
               granted only to the most worthy, who would dare to claim
               this quality? Moreover, where is the line between being
               worthy and being unworthy? Mediumship is given without
               distinction so that spirits may bring the light to all ranks,
               all classes of society, to the rich as well as to the poor; to
               the wise to strengthen them in the good, and to the corrupt
               in order to correct them. Are not these latter the sick who
               are in need of a doctor? Why would God, who does not
               want the death of sinners, deprive them of the help that
               could pull them from the mire? Good spirits thus come to
               help them, and their counsels, which they receive directly,
               are of a nature that will impress them more strongly than
               if they received them by different means. In order to save
               them the trouble of having to go far in search of the light,
               the benevolent God places it in their hands; are they not
               even guiltier if they do not consider it? Could they excuse
               themselves for lack of knowledge when they have written
               with their own hands, seen with their own eyes, heard
               with their own ears, and spoken with their own mouth
               their own condemnation? If they do not take advantage
               of it, they will be punished with the loss or perversion of
               their faculty, with evil spirits taking hold of them in order
               to obsess and deceive them. This will not lessen the real
               afflictions with which God smites unworthy servants and
               hearts hardened by pride and selfishness.


                                             447




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 447                                     3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                           CHAPTER XXIV



                      Mediumship does not necessarily imply habitual
               communication with high order spirits. It is simply an
               aptitude that serves as a more flexible or less flexible
               instrument for spirits in general. Hence, good mediums
               are not those who communicate easily, but those who are
               attuned to good spirits and who are helped only by them.
               It is solely in this sense that the excellence of their moral
               qualities has complete power over mediumship.



               THE COURAGE OF FAITH


                      13. Everyone who confesses me and acknowledges me
                      before men, I will acknowledge and confess before my Father
                      who is in heaven; and anyone who denies me before men, I
                      will deny before my Father who is in heaven. (Mt. 10:32-33)

                      14. If anyone is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of
                      Man will be ashamed of him when he comes in his glory and
                      in the glory of his Father and all the holy angels. (Lk. 9:26)

               15. Courage of opinion has always been held in great
               esteem by humankind because there is merit in facing
               the danger, persecution, opposition and even the simple
               sarcasm to which are exposed those who are not afraid to
               loudly profess ideas that are not the same as everybody
               else’s. Here, as in everything, the merit depends on the
               circumstances and the importance of the result. There is
               always weakness in recoiling from the consequences of
               one’s opinions and in denying them, but there are cases
               where it is a cowardice as great as that of fleeing at the
               moment of combat.


                                                 448




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 448                                                3/7/2009 18:00:38

                             DO NOT HIDE YOUR LAMP UNDER A BUSHEL



                      Jesus condemned such cowardice from the special
               point of view of his doctrine, saying that if anyone is
               ashamed of his words, he will be ashamed of him or her;
               that he will deny those who have denied him; that those
               who confess him before others, he will acknowledge before
               his Father who is in heaven. In other words, those who are
               afraid to confess that they are disciples of the truth are not
               worthy of being admitted into the kingdom of the truth. They
               will lose the benefit of their faith because it is a selfish faith
               that they keep to themselves, and which they hide out of
               fear that it might bring them harm in this world, whereas
               those who, placing the truth above their own material
               interests and proclaiming it openly, work simultaneously
               for their own future and the future of others.

               16. It will be the same for the followers of Spiritism; since
              its doctrine is nothing other than the development and
              application of the Gospel, Christ’s words are addressed to
              them as well. They sow on the earth what they will reap
              in the spirit life. There, they will reap the fruits of their
              courage or their weakness.



              BEAR YOUR CROSS. WHOEVER WANTS TO SAVE
              HIS LIFE WILL LOSE IT


                      17. You are greatly blessed when men hate you, avoid you,
                      treat you injuriously, and revile your name as evil on account
                      of the Son of Man. Rejoice on that day and exult with joy,
                      because a great reward is reserved for you in heaven, for
                      thus their fathers treated the prophets. (Lk. 6:22-23)



                                                449




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 449                                            3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          CHAPTER XXIV



                      18. Calling the people unto him with his disciples, he said
                      to them: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him deny
                      himself, take up his cross and follow me, for he who wants
                      to save himself will be lost, and he who loses himself out of
                      love for me and the Gospel will be saved. In truth, what good
                      would it do a man to gain the whole world but lose himself?
                      (Mk. 8:34-36; Lk. 9:23-25; Mt. 10:39; Jn. 12:24-25)

               19. Rejoice, said Jesus, when others hate you and persecute
               you on account of me, for you will be rewarded in heaven
               because of it. These words may be translated as: Be happy
               when, because of their ill will toward you, others provide
               you with an opportunity to test the sincerity of your faith,
               because the evil they do to you results in your benefit.
               Therefore, mourn them because of their blindness, and do
               not curse them.

                      Then, he adds: “Let those who want to follow me take
               up their cross”; that is, they should courageously bear
               the tribulations that their faith will engender, because
               those who want to save their life and their possessions
               by denying me will lose the advantages of the kingdom of
               heaven, whereas those who have lost everything in this
               world – even their life – for the triumph of the truth will
               receive in the future life the reward for their courage,
               perseverance and self-denial. But to those who sacrifice
               heavenly possessions to earthly pleasures, God says: You
               have already received your recompense.




                                                450




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 450                                           3/7/2009 18:00:38

               CHAPTER XXV



               Seek and you shall find
                      x Help yourself and heaven will help you

                      x Observe the birds in the sky

                      x Do not wear yourself out for the possession of gold




               HELP YOURSELF AND HEAVEN WILL HELP YOU



                      1. Ask and it shall be given to you; seek and you shall find;
                      knock at the door and it shall be opened to you; for whoever
                      asks receives, and whoever seeks finds, and it shall be
                      opened to the one who knocks at the door.

                      Also, who is the man among you who will give a stone to his
                      son when he asks for bread? Or if he asks him for a fish, will
                      give him a serpent? If, therefore, you, being evil as you are,
                      know how to give good things to your children, it is even more
                      reasonable that your Father, who is in heaven, will give good
                      things to those who ask him.(Mt. 7:7-11)

               2. From the earthly point of view, the maxim: Seek and
               you shall find is analogous to this one: Help yourself




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 451                                            3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          CHAPTER XXV



               and heaven will help you. It is the principle of the law of
               labor and, consequently, the law of progress, because
               progress is the child of labor, and labor sets in motion the
               powers of the intelligence.

                      During humankind’s infancy, humans apply their
               intelligence only to the search for nourishment, the means
               to shelter themselves from the inclemency of the weather
               and to defend themselves against their enemies. However,
               God has given them more than to the animal: the incessant
               desire to better themselves; it is this desire that drives them
               to seek out means of improving their situation, which
               in turn leads them to discoveries, inventions and to the
               perfecting of science, because it is science that provides
               them with what they lack. Through their research, their
               intelligence expands and their morals become purified. The
               needs of the body are followed by the needs of the spirit.
               After physical nourishment, humans need spiritual
               nourishment, and it is thus that humans pass from the
               primitive to the civilized state.

                      However, the progress that each person accomplishes
               individually during his or her lifetime is very little, even
               imperceptible to many. How, then, could humankind
               progress without the preexistence and re-existence of
               the soul? If souls departed every day never to return,
               humankind would be constantly renewing itself with
               primitive beings, having everything to do and everything to
               learn. Consequently, there would be no reason for humans
               to be more advanced today than in the early ages of the
               world, since with each birth all intellectual labor would



                                              452




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 452                                      3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          SEEK AND YOU SHALL FIND



               have to recommence. On the other hand, by returning with
               the progress it has accomplished, and each time acquiring
               a little more, the soul passes gradually from barbarism to
               materialistic civilization and from there to moral civilization.
               (See chap IV, no. 17)

               3. If God had exempted humans from bodily labor, their
               limbs would have atrophied; if God had exempted them
               from intellectual labor, their spirit would have remained
               in infancy, in the state of animal instinct. That is why God
               made labor a necessity, and said to them: Seek and you
               shall find; labor and you shall produce. In this way, you
               will be the children of your deeds; you will derive merit
               from them and you will be recompensed according to what
               you have done.

               4. It is through the application of this principle that spirits
               do not come to spare humans the work of research by
               bringing them discoveries and inventions that are completed
               and ready to produce, in such a way that they would only
               have to take what was put in their hands, without having
               to go to the trouble to bend down to pick it up or even to
               think about it. If that were the case, the laziest individuals
               could enrich themselves and the most unlearned become
               wise at no cost, and both would receive merit for what they
               have not done. No, spirits do not come to exempt humans
               from the law of labor, but to show them the objective they
               must reach and the way that will lead them to it, saying to
               them: Press on and you shall arrive. You will find stones
               under your feet; look and remove them yourself. We will
               give you the strength you need if you wish to use it. (The
               Mediums’ Book, pt. 2, chap. XXVI, nos. 291 ff.)



                                                    453




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 453                                       3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                           CHAPTER XXV



               5. From the moral point of view, these words of Jesus mean:
               Ask that the light may enlighten your way and it will be
               given to you; ask for the strength to resist evil and you will
               have it; ask for the assistance of the good spirits and they
               will come to accompany you, and like the angel of Tobit,
               they will serve as your guides. Ask for good counsel and it
               will never be refused to you; knock at our door and it will
               be opened to you; but ask sincerely, with faith, fervor and
               trust; present yourself with humility and not arrogance;
               otherwise, you will be left to your own devices and your
               failures will be the punishment for your pride.

                      Such is the meaning of the words: Seek and you shall
               find; knock and it shall be opened to you.



               OBSERVE THE BIRDS IN THE SKY


                      6. Do not accumulate treasures on the earth, where rust and
                      worms corrupt them and where thieves unbury and steal
                      them; but create treasures in heaven, where neither rust nor
                      worms corrupt, for wherever your treasure is, there is your
                      heart also.

                      Thus, I say to you: Do not be anxious about where you will
                      find something to eat for the sustenance of your life, or where
                      you will get clothes to cover your body. Is not life more than
                      food and the body more than clothing?

                      Observe the birds in the sky: they neither sow nor reap, nor
                      do they store anything in barns, but your heavenly Father
                      feeds them. Are you not worth much more than they? And




                                                454




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 454                                             3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          SEEK AND YOU SHALL FIND



                      who among you, with all his effort, can increase his stature
                      by one cubit?

                      Moreover, why are you anxious about clothing? Observe
                      how the lilies of the fields grow: they neither work nor spin;
                      nevertheless, I declare to you that Solomon himself in all
                      his glory was ever dressed like one of them. Thus, if God
                      has taken care to clothe in such manner an herb in the field,
                      which exists today and tomorrow will be cast into the fire,
                      how much more care will he take in clothing you, O men of
                      little faith!

                      Therefore, do not be anxious, saying: What will we eat, or
                      what will we drink, or what will we wear, as do the pagans
                      who seek after all these thing, because your Father knows
                      what you need.

                      Therefore, seek first the kingdom of God and his
                      righteousness, and all these things will be given to you in
                      abundance. So do not be anxious for tomorrow, for tomorrow
                      will take care of itself. Each day has enough evil of its
                      own. (Mt. 6:19-21, 25-34)

               7. Taken literally, these words would be the negation of
               all foresight and labor, and consequently, of all progress.
               With such a principle, humans would reduce themselves
               to an expectant passiveness. Their physical and mental
               powers would remain inactive. If such had been their
               normal condition on the earth, they would have never left
               the primitive state, and if it were to become the law today,
               they would have nothing more to do than to live in idleness.
               This could not have been Jesus’ thought, because it would
               be in contradiction with what he said elsewhere and with


                                                    455




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 455                                            3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          CHAPTER XXV



               the laws of nature themselves. God created humans with
               neither clothing nor shelter but gave them the intelligence
               to make them. (Chap. XIV, no. 6; chap. XXV, no. 2)

                     Therefore, one should see in these words only a poetic
               allegory of Providence, which never abandons those
               who put their trust in it, but which wills that they work
               alongside it. If Providence does not always come to them
               with material help, it inspires them with ideas with which
               they may find the means of freeing themselves from their
               difficulty. (Chap. XXVII, no. 8)

                    God knows our needs and provides for them according
               to what is necessary. However, humans, insatiable in their
               desires, never know how to be content with what they
               have: the necessities are not enough for them; they need
               the superfluous. It is then that Providence leaves them to
               themselves. They are often unhappy due to their own fault
               and for having disregarded the voice that warned them
               in their conscience; and God allows them to suffer the
               consequences so that they may serve as a lesson for the
               future. (Chap. V, no. 4)

               8. The earth will produce enough to feed all its inhabitants
               when, according to the laws of justice, charity and love for
               one’s neighbor, people know how to manage the provisions
               it gives to them. When fraternity reigns among all peoples
               as it does among the provinces of the same country, the
               temporary surplus of one will make up for the temporary
               insufficiency of another, and each will have what it
               needs. The rich will then regard themselves as those who
               possess a large amount of seed; if they scatter it, it will



                                              456




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 456                                   3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          SEEK AND YOU SHALL FIND



               produce a hundredfold for themselves and for others, but
               if they consume the seed by themselves, if they waste it
               and allow the surplus of what they have consumed to
               be lost, the seed will produce nothing and there will not
               be enough for everybody. If they hoard it in their barns,
               the worms will devour it. That is why Jesus said: Do not
               accumulate treasures on the earth, which are perishable,
               but create treasures in heaven, because they are eternal.
               In other words, do not attach more importance to material
               possessions than spiritual ones, and know how to sacrifice
               the former on behalf of the latter. (Chap. XVI, nos. 7 ff.)

                      Charity and fraternity are not decreed by law. If they
               are not in the heart, selfishness will always stifle them; it
               is the labor of Spiritism to enable them to enter the heart.



               DO NOT WEAR YOURSELF OUT FOR THE POSSESSION
              OF GOLD


                      9. Do not fret for the possession of gold or silver or any other
                      coins in your purse. Do not prepare a bag for your journey,
                      or two cloaks, or shoes, or staff, for those who work deserve
                      to be fed.

                      10. In any city or town that you have entered, inquire as to
                      who is worthy to house you, and remain with him until you
                      leave. When you enter the house, greet it saying: May peace
                      be in this house. If the house is worthy, your peace will come
                      upon it; if it is not, your peace will return to you.

                      Whenever someone does not wish to receive you or to listen
                      to your words, when you leave that house or city, wipe the



                                                    457




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 457                                              3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                           CHAPTER XXV



                      dust from your feet. Verily I say to you that on the day of
                      Judgment, Sodom and Gomorrah will be treated less harshly
                      than that city. (Mt. 10:9-15)

               11. These words, which Jesus addressed to his disciples
               when he sent them out for the first time to proclaim the
               Good News, display nothing strange for that era: they are
               in keeping with the patriarchal customs of the East, where
               the traveler was always welcomed into one’s tent. However,
               back then travelers were rare. Among modern cultures, the
               increase in travel has led to the creation of new customs,
               and those of ancient times are found only in far-off regions
               that have not yet been affected by much travel. And if
               Jesus were to return today, he would no longer be able to
               tell his disciples: Set out without any provisions.

                      Besides their actual meaning, these words contain a
               much deeper moral meaning. Jesus was thereby teaching
               his disciples to trust in Providence. By having nothing,
               they could not tempt the greed of those who received them.
               It was a way to distinguish the charitable ones from the
               selfish. That is why he said to them: “Inquire as to who
               is worthy to house you”; which means, who is humane
               enough to shelter the traveler who has no means of paying,
               because such persons are worthy of hearing your words.
               By their charity you will recognize them.

                      As for those who did not want to welcome them or
               listen to them, did he tell his disciples to curse them, to
               impose themselves on them or to use force and coercion to
               convert them? No, but purely and simply to go somewhere
               else and look for persons of goodwill.



                                                458




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 458                                         3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          SEEK AND YOU SHALL FIND



                      This is what Spiritism tells its adherents today. Do not
               violate anyone’s conscience. Do not force anyone to leave
               their own beliefs to adopt yours. Do not cast an anathema
               on those who do not think like you. Gather those who come
               to you and leave in peace those who reject you. Remember
               Christ’s words. Formerly heaven was taken by force; today
               it is taken by kindness. (Chap. IV, nos. 10, 11)




                                                    459




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 459                                      3/7/2009 18:00:38

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 460   3/7/2009 18:00:38

               CHAPTER XXVI



               Give freely what you
               have received freely
                      x The gift of healing

                      x Paid prayers

                      x The merchants expelled from the temple

                      x Mediumship free of charge




               THE GIFT OF HEALING


                      1. Restore health to the sick; raise the dead; heal lepers and
                      cast out demons. Give freely what you have received freely.
                      (Mt. 10:8)

               2. “Give freely what you have received freely,” Jesus said
               to his disciples. By this precept he prescribes that one
               should not charge for something that one has not paid
               for. What the disciples had received freely was the faculty
               of healing the sick and casting out demons, that is, evil
               spirits. This gift was given to them freely by God for the
               relief of those who were suffering and for the spreading




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 461                                            3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          CHAPTER XXVI



               of the faith; he told them not to make a business of it, an
               object of speculation, or a way to make a living.



               PAID PRAYERS


                      3. He then said to his disciples in the presence of all
                      the people listening to him: “Guard yourselves against
                      the scribes, who walk around in long robes to show
                      themselves, who love to be greeted in the public squares
                      and to occupy the best seats in the synagogues and feasts;
                      who, under the pretext of long prayers, devour widows’
                      houses. For doing so, such persons will receive a harsher
                      condemnation.” (Lk. 20:45-47; Mk. 12:38-40; Mt. 23: 14)

               4. Jesus also said: Do not make anyone pay for your
               prayers; do not do like the scribes who “under the pretext
               of long prayers, devour widows’ houses,” which means to
               seize their wealth. Prayer is an act of charity, an impulse
               of the heart; to be paid for a prayer addressed to God for
               someone else is to make oneself a paid intermediary. Prayer,
               in this case, is a formula, whose length is in proportion
               to the amount of money it yields. Well then, one of two
               things applies: either God measures or does not measure
               his blessings by the number of words. If many words are
               necessary, why say only a few of them or none at all for
               those who cannot pay? This is a lack of charity. If only one
               is enough, then more are pointless. So why make them
               pay? It is an abuse of trust.

                      God does not sell the benefits he grants. Why, then,
               would someone who is not even the benefits’ distributor,


                                              462




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 462                                         3/7/2009 18:00:38

                         GIVE FREELY WHAT YOU HAVE RECEIVED FREELY



               and who cannot guarantee their obtainment, demand
               payment for a request that might not be answered? God
               cannot make an act of clemency, goodness or justice that
               is requested from the divine mercy be dependent on a sum
               of money; otherwise, the consequence would be that if the
               sum were not paid or if it were insufficient, God’s clemency,
               goodness and justice would be withheld. Reason, common
               sense and logic state that God, the absolute perfection,
               could not delegate to imperfect individuals the right to
               put a price on divine justice. God’s justice is like the sun;
               it is for everybody, for the rich as much as the poor. If
               the selling of favors by an earthly sovereign is regarded
               as immoral, is it any more legitimate to sell those of the
               sovereign of the universe?

                      Paid prayers have another drawback: those who buy
               them very often believe that they themselves do not have to
               pray because they have given their money. We know that
               spirits are touched by the fervor of the thought of those
               who take an interest in them; what could be the fervor of
               someone who arranged for a third party to pray for them by
               paying for it? What is the fervor of this third party when he
               or she delegates this task to another, and that one yet to
               another, and so on and so forth? Does that not reduce the
               prayer’s effectiveness to the value of a particular currency?



               THE MERCHANTS EXPELLED FROM THE TEMPLE


                      5. They then came to Jerusalem, and Jesus, having entered
                      the temple, began to expel those who were buying and selling



                                               463




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 463                                          3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          CHAPTER XXVI



                      there. He overturned the tables of the moneychangers and
                      the seats of those who were selling doves. And he allowed
                      no one to carry any wares through the temple. He also taught
                      them, saying: “Is not my house to be called a house of prayer
                      for all the nations? But you have made it a den of thieves.”
                      When the chief priests heard this, they sought a means to kill
                      him, for they feared him because all the people were taken by
                      wonder at his doctrine. (Mk. 11:15-18; Mt. 21:12-13)

               6. Jesus expelled the merchants from the temple,
               thereby condemning the selling of holy things under any
               form whatsoever. God sells neither the divine blessings,
               forgiveness nor entry into the kingdom of heaven; humans,
               therefore, have no right to require payment for them.



               MEDIUMSHIP FREE OF CHARGE


               7. Modern mediums – because the disciples also possessed
               mediumship – also have received a free gift from God: that
               of being the interpreters of spirits for the instruction of
               humankind, to show them the pathway to the good and
               to lead them to faith; and not to sell them words that do
               not belong to them, because they are not the product of
               their personal conception, research or personal labor. God
               wills for the light to reach everybody; God does not will
               for the poorest person to be disinherited from it or to
               be kept from it by saying: I do not have faith, because I
               could not pay for it; I could not have the consolation of
               receiving the encouragement and the displays of affection
               of those whom I weep for, because I am poor. That is why



                                                464




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 464                                            3/7/2009 18:00:38

                         GIVE FREELY WHAT YOU HAVE RECEIVED FREELY



               mediumship is not a privilege and is found everywhere. To
               receive payment for its practice would thus be to divert it
               from its providential purpose.

               8. All those who know the conditions in which good spirits
               communicate and their aversion for anything that may
               have a selfish interest, and who know how little it takes to
               keep them away, can never believe that high order spirits
               are at the disposal of the first person who comes along and
               evokes them for a price at a mediumistic session; plain
               common sense rejects such a thought. Would it not also
               be a profanation to evoke for the price of silver the beings
               whom we respect or who are dear to us? Undoubtedly,
               one can obtain manifestations this way, but who could
               guarantee their authenticity? Frivolous, deceitful and
               cunning spirits, and a whole multitude of unscrupulous
               low order spirits, will always show up and are always
               ready to respond to any question asked of them, with
               no regard for the truth. Thus, those who desire serious
               communications must first ask for them seriously after
               certifying the nature of the sympathies of the medium
               with the beings of the spirit world. Now, the first condition
               for attracting the benevolence of good spirits is humility,
               devotion, selflessness and complete moral and material
               disinterest.

               9. Alongside the moral issue, a no less important
               consideration presents itself in connection with the very
               nature of the faculty. Mediumship could not be, nor will it
               ever be, a profession, not only because it would be morally
               discredited and immediately compared with fortunetelling,



                                            465




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 465                                    3/7/2009 18:00:38

                                          CHAPTER XXVI



               but because a material obstacle is opposed to it: it is an
               essentially transitory, fleeting and changeable faculty,
               whose permanence no one can count on. Therefore, it
               would always be a very uncertain resource to be exploited
               because it could fail at the moment in which it would be
               most necessary. A different matter altogether is a talent
               acquired through study and work, and which, for that very
               reason, is an asset from which it is naturally permitted to
               make a profit. Mediumship, however, is neither an art nor a
               talent, and that is why it cannot be made into a profession;
               it does not exist except through the concourse of spirits;
               if spirits are lacking, there is no longer mediumship; the
               aptitude may persist but the practice is annulled; thus,
               there is not one medium in the world who could guarantee
               the obtainment of a spirit phenomenon at any given
               moment. Exploiting mediumship is thus to make use of
               something that one does not really own; to state otherwise
               is to deceive the person being charged. What is more, it is
               not they themselves that they are making use of, but the
               spirits, the souls of the dead, whose concourse is put up
               for sale. Such a thought is instinctively repugnant. It is
               this sort of trafficking, degenerated into abuse, exploited
               by charlatanism, ignorance, credulity and superstition
               that motivated Moses’ prohibition. Modern Spiritism,
               understanding the serious side of the matter through the
               discredit it has cast over such exploitation, has elevated
               mediumship to the category of being a mission. (See The
               Mediums’ Book, chap. XXVIII; Heaven and Hell, chap. XI)

               10. Mediumship is something sacred that must be practiced
               in a holy and religious manner. If there is one type of


                                              466




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 466                                   3/7/2009 18:00:39

                         GIVE FREELY WHAT YOU HAVE RECEIVED FREELY



               mediumship that requires this attitude most completely,
               it is healing mediumship. Physicians provide the fruit of
               their study, which they have made at the price of often
               painful sacrifice; magnetizers provide their own fluid1 –
               oftentimes even their health – and they may charge for
               their practices; healing mediums, however, transmit the
               healthful fluid of good spirits, and do not have the right
               to sell it. Although poor, Jesus and the disciples charged
               nothing for the healings they obtained.

                      Thus, those who do not have the financial means
               to support themselves should go and seek resources
               somewhere else other than in mediumship, and if
               necessary, devote to it only the spare time they have
               available. Spirits will take into account their dedication
               and sacrifices, whereas they will avoid those who intend to
               use mediumship as a means for material gain.




               1
                 “We call fluids those states in which matter is even more refined than
               it is in the gaseous state (Gabriel DeLanne, O Espiritismo perante a
               Ciência, pt. 4, chap. 3, Federação Espírita Brasileira, 1993 – translation
               ours) – Tr.


                                                  467




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 467                                                 3/7/2009 18:00:39

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 468   3/7/2009 18:00:39

               CHAPTER XXVII



               Ask and you shall receive
                      x The characteristics of prayer

                      x The effectiveness of prayer

                      x The action of prayer; transmission of thought

                      x Intelligible prayers

                      x Prayers for the dead and for suffering spirits



                      THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

                      x How to pray

                      x The joy of prayer




               THE CHARACTERISTICS OF PRAYER


                      1. When you pray, do not be like the hypocrites who take
                      pleasure in standing in the synagogues and on street corners,
                      praying in order to be seen by men. Verily, I say to you, they
                      have received their reward. But when you want to pray, go
                      into your room, and with the door closed, pray to your Father
                      in secret; and your Father, who sees what happens in secret,
                      will reward you.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 469                                            3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                           CHAPTER XXVII



                      Do not feign to pray much in your prayers as do the heathen,
                      who think they will be heard because of their many words.
                      Do not become like them, because your Father knows what
                      you need even before you ask him. (Mt. 6:5-8)

                      2. When you present yourself to pray, if you have something
                      against someone, forgive him so that your Father in heaven
                      may forgive your sins also. If you do not forgive, your Father
                      in heaven will not forgive your sins either. (Mk. 11: 25-26)

                      3. He also told this parable to a few who believed themselves
                      to be righteous, while despising others.

                       Two men went up to the temple to pray. One was a Pharisee;
                      the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed like this:
                      My God, I give you thanks because I am not like other men,
                      who are thieves, unrighteous and adulterers, nor am I like
                      this publican. I fast twice per week and I give a tenth of all I
                      possess.

                      The publican, on the other hand, kept his distance and did
                      not even dare to lift his eyes to heaven; but he beat his breast,
                      saying, “My God, have mercy on me, sinner that I am.”

                      I tell you that this one returned to his house justified, whereas
                      the other did not, for everyone who raises himself will be
                      humbled and everyone who humbles himself will be lifted
                      up. (Lk. 18:9-14)

               4. The characteristics of prayer are clearly defined by
               Jesus. When you pray, he states, do not be obvious about
               it, but pray in secret. Do not feign to pray much, because
               it is not due to a multiplicity of words that your prayer
               will be granted, but your sincerity. Before praying, if you



                                                 470




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 470                                               3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE



               have something against someone, forgive that person,
               because your prayer will not be pleasing to God if it does
               not come from a heart purified of every sentiment contrary
               to charity. In short, pray with humility like the publican,
               and not with pride like the Pharisee. Examine your defects
               and not your good qualities, and if you compare yourself
               with others, look for what might be evil in you. (See chap.
               X, nos. 7 and 8)



               THE EFFECTIVENESS OF PRAYER


                      5. Whatever you may ask for in prayer, believe you will
                      receive it, and it will be granted to you. (Mk. 11:24)

               6. There are persons who contest the effectiveness of
               prayer, and they base their argument on the principle that
               if God knows our needs, it is superfluous to state them.
               They add further that, since everything in the universe is
               linked together by eternal laws, our desires cannot change
               God’s decrees.

                      Without any doubt there are natural and immutable
               laws from which God cannot derogate according to one’s
               caprice; there is a great distance, however, from believing
               this and believing that all life’s circumstances are subject
               to fatalism. If such were the case, humans would be only a
               passive instrument with no free will or initiative. Under such
               a hypothesis, there would be no other recourse than to bend
               one’s head under the blow of every event, without seeking
               to avoid it; no effort would be made to try to avert danger.
               God has not given humans discernment and intelligence


                                                     471




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 471                                        3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          CHAPTER XXVII



               to go unused, a will not to be exercised in desiring things,
               or activity to remain inactive. Since humans are free to act
               in one way or another, their actions have, for them and for
               others, consequences dependent on what they do or fail
               to do. Through their initiative, therefore, there are events
               that inevitably escape fatalism, and which do not destroy
               the harmony of the universal laws, just as the quicker or
               slower pace of the pendulum does not destroy the law of
               movement upon which the mechanism is built. Hence, God
               can accede to certain requests without derogating from the
               immutability of the laws that govern the whole, although
               granting them is always subject to God’s will.

               7. It would be illogical to conclude from this maxim:
               “Whatever you may ask for in prayer will be granted to
               you,” that it is enough simply to ask in order to receive,
               and it would be unjust to accuse Providence if it does not
               grant every request made, because it knows better than
               we do what is best for us. The same applies to a wise
               father who refuses his son things that are not in his best
               interest. Generally, humans see only the present; however,
               if suffering is useful for their future happiness, God will
               allow them to suffer, just as a surgeon allows the sick
               person to suffer an operation that should bring healing.

                      What God will grant them, if asked with trust, is
               courage, patience and resignation. What God will also
               grant them are the means to extricate themselves from
               their difficulties with the aid of ideas suggested by good
               spirits at God’s urging, thus leaving them the merit. God
               helps those who help themselves, according to this maxim:



                                               472




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 472                                   3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE



               “Help yourself and heaven will help you,” and not those
               who hope for outside help without making use of their own
               faculties. Usually, however, one would rather be helped by
               a miracle without having to do anything. (See chap. XXV,
               nos. 1 ff.)

               8. Let us take an example. A man is lost in a desert and
               is suffering from terrible thirst. He feels faint and falls to
               the ground. He prays to God to help him and waits; but no
               angel comes to bring him something to drink. Meanwhile,
               a good spirit suggests to him the thought to get up and
               follow one of the pathways that are before him. Then, in
               a purely mechanical motion, he gathers his strength, gets
               up and walks erratically. Arriving at an elevated area, he
               spots a brook not far away. Upon seeing it, he regains his
               courage, and if he has faith, he will exclaim, “Thank you,
               my God, for the thought you inspired in me and for the
               strength you have given me.” If he does not have faith,
               he will say, “What a good thought I had! What good luck
               I had by taking the path to the right instead of the one
               to the left. Sometimes chance really does serve us well!
               How I must congratulate myself for my courage and for not
               having given up!”

                      You might ask, however, why did the good spirit not
               say to him clearly, “Follow this path and at the end of it
               you will find what you need?” Why did the spirit not show
               itself to him in order to guide him and uphold him in his
               feebleness? In that way, he would have become convinced
               of the intervention of Providence. First of all, it was meant
               to teach him that one must help oneself and make use



                                                     473




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 473                                     3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                               CHAPTER XXVII



               of one’s own strength. Second, through uncertainty, God
               puts to the test this man’s trust and submission to the
               divine will. This man was in the situation of a child who
               falls and who, perceiving someone near at hand, cries out
               and hopes that it will be picked up; if the child does not
               see anyone, however, it makes the effort and gets up by
               itself.

                       If the angel who accompanied Tobit had said to him, “I
               have been sent by God to guide you on your journey and to
               protect you from all harm,” Tobit would not have merited
               anything. Trusting in his companion, he would not even
               have had to think; that is why the angel made itself visible
               only on the return trip.1



               THE        ACTION          OF   PRAYER;        TRANSMISSION   OF
               THOUGHT


               9. Prayer is an invocation; by means of prayer we
               communicate through thought with the being to whom
               the prayer is addressed. Its purpose may be a request,
               an acknowledgement or a glorification. One may pray for
               oneself or for someone else, for the living or for the dead.
               Prayers addressed to God are heard by spirits in charge of
               carrying out God’s will; those that are addressed to good
               spirits are taken to God. When one prays to beings other
               than God, they act only as intermediaries or intercessors,
               because nothing can be done without it being God’s will.

               1
                   A reference to the Apocryphal book of Tobit. – Tr.


                                                    474




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 474                                       3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE



               10. Spiritism enables us to understand the action of prayer
               by explaining the mode of transmission of thought, either
               when the being to whom we have prayed comes in answer
               to our appeal, or when our thoughts ascend to this being. In
               order to understand what occurs in this circumstance, one
               must visualize all beings, both incarnate and discarnate, as
               immersed in the universal fluid that occupies space, just as
               we are immersed in the atmosphere of this world. This fluid
               receives an impulse of the will. It is the vehicle of thought,
               just as the air is the vehicle of sound, but with the difference
               that the vibrations in the air are circumscribed, whereas
               those of the universal fluid extend infinitely. Therefore,
               when the thought is directed toward some being either on
               the earth or in space, from incarnate to discarnate, a fluidic
               current is established from the one to the other to transmit
               the thought, just as air transmits sound.

                      The current’s energy depends on the strength of the
               thought and the will; this is how prayer is heard by spirits
               wherever they may be, how spirits communicate amongst
               themselves, how they transmit their inspirations to us,
               and how communications at a distance are established
               among incarnates.

                      This explanation is especially for those who do not
               understand the worth of purely mystical prayer; its
               purpose is not to materialize prayer but to render its effect
               intelligible by showing that it can have a direct and effective
               action. Prayer is nonetheless still subordinate to the will
               of God, the supreme judge in all matters, and the only one
               who can render its action effective.



                                                     475




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 475                                       3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          CHAPTER XXVII



               11. Through prayer, humans call to themselves the
               concourse of good spirits, who come to uphold them
               in their good resolutions and inspire them with good
               thoughts. They thus acquire the moral strength needed
               to overcome difficulties and to return to the upright path
               when they have wandered from it; through prayer they
               can also divert the evils they attract because of their own
               fault. For example, a man finds that his health has been
               ruined because of the excesses he has committed, and he
               leads a life of suffering till the end of his days. Does he
               have the right to complain if he does not receive healing?
               No, because he could have found in prayer the strength to
               resist temptation.

               12. If the ills of life were divided into two parts, one
               consisting of what humans cannot avoid and the other
               consisting of troubles whose primary cause is humans
               themselves through their carelessness and excesses (see
               chap. V, no. 4), one would see that the latter is much
               greater in number than the former. It is thus obvious that
               humans are the authors of most of their afflictions and
               that they could save themselves from them if they always
               acted with wisdom and prudence.

                      It is no less certain that such troubles are the result of
               our infractions against God’s laws, and that if we were to
               observe these laws accurately, we would be perfectly happy.
               If we did not surpass the limit needed to satisfy our needs,
               we would not suffer the illnesses that are the consequence of
               the excesses along with the vicissitudes that such illnesses
               entail. If we placed a limit on our ambition, we would not



                                               476




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 476                                        3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE



               fear ruin. If we did not want to ascend higher than we are
               capable of, we would not fear a downfall. If we were humble,
               we would not suffer the disappointments of humiliated
               pride. If we practiced the law of charity, we would not be
               slanderous, envious or jealous, and we would avoid quarrels
               and dissentions. If we did not do evil to anyone, we would
               not fear revenge, etc.

                      Let us admit the fact that humans can do nothing
               about other ills, and that all prayers are ineffective to be
               freed of them; would it not be enough if they could be free
               of all the ills that stem from their own conduct? In such a
               case, the action of prayer is easy to conceive because its
               effect is to evoke the healthy inspiration of good spirits, and
               to ask them for the strength to resist evil thoughts whose
               fulfillment could be disastrous for us. In this instance, it is
               not the evil that good spirits divert from us, but instead, they
               divert us from the thought that could cause the evil; they do
               not in any way contravene the decrees of God, nor do they
               suspend the course of the laws of nature; rather, it is we
               ourselves whom they keep from infringing these laws by
               guiding our free will. However, they do so without our being
               aware of it so as not to infringe on our will. Humans are
               therefore in the situation of those who ask for good advice
               and put it into practice; that is, they are always free to
               follow it or not. God wills it to be this way so that they will
               take responsibility for their acts and in order to leave them
               the merit of choosing between good and evil. This is what
               humans can always be certain of obtaining if they ask for
               it with fervor, and it is to what these words are especially
               applicable: “Ask and you shall receive.”


                                                     477




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 477                                       3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          CHAPTER XXVII



                      Would not the effectiveness of prayer, even if reduced
               to this proportion, have an immense result? It was reserved
               for Spiritism to prove us its action by revealing the relations
               between the corporeal and spirit worlds. But its effects are
               not limited to just this.

                      Prayer is recommended by all the Spirits; to renounce
               prayer is to ignore God’s goodness; it is to refuse for oneself
               the assistance of God, and for others the good that we can
               do for them.

               13. By granting a request, God frequently aims to reward
               the intent, the devotion and the faith of the one who prays;
               that is why the prayer of a good person is more meritorious
               in God’s eyes and always more effective, because a corrupt
               and evil person cannot pray with the fervor and trust that
               come solely from a sentiment of true piety. From the heart
               of a selfish person who prays only with the lips only words
               will come out and not the impulses of charity that give
               prayer all its power. One understands this so clearly that,
               by an instinctive reaction, we prefer to commend ourselves
               to the prayers of those in whom we perceive a conduct that
               must be pleasing to God, sensing they are more readily
               heard.

               14. If prayer exerts a sort of magnetic action, one might
               suppose that its effect is dependent on the fluidic power –
               however, this is not the case. Since spirits exert this action
               on humans, spirits make up for the insufficiency of those
               who pray, when necessary, whether by acting directly in
               their name, or by momentarily giving them exceptional



                                               478




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 478                                      3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE



               strength, when they are deemed worthy of such a favor or
               if it may be useful.

                      People who do not think they are good enough to exert
               a healthful influence should not abstain from praying for
               others by thinking they are not worthy of being heard. The
               awareness of their unworthiness is a demonstration of
               humility, which is always agreeable to God, who takes into
               account the charitable intent that animates them. Their
               fervor and trust in God are a first step in the return to
               goodness, for which good spirits are happy to encourage
               them. Prayers that are rejected are those of the proud, who
               have faith in their own power and worthiness, and who
               think they can replace the will of the Eternal One.

               15. The power of prayer is in the thought; it is connected
               neither to the words, the place nor the time in which it
               is done. Hence, one can pray anywhere and at any time,
               alone or in a group. The influence of the place or time
               is connected with the circumstances that may favor
               introspection. Prayer in a group is more powerful when all
               those who pray are joined by the same heartfelt thought
               and have the same purpose because it is as if they all
               speak in one voice and in unison; but what does it matter
               to be gathered in a large number if each person acts alone
               and for his or her own benefit! One hundred persons
               together can pray selfishly, whereas two or three joined
               in a common aspiration may pray like true brothers and
               sisters in God, and their prayer will have more power than
               the other hundreds’. (See chap. XXVIII, nos. 4 and 5)




                                                     479




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 479                                   3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          CHAPTER XXVII



               INTELLIGIBLE PRAYERS


                      16. If I do not understand what the words mean, I will be
                      a foreigner to the one with whom I am speaking and he will
                      be a foreigner to me. If I pray in a language that I do not
                      understand, my spirit prays but my mind does not benefit.
                      If you praise God only with your spirit, how would anyone
                      among those who understand only their own language
                      respond ‘Amen’ at the end of your thanksgiving if they do
                      not understand what you say? It is not that your
                      thanksgiving is not good, but that the others are not
                      edified by it. (I Cor. 14:11,14,16-17)

               17. A prayer is only as good as the thought connected with
               it, and it is impossible to connect a thought with what
               is not understood, because whatever is not understood
               cannot touch the soul. For most people, prayers spoken
               in an incomprehensible language are only a group of
               words that say nothing to the spirit. In order for prayer to
               touch, each word must reveal an idea, and if one does not
               understand it, it cannot reveal anything. One repeats it as
               a simple formula that has more or less virtue according
               to the number of times it is repeated. Many pray as an
               obligation; others to conform to the habit. This is why they
               believe they are exonerated after they have said a prayer
               a determined number of times and in such and such an
               order. God reads the depths of the heart and sees the
               thought and sincerity, and it is to demean God to believe
               that God is more impressed by the form than the depth.
               (See chap. XXVIII, no. 2)




                                               480




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 480                                         3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE



               PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD AND FOR SUFFERING
               SPIRITS


               18. Suffering spirits beg for prayers. Prayer is useful
               to them because when they see that they are being
               remembered, they feel less forsaken and less unhappy.
               However, prayer has a more direct action on them: it
               rebuilds their courage and incites them with the desire to
               uplift themselves through repentance and reparation, and
               it can divert them from thoughts of evil. In this sense, it
               may not only alleviate, but shorten their sufferings. (See
               Heaven and Hell, pt. 2: Examples)

               19. Some people do not believe in prayers for the
               dead, because in their belief system there are only two
               alternatives for the soul: to be saved or to be condemned to
               eternal punishment; and in either case prayer is useless.
               Without discussing the value of such a belief, let us admit
               for a moment the reality of eternal and unpardonable
               punishment, and that our prayers are powerless to put an
               end to it. We would ask: if such is the case, is it logical,
               charitable and Christian to refuse prayer for the reprobate?
               As powerless as such prayers may be to deliver them, are
               they not for them a demonstration of pity that might soften
               their suffering? On earth, when individuals receive a life
               sentence, even if they have no hope of having it commuted,
               is a charitable person prohibited from helping to alleviate
               the weight of their punishment? When someone is beset
               with an incurable disease because there is no hope for a
               cure, must he or she be abandoned without any relief?
               Imagine that, among the reprobate, there might be a


                                                     481




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 481                                   3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          CHAPTER XXVII



               person who used to be dear to you, maybe a friend, a
               father, a mother or a son, and although, according to you,
               they could not expect any mercy, would you refuse them a
               glass of water to quench their thirst? A balm to dress their
               wounds? Would you not do for them what you would do
               for a prisoner? Would you not give them a show of love, a
               consolation? If not, that would not be Christian. A belief
               that hardens the heart cannot ally itself with the belief in
               a God who places love for one’s neighbor at the head of the
               list of duties.

                      The fact that punishment is not eternal does not imply
               a denial of temporary punishment, because God, out of
               divine justice, cannot mix good and evil. Thus, to deny
               the effectiveness of prayer in this case would be to deny
               the effectiveness of consolation, encouragement and good
               counsel. It would be to deny the strength that one derives
               from the moral assistance of those who wish us well.

               20. Others base their opinion on a more deceptively
               attractive reason: the immutability of the divine decrees.
               God, they say, cannot change his decisions at the request
               of his creatures; otherwise, nothing would be stable in the
               world. Therefore, man cannot ask God for anything; he
               can only submit to and worship him.

                      In this idea there is an erroneous application of the
               immutability of divine law, or rather, ignorance of the law
               concerning future punishment. This law has been revealed
               by the Spirits of the Lord now that humans are mature
               enough to understand what, within faith, is in conformance
               with or contrary to the divine attributes.



                                               482




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 482                                    3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE



                      According to the dogma of the absolute eternality
               of punishment, the remorse and repentance of the
               blameworthy are not taken into account. For them, all
               desire to better themselves is superfluous, for they are
               condemned to remain forever in evil. If they are sentenced
               for a determined period of time, their punishment will end
               when that time expires; but who is to say that by then they
               will have better sentiments? Who is to say that, based on
               the example of many condemned on earth, when they get
               out of prison they will not be as evil as before? In the former
               instance, it would be to keep under the pain of punishment
               those who return to the good; in the latter, it would be to
               pardon those who remained blameworthy. The law of God
               is more foresightful than that. Always just, equitable and
               merciful, it does not set any length on the punishment,
               whatever it may be; and it may be summarized as follows:

               21. “Humans always bear the consequences of their
               wrongs. There is not one infraction of God’s law that does
               not entail punishment.

                      “The severity of the punishment is proportional to the
               gravity of the wrong.

                      “The duration of the punishment for any wrong is
               not set and is dependent on the repentance of the guilty
               and his or her return to the good. The punishment lasts as
               long as the obstinacy in evil; it would be everlasting if the
               obstinacy were everlasting; it will be of short duration if
               repentance is not long in coming.

                      “Once the guilty beg for mercy, God hears them and
               sends them hope. However, simple regret for the evil


                                                     483




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 483                                      3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          CHAPTER XXVII



               committed is not enough; reparation is required. That is
               why the guilty are submitted to new trials in which always
               by the use of their will, they can do good in order to repair
               the evil they have committed.

                      “Consequently, humans are always the arbiters of their
               own fate; they can shorten their punishment or prolong it
               indefinitely. Their happiness or unhappiness depends on
               their willingness to do good.”

                      Such is the law, an immutable law in conformance
               with the goodness and justice of God.

                      The guilty and unhappy spirit can thus always save
               itself: the law of God tells it under what conditions it may
               do so. What this spirit most often lacks is willingness,
               strength and courage. If, by our prayers, we inspire this
               willingness in it; if we uplift and encourage it; if, by our
               counsels, we give it the enlightenment it lacks, then instead
               of asking God to depart from the divine law, we become the
               instruments for carrying out God’s law of love and charity,
               in which God permits us to participate so that we might
               give proof of our own charity. (See Heaven and Hell, pt. 1,
               chap. IV, VII, VIII)



               THE SPIRITS’ TEACHINGS

               HOW TO PRAY


               22. The first duty of all individuals, the first act that should
               signal their return to active life each day, is prayer. Nearly
               all of you pray, but how few of you know how to pray!


                                               484




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 484                                       3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE



               Of what importance to the Lord are the sentences you
               mechanically say one after the other out of habit because
               it is a duty to fulfill, and like every duty, weighs on you?

                      The prayers of Christians, of Spiritists, of whatever
               belief, should be made the moment the spirit retakes the
               yoke of the flesh. They should lift themselves to the feet of the
               divine majesty with humility, with profundity, in a rapture
               of gratitude for all the benefits that have been granted up
               until this very day; and also for the night that has passed
               and during which you have been allowed – although you
               do not remember it – to be with your friends and your
               guides in order to acquire more strength and perseverance
               from their contact. Your prayers should humbly ascend to
               the feet of the Lord to commend your weakness to him, to
               ask for his support, indulgence and mercy. They should
               be profound because it is your soul that should ascend to
               the Creator, that should be transfigured like Jesus on Mt.
               Tabor and become white and radiant with hope and love.

                      Your prayer should entail a request for the blessings
               you need, but the need must be real. Thus, it would be
               useless to ask the Lord to shorten your trials, to give you
               joy and wealth. Instead, ask him to grant you the more
               precious possessions of patience, resignation and faith. Do
               not say, as many of you do: “It’s no use praying, since God
               does not answer me anyway.” What do you ask of God most
               of the time? Do you often think to ask him for your moral
               improvement? Oh no, not very often at all! Instead, you think
               of asking him for success in your earthly undertakings, and
               then you exclaim: “God is not concerned about us; if he



                                                     485




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 485                                        3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          CHAPTER XXVII



               were, there would not be so much injustice.” How foolish!
               How ungrateful! If you were to delve into the depths of
               your conscience, you would nearly always find within you
               the starting point for all the ills you complain about. So,
               before anything else, ask for your betterment, and you will
               see what a torrent of blessings and consolations pour over
               you. (See chap. V, no. 4)

                      You must pray without ceasing, but without having
               to go to a church or kneeling in the public squares. Daily
               prayer is the fulfillment of your duties, of all your duties
               without exception, of whatever nature they might be. Is
               it not an act of love for the Lord for you to assist your
               brothers and sisters in any moral or physical need? Is it not
               an act of appreciation to lift up your thought to him when
               a joy comes your way, when an accident is averted, or even
               when a difficulty only grazes you minimally, by saying in
               your mind: Blessed are you, my Father! Is it not an act of
               contrition to humble yourselves before the supreme judge
               when you feel that you have failed, even if only by means
               of a fleeting thought, by saying to him: Forgive me, my God,
               for I have sinned (out of pride, selfishness or lack of charity);
               give me the strength not to fail again and the courage to
               make reparation?

                      This is besides the usual prayers of the morning and
               evening and the holy days; but as you can see, a prayer can
               be offered at any instant without causing any interruption
               in your labors; on the contrary, said this way, it sanctifies
               your activities. You can be certain that just one of such
               thoughts arising from the heart is heard more by your



                                               486




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 486                                        3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE



               heavenly Father than the long prayers said out of habit,
               frequently without any determined motive and to which
               the conventional time of day is mechanically calling you.

                                                           V. Monod (Bordeaux, 1862)



               THE JOY OF PRAYER


               23. Come, you who wish to believe: the heavenly spirits
               make haste to proclaim great things to you. God, my
               children, opens his treasures to distribute their benefits
               to you. O disbelievers! If you only knew how good for the
               heart faith is and how it leads the soul to repentance and
               prayer! Prayer! Ah! How touching are the words that leave
               the lips at the time one prays! Prayer is a divine mist that
               destroys the highest heat of the passions; the firstborn
               daughter of faith, it leads us to the pathway that takes us
               to God. In introspection and solitude you are with God;
               no more mysteries for you, because he unveils himself to
               you. O Apostles of thought, life is before you. Your soul
               detaches itself from matter and launches itself onto those
               infinite and ethereal worlds that poor human beings fail to
               acknowledge.

                      Press onward! Press onward along the pathways
               of prayer and you will hear the voices of angels. What
               harmony! No longer the confused noises and shrill sounds
               of the earth, but the lyres of archangels and the sweet, soft
               voices of the seraphim, lighter than the morning breezes
               when they play among the leaves of your great forests.
               Amongst what delights you shall walk! Your language


                                                     487




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 487                                            3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          CHAPTER XXVII



               cannot describe such bliss; it enters through all your
               pores, so alive and refreshing is the spring from which you
               drink through prayer! Sweet voices and heady fragrances
               that the soul hears and breathes when it launches itself
               onto those unknown and inhabited realms through prayer!
               Without the confusion of carnal desires, all aspirations are
               divine. And you, too, pray as Christ did carrying his cross
               to Golgotha, to Calvary. Carry your cross and you will feel
               the sweet emotions that passed through his soul even as
               he was carrying the infamous cross. He was going to die,
               but in order to live the heavenly life in the dwelling of his
               Father.

                                                     St. Augustine (Paris, 1861)




                                               488




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 488                                        3/7/2009 18:00:39

               CHAPTER XXVIII


               A collection of Spiritist
               prayers

               PREAMBLE



               1. The Spirits have always said: “The form means
               nothing; the thought is everything. Pray according to your
               convictions and in the manner that touches you the most;
               a good thought is worth more than many words that are
               foreign to the heart.”

                      The Spirits do not prescribe any absolute formula for
               prayer; when they do, it is for focusing one’s thoughts and
               especially for calling attention to certain principles of the
               Spiritist Doctrine. One other purpose applies to those who
               have difficulty expressing their ideas, because there are
               some who do not believe they have truly prayed if their
               thoughts have not been formulated.

                      The collection of prayers contained in this chapter is
               one chosen from among those that were dictated by the
               Spirits in various circumstances. They could have dictated
               others using different words appropriate for certain ideas




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 489                                    3/7/2009 18:00:39

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               or special cases, but the form is of little importance if the
               underlying thought is the same. The aim of prayer is to
               lift our soul to God. The diversity of formulas should not
               create any differences amongst those who believe in God,
               and even less amongst the followers of Spiritism, because
               God accepts all prayers when they are sincere.

                      Consequently, one ought not to regard this collection
               as a set formulary, but as a variety of prayers based on the
               teachings given by the Spirits. It is an application of
               the principles of the Gospel morality that have been
               developed in this book and is a complement to their dictates
               concerning one’s duties toward God and neighbor, wherein
               all the principles of the Doctrine are brought to mind.

                      Spiritism acknowledges that the prayers of all religions
               are good when they are spoken from the heart and not
               just from the lips. It imposes none, nor does it condemn
               any. God is too great according to Spiritism to reject the
               voice that implores God or sings God’s praises because
               it is done in one certain manner rather than another. All
               those who pronounce anathemas against prayers that are
               not in their own formulary show that they know nothing of
               the greatness of God. To believe that God is bound to one
               specific formula is to attribute to God the pettiness and
               passions of humankind.

                      According to St. Paul (see chap. XXVII, no. 16), one
               essential condition for prayer is that it must be intelligible
               so that it may speak to our spirit; thus, it is not enough
               for it to be uttered in a language understood only by the



                                               490




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 490                                      3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               one who prays. There are prayers in ordinary language
               that do not say any more to our mind than if they were
               spoken in a foreign language, and for that very reason
               they do not reach the heart. The few ideas they entail are
               often suffocated by an overabundance of words and the
               mysticism of the language.

                      The main requirement of prayer is that it be clear,
               simple and concise, without needless phraseology or an
               excess of epithets that are merely showy finery. Each word
               should be important, reveal a thought, and strike a cord;
               in short, it should cause one to reflect; this is the only
               condition in which the prayer can achieve its objective;
               otherwise, it is only noise. One observes, however, with
               what an air of distraction and inconsistency prayers are
               spoken most of the time; one can see the lips moving,
               but by the facial expression and even by the tone of voice
               one realizes that it is a purely outward, mechanical act to
               which the soul remains indifferent.

                      The prayers in this collection are divided into five
               categories: 1) general prayers; 2) prayers for oneself; 3)
               prayers for the living; 4) prayers for the dead; and 5) special
               prayers for the sick and the obsessed.

                      Aiming at calling particular attention to the object
               of each prayer and to render its importance more
               comprehensible, they are all preceded with preliminary
               instructions, a sort of exposition of rationale under the
               heading Introduction.




                                                491




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 491                                      3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               I – GENERAL PRAYERS

               THE LORD’S PRAYER


               2. INTRODUCTION: The Spirits have recommended placing
              the Lord’s Prayer at the beginning of this collection, not
              only as a prayer per se, but as a symbol. Of all prayers,
              this is the one they place the highest, whether because
              it has come from Jesus himself (Mt. 6:9-13), or because
              it can replace all others, depending on the thought one
              attaches to it. It is the most perfect model of conciseness,
              a true masterwork of sublimity in its simplicity. In fact, in
              its highly concise form it sums up all the duties of humans
              toward God, themselves and their neighbor; it entails a
              profession of faith, an act of worship and submission, a
              request for life’s necessities, and the principle of charity.
              Saying it on behalf of other persons is the same as asking
              for them what one would ask for oneself.

                      Because of its brevity, however, the profound meaning
              contained in some of the words that compose it escapes
              most people. That is why it is usually said without directing
              one’s thought to the application of each of its parts. It is
              said as a formula whose effectiveness is in proportion to
              the number of times it is repeated. It is nearly always one
              of the cabalistic numbers three, seven or nine, taken from
              the ancient superstitious belief in the virtue of numbers
              and their use in magic.

                      In order to fill the vagueness that this prayer’s
              conciseness leaves in the mind, following the counsel of
              the Spirits and with their assistance, a commentary has



                                               492




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 492                                   3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               been added to each clause, which develops its meaning
               and shows its application. According to the circumstances
               and time available, one can thus say the Lord’s Prayer
               either in its simple or developed form.

               3. THE PRAYER – I. Our Father who art in heaven,
               hallowed be thy name!

                      O Lord, we believe in you because everything reveals
               your power and goodness. The harmony of the universe
               bears witness to a wisdom, prudence and providence that
               surpasses all human abilities. The name of one supremely
               great and wise being is written on all the works of creation
               from the blade of grass and the smallest insect to the
               heavenly bodies that travel through space. Everywhere,
               we see the proof of a paternal solicitude, and that is why
               those who do not recognize you in your works are blind;
               those who do not glorify you are proud and those who do
               not render thanks to you are ungrateful.



               II. Thy kingdom come!

                      Lord, you have given to men and women laws filled
               with wisdom that would make them happy if they would
               only observe them. With these laws, they would make peace
               and justice reign; they would help one another rather than
               harm one another as they do. The strong would uphold
               the weak rather than crush them. They would avoid the
               ills that engender abuses and excesses of all kinds. All
               the miseries of this world result from the violation of your


                                                493




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 493                                   3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               laws, for there is not one single infraction that does not
               entail unavoidable consequences.

                      You have given animals the instinct that marks the
               limit of their needs and they mechanically conform to
               it; to humans, however, besides instinct you gave them
               intelligence and reason. You have also given them the
               freedom to obey or violate those of your laws that concern
               them personally, that is, to choose between good and evil
               in order to have the merit and take responsibility for their
               acts.

                      No one can feign ignorance of your laws because, in
               your paternal providence, you have willed for them to be
               engraved in each one’s conscience regardless of religion or
               nationality; those who violate them do so because they do
               not acknowledge you.

                      A day will come when, according to your promise,
               everyone will abide by them; then, disbelief will have
               disappeared; all will acknowledge you as the supreme Lord
               of all things and the reign of your laws will be your reign
               on the earth.

                      O Lord, deign to hasten its coming by giving people
               the light needed to direct them on the pathway of truth.



               III. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven!

                      If obedience is children’s duty toward their parents,
               of subordinates toward their superiors, how much greater
               it is the duty of creatures toward their Creator. Doing
               your will, O Lord, is to obey your laws and to be obedient


                                               494




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 494                                   3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               without complaining against your divine decrees. People
               will become obedient when they understand that you are
               the fount of all wisdom and that without you they can do
               nothing. Then, they shall do your will on earth as the elect
               do in heaven.



               IV. Give us this day our daily bread.

                      Give us nourishment for maintaining the strength
               of our body; give us also spiritual nourishment for the
               development of our spirit.

                      The animal finds its pasture, but humans depend on
               their own activity and the resources of their intelligence
               because you have created them free.

                      You said to them: “You shall earn your nourishment
               from the earth with the sweat of your brow”; thus, you
               made labor an obligation so that they may exert their
               intelligence in seeking the means of providing for their
               needs and well-being, some through physical labor and
               others through intellectual labor. Without labor they would
               remain at a standstill and could not aspire to the bliss of
               the high order spirits.

                      You aid people of goodwill who trust in you for their
               necessities, but not those who take pleasure in idleness
               and who would like to receive everything without any effort,
               nor those who seek the superfluous. (See chap. XXV)

                      How many there are who succumb through their
               own fault, their negligence, their lack of foresight or their
               ambition, and for not wanting to be content with what


                                                495




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 495                                    3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               you have given them! They are the artisans of their own
               misfortune and they have no right to complain, because
               they are being punished for their sins. However, you do not
               forsake even these, because you are infinitely merciful. You
               extend to them a helping hand as long as, like the prodigal
               son, they sincerely return to you. (See chap. V, no. 4)

                      Before we lament our fate, let us ask ourselves if it is
               not of our own doing. At each misfortune that befalls us,
               let us ask ourselves if it was not up to us to avoid it. But
               let us also say that God has given us the intelligence we
               need to lift ourselves out of any slough and that it is up
               to us to use it.

                      Since the law of labor is a requirement for humankind
               on earth, give us the courage and strength to fulfill it. Give
               us prudence, foresight and moderation also so that we
               may not lose the fruit of our labor.

                      Therefore, O Lord, give us our daily bread, that is,
               the means to acquire through labor the things we need
               for life, for no one has the right to request what is
               superfluous.

                      If labor is impossible for us, we will entrust ourselves
               to your divine providence.

                      If it is your will to test us by means of the most
               crushing privations in spite of our efforts, we will accept
               them as a just expiation for the wrongs we have committed
               in this life or in a previous one, because you are just. We
               know that there are no undeserving punishments and that
               you never punish without cause.


                                               496




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 496                                      3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      Dear God, keep us from being envious toward those
               who have what we do not or toward those who have what is
               superfluous while we lack what is necessary. Forgive them
               if they forget the law of charity and love for one’s neighbor
               that you taught. (See chap. XVI, no. 8)

                      Moreover, keep from our spirit the thought of denying
               your justice when we see the prosperity of the wicked and
               the misfortune that sometimes crushes good persons.
               Thanks to the new enlightenment that it has pleased you
               to give us, we now know that your justice is always fulfilled
               and never fails anyone; that the material prosperity of the
               wicked is as fleeting as their corporeal existence and that
               they will suffer terrible reversals, whereas the joy reserved
               for those who suffer with resignation will be everlasting.
               (See chap. V, nos. 7, 9, 12, 18)



               V. Forgive our debts, as we forgive our debtors. Forgive
               our offenses, as we forgive those who offend us.

                      Each one of our infractions of your laws, O Lord, is
               an offense against you, a debt contracted that we will have
               to pay sooner or later. For these we beg the forgiveness of
               your infinite mercy, and we promise to make every effort
               not to contract new debts.

                      You have made charity an express law for everyone; but
               charity does not consist only in helping our fellow beings in
               their need. It also consists in forgetting and forgiving their
               offenses. By what right would we demand your indulgence
               if we ourselves do not show it toward those against whom
               we have a complaint?



                                                497




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 497                                     3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



                      Give us, dear God, the strength to stifle all resentment,
               all hatred and all grudges in our soul. Ensure that death
               does not surprise us while we hold a desire for revenge in
               our heart. If it pleases you to take us this very day from
               this world, ensure that we may present ourselves to you
               purified of all animosity, following Christ’s example, whose
               last words were for his executioners. (See chap. X)

                      The persecutions that the wicked make us bear are
               part of our earthly trials; we must accept them without
               complaining, just like all other trials, and not speak ill
               of those who out of malice in fact open to us the way of
               eternal joy, for you spoke through Jesus lips, “Blessed are
               they who suffer for the sake of righteousness!” Thus, may
               we bless the hand that strikes and humiliates us, for the
               contusions of the body strengthen our soul, and we will be
               lifted from our humiliation. (See chap. XII, no. 4)

                      Blessed be your name, O Lord, for having taught us
               that our fate is not irrevocably set after death; that we shall
               find in later existences the means to redeem and repair
               our past wrongs, and to complete in a new life what we
               have not been able to do in this one for our advancement.
               (See chap. IV; chap. V, no. 5)

                      Thus may all the apparent anomalies of life be finally
               explained. The light is shed upon our past and future as
               a radiant sign of your supreme justice and boundless
               goodness.




                                               498




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 498                                       3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               VI. Do not let us fall into temptation, but deliver us from all
               evil.1

                      O Lord, give us the strength to resist the suggestions
               of evil spirits, who tempt us away from the path of goodness
               by inspiring us with evil thoughts.

                      But we ourselves are imperfect spirits, having
               incarnated on this earth to expiate our wrongs and to make
               ourselves better beings. The first cause of evil lies within us
               and evil spirits merely take advantage of our vile tendencies,
               in which they support us in order to tempt us.

                      Each imperfection is an open door to their influence,
               whereas they are powerless and give up any attempt against
               perfect beings. Everything we could do to keep them away
               is useless if we do not oppose them with a will unshakeable
               in the practice of the good and with complete renunciation
               of evil. Thus, it is toward ourselves that we must direct
               our efforts, and then evil spirits will naturally stay away,
               because evil is what attracts them, while goodness repels
               them. (See below, Prayers for the obsessed)

                      Lord, uphold us in our weakness; through the voice
               of our guardian angels and the good spirits inspire us
               with the will to correct our imperfections in order to
               1
                  Some translations read: Lead us not into temptation (et ne nos indu-
               cas in tentationem); this rendering would lead one to understand that
               temptation comes from God; that God intentionally compels people to
               commit evil, a thought so blasphemous that it makes God equal to Satan.
               It could not therefore have been what Jesus meant. This is, by the way, in
               accordance with the common doctrine regarding the role of demons. (See
               Heaven and Hell, chap. X, Demons) – Auth.


                                                  499




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 499                                                 3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               prevent impure spirits from accessing our soul. (See
               below, no. 11)

                      Evil is not your work, O Lord, because the source of
               all goodness cannot engender evil in any way; we ourselves
               create it by infringing upon your laws and by the ill use we
               make of the freedom you have granted us. When humans
               finally begin to observe your laws, evil will disappear from
               the earth, just as it has already disappeared from more
               advanced worlds.

                      Evil is not a fatalistic necessity for anyone, and it
               seems irresistible only to those who complacently abandon
               themselves to it. If we have the will to commit evil, we
               also have the will to do the good. Therefore, dear God, we
               ask for your assistance and that of good spirits to resist
               temptation.



               VII. So be it!

                      O Lord, may it please you that our desires be fulfilled!
               Nonetheless, we bow down before your infinite wisdom.
               Regarding all the things that we have not been given to
               understand, may it be done according to your holy will
               and not ours, for you desire nothing but our good and you
               know better than we do what is useful for us.

                      We address this prayer to you, O God, for ourselves;
               we also address it to you for all suffering souls, whether
               incarnate or discarnate, for our friends and our enemies,
               for all those who ask for our help, and in particular for
               [person’s name].


                                               500




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 500                                      3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      We pray for your mercy and your blessing upon all.

                      Note: Here thanks may be rendered to God, and
               requests made for ourselves or for others. (See below,
               prayers nos. 26 and 27)



               SPIRITIST MEETINGS


                      4. Wherever two or three are gathered in my name, there I
                      will be in their midst. (Mt. 18:20)

               5. INTRODUCTION. To be gathered in Jesus’ name does
               not mean that it is enough to be gathered physically, but to
               be gathered spiritually through a communion of intentions
               and thoughts for the good. Then, Jesus is found in the
               midst of the assembly – either he himself or pure spirits
               who represent him. Spiritism enables us to understand in
               which way spirits can be among us. They are among us
               with their fluidic or spiritual body and with an appearance
               that we would recognize if they were to make themselves
               visible. The higher their position in the hierarchy, the
               greater their power of radiation. It is in this way that they
               possess the gift of ubiquity and can be at several places
               at the same time: all they need for this is the emission of
               their thought.

                      Through these words, Jesus wanted to show the
               effect of unity and fraternity. It is not the larger or smaller
               number per se that attracts him, since instead of two or



                                                 501




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 501                                       3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               three persons, he could have said ten or twenty; rather, it
               is the sentiment of charity animating each one with respect
               to the others. Therefore, to accomplish this, just two are
               enough. However, if these two persons each pray on their
               own accord, then even if they address Jesus, there is no
               communion of thought between them, especially if they
               are not motivated by a sentiment of mutual benevolence.
               By the same token, if they regard each other with
               prejudice, hatred, envy or jealousy, the fluidic currents of
               their thoughts repel rather than unite them in a common
               impulse of sympathy. Then, they are not gathered in Jesus’
               name; Jesus is only a pretext for the gathering and not the
               true motive. (See chap. XXVII, no. 9)

                      This does not imply that Jesus is deaf to the voice of
               one person alone. If he did not say, “I will come to anyone
               who calls me,” it is because he demands, above all else,
               love for one’s neighbor, which may be better displayed in
               a group than in isolation, and because any individualistic
               sentiment repels it. Hence, it follows that if in a large
               gathering only two or three persons are united in heart
               through the sentiment of true charity, while the others
               isolate themselves and concentrate on selfish or worldly
               ideas, Jesus will be with the former and not the latter. It
               is not, therefore, the simultaneity of the words, hymns or
               outward acts that comprise the gathering in Jesus’ name,
               but the communion of thoughts in conformance with the
               spirit of charity personified in Jesus. (See chap. X, nos. 7,
               8; chap. XXVII, no. 2-4)



                                               502




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 502                                    3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      Such should be the character of serious Spiritist
               meetings, those in which the concourse of good spirits is
               desired.

               6. PRAYER. (At the start of the meeting). We pray to Almighty
               Lord God to send us good spirits to assist us, to keep away
               spirits who might induce us to error, and to grant us the
               light necessary to distinguish truth from falsehood.

                      Also, keep away incarnate or discarnate malevolent
               spirits who might try to sow discord among us and lead
               us away from charity and love toward our neighbor. If any
               try to come here, do not allow them access to any of our
               hearts.

                      Good spirits, who come to teach us, render us
               amenable to your counsels. Keep from us any thought
               of selfishness, pride, envy or jealousy. Inspire us to be
               indulgent and benevolent toward our fellow beings, whether
               present or absent, friendly or hostile. Finally, enable us to
               recognize your salutary influence through the sentiments
               that animate us.

                      Give to the mediums whom you entrust to transmit
               your teachings the holy awareness of the mandate that
               has been entrusted to them and the seriousness of the act
               they are about to perform so that they may employ the
               necessary fervor and concentration to do so.

                      If in this gathering there are persons who have been
               attracted by sentiments other than those of the good, open
               their eyes to the light and forgive them just as we will forgive
               them if they have come with malevolent intentions.



                                                503




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 503                                       3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



                      We especially pray to the spirit of [name], our spirit
               guide, to assist us and watch over us.

               7. (At the end of the meeting). We give thanks to the good
               spirits who have wished to come and communicate with
               us. We pray that they will help us put into practice the
               teachings they have given, and will help each one of us as
               we leave this place to feel strengthened in the practice of
               the good and love toward our neighbor.

                      We also desire that their teachings will be useful for
               suffering, ignorant or wicked spirits who may have attended
               this meeting, and for whom we implore God’s mercy.



               FOR MEDIUMS


                      8. “In the last days,” says the Lord, “I will pour out my Spirit
                      upon all flesh. Your sons and daughters shall prophesy; your
                      young shall have visions and your elderly, dreams. In those
                      days, I will pour out my Spirit upon my servants and they
                      shall prophesy.” (Acts 2:17-18)

               9. INTRODUCTION. The Lord willed for the light to shine
               for all people and for it to enter everywhere through the
               voice of the Spirits so that everyone may receive proof
               of immortality. It is with this purpose that the Spirits
               are manifesting today at every point on the earth, and
               mediumship, revealed among persons of all ages and every
               condition, among men and women, and among children
               and the elderly, is one of the signs that the times prophesied
               about are being fulfilled.



                                                 504




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 504                                              3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      In order to know the things of the visible world
               and to discover the secrets of material nature, God has
               given human beings bodily sight, the senses and special
               instruments. With the telescope, they can plunge their
               eyes into the depths of space and with the microscope
               they can discover the world of the infinitely small. In
               order to penetrate the unseen world, God has given them
               mediumship.

                      Mediums are the interpreters in charge of transmitting
               the Spirits’ teachings to humans; or rather, they are the
               material instruments through which the Spirits express
               themselves in order to become intelligible to humankind.
               Their mission is holy because its aim is to open up the
               horizons of life eternal.

                      The Spirits have come to instruct humans about their
               future destiny and to lead them along the pathway of the
               good, but not to spare them the physical effort they must
               exert in this world for their advancement, nor to favor
               their ambition and cupidity. This is what mediums must
               understand very clearly so that they do not make bad use
               of their faculties. Those who grasp the seriousness of the
               mandate with which they have been vested will fulfill it
               religiously. Their conscience would reprove them for a
               sacrilegious act if for themselves or for others they were
               to transform into a form of entertainment or distraction a
               faculty given with such a serious purpose, and which puts
               them into communication with beings beyond the grave.

                      As interpreters of the Spirits’ teachings, mediums must
               perform an important role in the moral transformation



                                                505




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 505                                     3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               that is taking place. The services they can render are due
               to the good direction they give their faculty, because those
               who are on the wrong road are more harmful than useful
               to Spiritism’s cause. Through the bad impressions they
               produce, they have hampered more than one conversion.
               Thus, they will be asked to give an account of the use
               they have made of a faculty that was given to them for the
               purpose of doing good to their neighbor.

                      Mediums who want to retain the assistance of good
               spirits must work for their own advancement; those who
               want to see their faculty grow and develop must themselves
               grow morally and abstain from anything that might divert
               them from their providential objective.

                      If good spirits sometimes make use of imperfect
               instruments, it is to give good counsel and to endeavor to
               lead them to the good; however, if they encounter hardened
               hearts and if their warnings go unheeded, they withdraw,
               and then the field is left wide open to evil spirits. (See chap.
               XXIV, nos. 11 and 12)

                      Experience has shown that, among those who are
               not able to profit from the counsels they receive from good
               spirits, communications that have for some time displayed
               brilliance degenerate little by little, and end up by falling
               into error, verbosity or foolishness, an incontestable sign
               that good spirits have taken their leave.

                      To obtain the assistance of good spirits and to avert
               frivolous and deceitful ones should be the objective
               of constant effort by all serious mediums; otherwise,
               mediumship is a barren faculty that may even revert to


                                               506




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 506                                       3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               the harm of the one who possesses it, because it may
               degenerate into a dangerous obsession.

                      Rather than flattering themselves for a faculty that
               does not belong to them (since it may be taken from them),
               mediums who understand their duty attribute to God the
               good things they obtain. If their communications merit
               praise, they do not flatter themselves because of it, for
               they know that such communications are independent of
               their personal merit, and they render thanks to God for
               having allowed good spirits to manifest through them. If
               these communications give rise to criticism, they are not
               offended by it, because they are not the work of their own
               spirit. They tell themselves that they have not been good
               instruments and that they have not possessed all the
               qualities needed to oppose the interference of evil spirits;
               consequently, they seek to acquire such qualities, and
               through prayer they ask for the strength they lack.

               10. PRAYER. Almighty God, permit good spirits to assist
               me in the communication that I am asking for. Keep me
               from the presumption of thinking that I am safe from evil
               spirits, from the pride that may deceive me regarding the
               worth of what I obtain, and all sentiment contrary to charity
               with respect to other mediums. If I am induced to error,
               inspire someone with the thought to warn me, and inspire
               me with the humility to accept and acknowledge criticism,
               and to take for myself – not for others – the counsels that
               good spirits wish to dictate to me.

                      If I have been tempted to abuse in any way whatsoever
               the faculty that it pleased you to have granted me or to



                                                507




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 507                                    3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               flatter myself for it, I ask that you take it away rather than
               allow it to be diverted from its providential purpose, which
               is the good of all and my own moral advancement.



               II – PRAYERS FOR ONESELF

               TO ONE’S GUARDIAN ANGELS AND PROTECTOR
               SPIRITS


               11. INTRODUCTION. We all have a good spirit who has
               been connected to us ever since we were born, and who
               has kept us under its watch-care. With us it performs the
               mission of a father with his child: that of leading us on the
               pathway of the good and of progress through life’s trials. It
               is happy when we respond to its solicitude; it suffers when
               it sees us succumb.

                      Its name matters little because it might have a name
               not known on the earth; thus, we evoke it as our guardian
               angel, our good spirit. We may even evoke it by using the
               name of any high order spirit with whom we feel particularly
               attuned to.

                      Besides our guardian angel, who is always a high
               order spirit, we have protector spirits, who, though less
               evolved, are nonetheless good and benevolent. They may
               be relatives, friends or sometimes individuals whom we
               have not known at all in our current lifetime. They assist
               us with their counsels and frequently by their intervention
               in the actions of our life.

                      Sympathetic spirits are those who are connected with
               us by a certain similarity of tastes and tendencies: they


                                               508




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 508                                     3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               may be either good or evil according to the nature of the
               inclinations that attract them to us.

                      Tempter spirits make efforts to lead us away from the
               pathway of the good by suggesting evil thoughts to us. They
               take advantage of all our weaknesses as if they were open
               doors giving them access to our soul. There are those who
               hound us as if we were prey, but they withdraw once they
               realize their powerlessness in fighting against our will.

                      God has given us a principle and superior guide in
               our guardian angel, and secondary guides in our protector
               and familiar spirits; however, it is wrong to believe that
               we unavoidably have an evil spirit who has been placed
               next to us to counterbalance good influences. Evil spirits
               come intentionally according to how much access they
               have to our weakness or our negligence in following the
               inspirations of good spirits. Therefore, we ourselves are
               the ones who attract them. The truth of the matter is that
               no one is ever denied the assistance of good spirits, and
               that it depends on us to repel the evil ones. Because of
               their imperfections, human beings are the primary cause
               of the miseries they must bear and are most frequently
               their own evil spirit. (See chap. V, no. 4)

                      The prayer to guardian angels and protector spirits
               should have the aim of soliciting their intervention before
               God, asking them for the strength to resist evil suggestions
               and their assistance with the needs of life.

               12. PRAYER. Wise and benevolent spirits, messengers of
               God, whose mission is to assist people and lead them on
               the pathway of the good, uphold me during the trials of


                                                509




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 509                                    3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               this life. Give me strength to bear them without complaint.
               Keep from me evil thoughts and help me not to give access
               to any of the evil spirits who may try to induce me to evil.
               Enlighten my conscience regarding my faults, and lift from
               my eyes the veil of pride that prevents me from perceiving
               them and acknowledging them to myself.

                      You especially, [name], my guardian angel, who
               watches most particularly over me, and all you protector
               spirits who have taken an interest in me, enable me to
               become worthy of your benevolence. You know my needs;
               may they be fulfilled according to God’s will.

               13. (Another prayer). Dear God, allow the good spirits who
               assist me to come to my aid when I am in trouble, and to
               uphold me if I waver. O Lord, enable them to inspire me
               with faith, hope and charity. May they be for me a support,
               a hope and a proof of your mercy. Finally, enable me to
               find in them the strength I lack in life’s trials, and, in order
               to resist evil suggestions, the faith that saves and the love
               that consoles.

               14. (Another). Beloved spirits, guardian angels, you whom
               God in his infinite mercy allows to watch over humankind,
               be my protectors in the trials of my earthly life. Give
               me strength, courage and resignation. Inspire me with
               everything good and restrain my tendency toward evil.
               May your gentle influence enter my soul. Enable me to
               sense nearby a devoted friend who sees my suffering and
               shares my joys.



                                               510




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 510                                       3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      And you, my good angel, do not forsake me. I have
               need of all your watch-care in order to bear with faith and
               love the trials that God wills to send me.



               TO KEEP EVIL SPIRITS AWAY


                      15. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you
                      clean the outside of the cup and plate, while inside they are
                      full of plunder and impurity. Blind Pharisees, first clean the
                      inside of the cup and plate so that the outside may be clean
                      also. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you
                      are like whitewashed tombs which look beautiful on the
                      outside but which inside are full of every sort of corruption.
                      Thus, on the outside you seem righteous in men’s eyes, but
                      inside you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. (Mt. 23:25-28)

               16. INTRODUCTION. Evil spirits go only where they find
               what satisfies their wickedness. In order to keep them at
               bay, it is not enough to ask them or even to order them to
               stay away; one must rid oneself of what attracts them. Evil
               spirits sniff out the wounds of the soul, just as flies sniff
               out the wounds of the body. Just as you would cleanse
               your body to keep vermin away, cleanse your soul of its
               impurities to keep evil spirits away. Since we live in a world
               swarming with evil spirits, the good qualities of the heart
               do not always shelter us from their attempts, but they do
               give us the strength to resist them.

               17. PRAYER. In the name of Almighty God, may evil spirits
               stay away from me, and may good spirits serve as my
               rampart against them!



                                                511




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 511                                               3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



                      Wicked spirits, who inspire people with evil thoughts;
               deceitful and lying spirits, who delude them; mocking spirits,
               who entertain yourselves with their gullibility, I repel you
               with all the strength of my soul and I shut my ears to your
               suggestions; however, I ask God’s mercy upon you.

                      Good spirits, who have agreed to assist me, give me
               the strength to resist the influence of evil spirits and the
               necessary understanding not to be a victim of their ruses.
               Keep me from pride and presumption; keep from my heart
               jealousy, hatred, malevolence and all sentiments against
               charity, which are all open doors to evil spirits.



               TO ASK FOR A FAULT TO BE CORRECTED


               18. INTRODUCTION. Our evil instincts are the result
               of the imperfection of our spirit and not of our body;
               otherwise, humankind would be exempt from any kind of
               responsibility. Our advancement depends on us, because
               all people who enjoy the use of their faculties in all things
               have the freedom to do or not to do; they lack only the will
               to do the good. (See chap. XV, no. 10; chap XIX, no. 12)

               19. PRAYER. You have given me, O God, the intelligence
               I need to distinguish between good and evil. Thus, the
               instant in which I realize that something is evil, I am guilty
               if I do not make an effort to resist it.

                      Keep me from the pride that may prevent me from
               perceiving my faults, and from the evil spirits who may
               incite me to persevere in them.



                                               512




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 512                                     3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      Amongst my imperfections, I realize that I am
               particularly inclined toward… , and if I do not resist this
               inclination, it is because of my habit to give in to it.

                      You did not create me blameworthy, for you are just;
               but you created me with an equal aptitude for either good
               or evil. If I have followed the evil pathway, it is a result
               of my free will. But for the same reason that I have the
               freedom to do evil, I can also do the good. Consequently, I
               can change my course.

                      My current faults are remains of the imperfections
               I have retained from my previous existences. That is my
               original sin, from which I may unburden myself with my
               will and the assistance of good spirits.

                      Good spirits who watch over me, and especially
               you, my guardian angel, give me strength to resist evil
               suggestions and emerge victorious from the struggle.

                      Faults are barriers that separate us from God, and
               each one that is overcome is a step taken on the path of
               progress that shall bring me closer to him.

                      The Lord, in his infinite mercy, has willed to grant me
               this present existence to serve for my advancement. Good
               spirits, help me to take advantage of I so that I may not
               waste it, and that, when it pleases God to take me from it,
               I may leave more evolved than when I entered. (See chap.
               V, no. 5; chap. XVII, no. 3)




                                                513




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 513                                     3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               TO ASK FOR STRENGTH TO RESIST A TEMPTATION


               20. INTRODUCTION. Every bad thought could have
               two sources: the soul’s own imperfection, or a sinister
               influence that acts upon it; in the latter case, it is always
               the indication of a weakness that makes us predisposed
               to receive such influence, and is thus an indication of an
               imperfect soul; consequently, those who have failed cannot
               use the excuse of having been influenced by an outside
               spirit, for such a spirit could not have induced anyone to
               evil if it had judged the person inaccessible to temptation.

                      When an evil thought arises, we can thus assume
               that a malevolent spirit is inducing us to evil, to which we
               are as completely free to yield or resist as if we were being
               tempted by a living person. At the same time, we should
               imagine our guardian angel or protector spirit, who, on its
               part, combats the evil influence in us and anxiously awaits
               our decision. Our hesitation to do evil is the voice of a good
               spirit making itself heard in our conscience.

                      A thought is acknowledged to be evil when it detours
               us from charity, which is the basis of all moral truth; when
               the thought’s source is pride, vanity or selfishness; when
               acting on it may cause any harm to another person; and
               lastly, when it entices us to do unto others what we would
               not like them to do unto us. (See chap. XXVIII, no. 15;
               chap. XV, no. 10)

               21. PRAYER. Almighty God, do not let me yield to the
               temptation that may lead me into error. Benevolent spirits
               watching over me, take this bad thought from me and



                                               514




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 514                                       3/7/2009 18:00:40

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               give me the strength to resist the suggestion of evil. If I do
               yield, I will deserve the expiation of my wrong in this life or
               another, for I am free to make a choice.



               THANKSGIVING FOR VICTORY OVER A TEMPTATION


               22. INTRODUCTION. Those who resist a temptation owe it
               to the help of good spirits, whose voice they have listened
               to. They should thank God and their guardian angel.

               23. PRAYER. Dear God, I give you thanks for having
               permitted me to emerge victorious from the struggle I
               have sustained against evil; may this victory give me the
               strength to resist new temptations.

                      And you, my guardian angel, I thank you for the
               assistance you have given me. May my submission to your
               counsels merit your protection the next time.



               TO ASK FOR COUNSEL


               24. INTRODUCTION. Whenever we are unsure about doing
               or not doing something, we should, before anything else,
               ask ourselves the following questions:

               1. – Can the thing I am hesitant to do cause harm to
               someone else?

               2. – Might it be useful to someone?

               3. – If someone else were to do it to me, would I be happy
               about it?


                                                515




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 515                                      3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



                      If the matter has to do only with oneself, one
               should balance the sum of the personal advantages and
               disadvantages that may result from it.

                      If it has to do with other persons, and if doing the
               good for one person might do evil to another, one must
               also weigh the sum of the good and evil in order to abstain
               or to act.

                      Finally, even for the best things, one must still consider
               the opportunity and the surrounding circumstances, for a
               thing that is good per se may lead to bad results in unskillful
               hands if not done with prudence and circumspection.
               Before undertaking it, one ought to consider one’s will
               power and the means of carrying it out.

                      In all cases, one can always ask for the assistance
               of one’s protector spirits, recalling this wise maxim: If in
               doubt, abstain. (See chap. XXVIII, no. 38)

               25. PRAYER. In the name of God Almighty, I ask the good
               spirits watching over me to inspire me to make the best
               decision in the uncertainty in which I find myself. Direct
               my thought to the good and divert the influence of those
               who would tempt me off the path.



               DURING LIFE’S AFFLICTIONS


               26. INTRODUCTION. We can ask God for earthly favors
               and he may grant them to us if they have a useful and
               serious purpose; however, since we judge the usefulness of
               things from our own point of view and since our vision is


                                               516




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 516                                        3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               limited to the present, we do not always see the bad side of
               what we desire. God, who sees better than we do, and who
               wants only our good, may thus refuse us, just as a father
               refuses to give his child what might be harmful. If what
               we have asked for is not granted, we must not become
               discouraged. On the contrary, we ought to think that the
               refusal of what we desire is being imposed on us as a trial
               or expiation, and that our recompense will be proportional
               to the resignation with which we will have borne it. (See
               chap. XXVII, no. 6; chap. II, nos. 5-7)

               27. PRAYER. Almighty God, who sees our misery, deign to
               listen favorably to the pleas I send to you at this moment.
               If my request is inappropriate, forgive me; if it is just and
               useful in your sight, may good spirits, who carry out your
               will, come to my aid for its fulfillment.

                      Whatever may come my way, dear God, may your will
               be done. If my desires are not heeded, it is because it is
               within your designs to test me, and I submit myself without
               complaint. Enable me not to become discouraged by this,
               and may neither my faith nor my resignation be shaken.

                                                           (Make the request).



               THANKSGIVING FOR A FAVOR RECEIVED


               28. INTRODUCTION. One must not only consider matters
               of great importance as happy events; those least in
               appearance are often the ones that have the most influence
               on our destiny. People easily forget the good and remember



                                                517




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 517                                      3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               especially what afflicts them. If we would recall every day
               the benefits we have received without having asked for
               them, we would often be surprised at the number that
               have slipped our memory and we would be humbled by
               our ingratitude.

                      Each night as we lift our soul to God, we should
               remember the favors granted during the day and give
               thanks for them. Moreover, it is especially at the moment
               when we feel the effects of God’s goodness and protection
               that we should, in a spontaneous gesture, render thanks.
               In this case it is sufficient to elevate a thought attributing
               the benefit to God without having to disrupt our work.

                      God’s benefits do not consist only in material things;
               we should also give thanks for the good ideas and the
               happy inspirations that are suggested to us. While the
               proud attribute the merit to themselves and disbelievers
               attribute them to chance, those who have faith render
               thanks to God and the good spirits. For this, long phrases
               are not necessary. “Thank you, my God, for the good thought
               you have inspired me with” says more than a lot of words.
               The spontaneous impulse that makes us attribute to God
               the good that comes to us bears witness to a habit of
               acknowledgement and humility that attracts the sympathy
               of good spirits. (See chap. XXVII, nos. 7, 8)

               29. PRAYER. Infinitely good God, may your name be
               blessed for the benefits you have bestowed on me. I would
               be unworthy of them if I attributed them to chance or my
               own merit.



                                               518




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 518                                     3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      Good spirits, who have carried out God’s will, and
               especially you, my guardian angel, I give you thanks. Keep
               me from the thought of being proud for what I have received
               or of using it for something that is not good. I thank you
               particularly for …



               THE ACT OF SUBMISSION AND RESIGNATION


               30. INTRODUCTION. When a reason for affliction strikes
               us, if we look for its cause we will often find that it is the
               consequence of our imprudence, lack of foresight or a
               previous action; in this case, we must attribute it only to
               ourselves. If the cause of a misfortune is independent of
               any participation on our part, it is either a trial for this life
               or an expiation of a past existence, and in the latter case,
               the nature of the expiation can enable us to understand
               the nature of the wrong, because we are always punished
               wherein we have sinned. (See chap. V, nos. 4, 6 ff.)

                      Regarding what afflicts us, generally we see only the
               present ill and not the final favorable consequences that it
               may hold. Frequently, the good comes after a temporary ill,
               just as the healing of a sickness is the result of the painful
               means that have been employed to obtain it. In all cases
               we should submit to God’s will and courageously bear
               life’s tribulations if we want them to be taken into account,
               and so that these words of Christ may be applicable to us:
               Blessed are they who suffer. (See chap. V, no. 18)

               31. PRAYER. Dear God, you are supremely just; every
               instance of suffering in this world must therefore have its


                                                519




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 519                                        3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               cause and usefulness. I accept the reason for this affliction
               that I am experiencing as an expiation for my past wrongs
               and as a trial for the future.

                      Good spirits watching over me, give me the strength to
               bear it without complaint; enable it to be for me a healthy
               warning; may it increase my experience; may it combat my
               pride, ambition, foolish vanity and selfishness, and may it
               thereby contribute to my advancement.

               32. (Another). Dear God, I feel the need to pray to you to
               give me strength to bear the trials you have sent. Allow
               the light to shine brightly within my spirit so that I may
               appreciate the full extent of a love that afflicts me in order
               to save me. I submit myself with resignation, dear God;
               but woe unto me! Human beings are so weak that if you do
               not uphold me, I fear that I will succumb. Do not forsake
               me, Lord, for without you I am nothing.

               33. (Another). I lift my eyes to you, Eternal One, and I
              feel strengthened. You are my strength; do not forsake me.
              Dear God, I am crushed under the weight of my iniquities!
              Help me. You know the weakness of my flesh; do not look
              away from me!

                      I am overcome by a burning thirst; pour forth your
              spring of living water and I will feel refreshed. May my
              mouth open only to sing your praises and not to complain
              about the afflictions of my life. Lord, I am weak, but your
              love shall uphold me.

                      Eternal One, only you are great; only you are the
              reason and purpose of my life! May your name be praised



                                               520




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 520                                     3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               even if you strike me, for you are the Lord and I am your
               faithful servant. I will bow my head without complaining,
               for only you are great; you only are the purpose of my life.



               AT A MOMENT OF IMMINENT DANGER


               34. INTRODUCTION. By means of the dangers we face,
               God reminds us of our weakness and the fragility of our
               existence, showing us that our life is in his hands and that
               we are upheld by a thread that may snap at a moment
               when we least expect it. From this point of view, no one is
               privileged, because both great and small are subject to the
               same alternatives.

                      If one examines the nature and consequences of the
               danger, one will see that, most often, such consequences,
               if they have occurred, are punishment for either a wrong
               committed or a duty neglected.

               35. PRAYER. Almighty God, and you, my guardian angel,
               help me! If I should succumb, may God’s will be done. If I
               am spared, may I for the rest of my life repair the wrong I
               surely committed and for which I now repent.



               THANKSGIVING AFTER HAVING ESCAPED A DANGER


               36. INTRODUCTION. By means of the dangers we go
               through, God shows us that we can at any moment be
               called to render an accounting for the use we are making



                                                521




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 521                                   3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               of our life. He thereby warns us so that we may focus
               ourselves and mend our ways.

               37. PRAYER. Dear God, and you, my guardian angel, I give
               you thanks for the help you have sent me during the time
               of the danger that threatened me. May it be a warning and
               may it enlighten me concerning the wrongs that I could
               have brought upon myself. Lord, I understand that my
               life is in your hands, and that you may take it from me
               whenever it pleases you. Inspire in me, through the good
               spirits who assist me, the thought of usefully employing
               the time you have granted me in this world.

                      My guardian angel, uphold me in the resolution I have
               made to repair my errors and to do all the good within my
               abilities so that I may arrive with fewer imperfections in
               the spirit world when it pleases God to call me.



               AT THE TIME OF SLEEP


               38. INTRODUCTION. Sleep is the repose of the body,
               but the spirit does not need repose. While the senses are
               numb, the soul partially frees itself from matter and enjoys
               its faculties as a spirit. Sleep was given to human beings
               to restore their organic and mental energies. While the
               body recovers the energy it spent during the waking state,
               the spirit renews itself amongst other spirits. It takes in
               what it sees and hears, and in the counsels it is given, it
               takes the ideas that, upon waking, come to it in the form of
               intuitions. Sleep is the temporary return of the exile to its


                                               522




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 522                                    3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               true homeland; it is the prisoner momentarily given back
               its freedom.

                      However, as happens with the wicked prisoner, the
               spirit does not always take advantage of this moment of
               freedom for its advancement. If it harbors evil instincts,
               then instead of seeking the company of good spirits, it goes
               looking for its equals and visits places where it can give
               free rein to its inclinations.

                      May those who are aware of this truth lift their thought
               at the moment when they feel sleep approaching. May they
               appeal to the counsels of good spirits and those whose
               memory is dear to them so that they may go to meet them
               during the short time that is granted, and upon waking
               they will feel stronger against evil and more courageous
               against adversity.

               39. PRAYER. My soul now goes to be with other spirits for
               a moment. May good spirits come to help me with their
               counsels. My guardian angel, enable me to retain upon
               awakening a lasting and healthy impression of them.



               UPON SENSING THE APPROACH OF DEATH


               40. INTRODUCTION. Faith in the future and the uplifting
               of one’s thoughts during life toward future destinations
               aids the quick disengagement of the spirit as it weakens
               the ties that are holding it to the body, and quite often
               corporeal life has not yet expired when the impatient
               soul has already begun soaring toward the great beyond.



                                                523




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 523                                      3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               On the other hand, for people who have concentrated all
               their thoughts on material things, these ties are more
               tenacious, the separation is more painful and dolorous, and
               the awakening beyond the grave is filled with trouble and
               anxiety.

               41. PRAYER. Dear God, I believe in you and your infinite
               goodness; that is why I cannot believe that you have given
               humans the intelligence to know you and the inspiration
               of the future just to plunge them into nothingness.

                      I believe that my body is only the perishable envelope
               of my soul, and that, when it ceases to live, I shall awaken
               in the world of spirits.

                      Almighty God, I feel that the ties that have bound
               my soul to my body are breaking, and soon I will have to
               render an accounting for the use of the life I am leaving
               behind.

                      I shall bear the consequences of both the good and
               evil I have done; in that world there is no more illusion,
               nor is subterfuge any longer possible. My entire past will
               unfold before me and I shall be judged according to my
               deeds.

                      I shall take none of my possessions from the earth:
               honors, riches, the satisfactions of vanity and pride –
               everything connected with the body shall remain in this
               world. Not one fragment of it will follow me, and none of it
               will be of the least help in the spirit world. I will take with
               me only what is connected to my soul, that is, its good and
               bad qualities, which will be weighed on the scales of strict



                                               524




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 524                                      3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               justice, and I will be judged with the same severity as my
               position on the earth gave me opportunities to do the good
               I did not do. (See chap. XVI, no. 9)

                      God of mercy, may my repentance reach you. Deign to
               extend your indulgence over me.

                      If you see fit to prolong my existence, may the rest
               of it be used to repair as much as possible the evil I may
               have done. If my time is up with no turning back, I am
               comforted with the thought that I will be allowed to redeem
               myself with new trials so that one day I may merit the bliss
               of the elect.

                      If it is not given me to immediately enjoy this untainted
               bliss, granted only to the righteous par excellence, I know
               that my hope is not precluded forever, and that, with labor,
               I shall reach the objective sooner or later according to my
               efforts.

                      I know that good spirits and my guardian angel are
               close by to receive me; in a short while, I will see them as
               they see me. I know that I will meet those whom I loved on
               the earth if I have merited it, and that those whom I am
               leaving behind will come to meet me again so that one day
               we may be reunited forever, and that, until that time, I will
               be able to come to visit them.

                      I also know that I will meet again those whom I have
               offended; may they forgive me for what they may have
               reproached me for: my pride, my hardness, my injustice so
               that I may not be covered with shame in their presence!



                                                525




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 525                                       3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



                      I forgive those who have done harm to me or wished
               it on me in this world; I bear no hatred against them and I
               ask God to forgive them.

                      Lord, give me strength to easily leave the crude joys
               of this world, which are nothing compared to the pure joys
               of the world I am about to enter. There, for the righteous,
               there are no more torments, sufferings or miseries. Only
               the guilty suffer, but hope remains for them.

                      Good spirits, and you, my guardian angel, do not allow
               me to fail at this supreme moment: shine the divine light
               on my eyes in order to reanimate my faith if it becomes
               shaken.

                      (Note: See below, section V: Prayers for the sick and
               for the obsessed.)



               III – PRAYERS FOR OTHERS

               FOR SOMEONE IN AFFLICTION


               42. INTRODUCTION. If it is in the interest of the afflicted
               person for his or her trial to follow its course, it will not
               be shortened at our request; but it would be an act of
               faithlessness to become disheartened because the request
               was not granted. Moreover, even if the trial does not
               cease, one can hope to receive some other consolation
               that mitigates its bitterness. What is truly useful for the
               one who is suffering is courage and resignation, without
               which the trial is unprofitable because it will have to be
               recommenced. Thus, it is for this purpose that one must


                                               526




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 526                                    3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               especially direct one’s efforts, whether by appealing to good
               spirits to help the afflicted, or by rebuilding the afflicted
               person’s morale through counsels and encouragement, or
               finally, by materially assisting the person if possible. In
               this case, prayer may have a direct effect by directing a
               fluidic current upon the person for moral strength. (See
               chap. V, nos. 5, 27; chap. XXVII, nos. 6, 10)

               43. PRAYER. Dear God, whose goodness is infinite, deign
               to soften the bitter situation of [person’s name] if it is your
               will.

                       Good spirits, in the name of Almighty God, I ask
               you to assist him/her in his/her afflictions. If in his/
               her best interests he/she cannot be spared them, enable
               him/her to understand that they are necessary for his/
               her advancement. Give him/her trust in God and in the
               future, which will render him/her less bitter. Give him/
               her also the strength not to give in to despair, which would
               cause the loss of the benefit, and which will render his/
               her future situation even more painful. Lead my thought
               to him/her so that it may uphold his/her courage.



               THANKSGIVING FOR A BENEFIT GRANTED TO
               SOMEONE ELSE


               44. INTRODUCTION. Those who are not dominated by
               selfishness rejoice over the good received by their neighbor,
               even when it has not been asked for through prayer.



                                                527




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 527                                      3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               45. PRAYER. Dear God, may you be blessed for the good
               fortune received by [name]. Good spirits, enable him/her to
               see it as an effect of God’s goodness. If the benefit he/she
               has received is a trial, inspire him/her with the thought to
               put it to good use and not to become vainglorious so that
               this benefit may not result in his/her harm in the future.

                      You, my good spirit, you who watch over me and
               desire my happiness, keep from my thought any sentiment
               of envy or jealousy.



               FOR OUR ENEMIES AND THOSE WHO WISH US ILL


               46. INTRODUCTION. Jesus said: Love even your enemies.
               This maxim reveals to us what is most sublime in Christian
               charity. However, with it Jesus does not mean that we
               must have for our enemies the same affection we have for
               our friends. With these words he tells us to forget their
               offenses, to forgive the evil they have done to us, to repay
               their evil with goodness. Besides the merit of this in God’s
               eyes, it shows others what is truly superior. (See chap. XII,
               nos. 3, 4)

               47. PRAYER. Dear God, I forgive [person’s name] for the
               evil he/she caused me and wants to cause me, just as I
               want you to forgive me and him/her to forgive me for the
               wrongs I may have committed. If you have placed him/her
               on my path as a trial, may your will be done.

                      Dear God, keep from me the thought of slandering
               him/her and from any malevolent desire against him/her.



                                               528




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 528                                     3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               Enable me not to feel any joy for the misfortunes that may
               strike him/her, or any upset for the benefits that may be
               granted him/her so that my soul may not be tainted with
               thoughts unbefitting a Christian.

                      May your goodness, O Lord, be extended over him/
               her, thereby leading him/her to have better sentiments
               toward me.

                      Good spirits, inspire me to forget evil and remember
               the good. May neither the hatred, the rancor, nor the
               desire to repay evil with evil enter my heart, for hatred and
               revenge belong only to evil spirits, whether incarnate or
               discarnate. Instead, may I be ready and willing to extend a
               helping hand and repay his/her evil with good and to come
               to his/her aid if I can.

                      To prove my words sincere, I wish for an opportunity
               to be useful to him/her; but most of all, dear God, keep me
               from doing so out of pride or ostentation, or for oppressing
               him/her with humiliating generosity, which would cause
               me to lose the benefit of my act; for then I would deserve
               these words of Christ to be applied to me: You have already
               received your reward. (See chap. XIII, nos. 1 ff.)



               THANKSGIVING FOR A BENEFIT GRANTED TO OUR
               ENEMIES


               48. PREFACE. Not wishing one’s enemies ill is being only
               half charitable. True charity consists in wishing what



                                                529




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 529                                    3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               is good for them and being happy for the benefits they
               receive. (See Chap. XII, nos. 7, 8)

               49. PRAYER. Dear God, in your justice you have seen fit to
               make [person’s name]’s heart joyful. I give you thanks for
               it in spite of the ill he/she has done to me or wants to do
               to me. If he/she uses it to humiliate me, I will accept it as
               a trial of my charity.

                      Good spirits watching over me, do not allow me to
               feel any unhappiness over this. Keep me from the envy
               and jealousy that only degrades. Instead, inspire me with
               the generosity that uplifts. Humiliation lies in evil, not in
               the good, and we know that sooner or later justice will be
               served to all according to their deeds.



               FOR THE ENEMIES OF SPIRITISM


                      50. Blessed are they who hunger for justice, for they shall
                      be filled.

                      Blessed are they who suffer persecution for righteousness,
                      for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

                      Blessed are you when men slander you and persecute you
                      and wrongly say all sorts of evil against you for my sake.
                      Rejoice, therefore, for a great recompense is reserved for you
                      in heaven, because in the same way they persecuted the
                      prophets who were before you. (Mt. 5:6, 10-12)

                      Do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul;
                      rather, fear the one who can destroy both soul and body in
                      hell. (Mt. 10:28)


                                                530




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 530                                            3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               51. INTRODUCTION. Of all the freedoms, the most
               inviolable is that of thought, which also includes freedom
               of conscience. Casting anathemas against those who
               do not think as we do is to demand such freedom for
               ourselves while refusing it to others, thus violating Jesus’
               first commandment: charity and love for one’s neighbor. To
               persecute them for their beliefs is to attack the most sacred
               right that all people have of believing in what is fit for them
               and worshiping God according to their understanding.
               Obliging them to outward forms like our own is to show
               that we are bound more to appearances than to conviction.
               Forced renouncement never brings faith; it produces only
               hypocrisy. It is an abuse of material power that does not
               demonstrate the truth. The truth is secure in and of itself;
               it convinces and does not persecute, because it does not
               need to.

                      Spiritism is an opinion, a belief; even if it were a
               religion, why would persons not have as much freedom
               to say they are Spiritists as they would have to say that
               they are Catholics, Jews or Protestants, adherents of this
               or that philosophy or this or that economic system? A
               belief is either false or true; if it is false, it will fall by itself,
               because error cannot prevail against the truth when minds
               are enlightened; if it is true, persecution cannot render it
               false.

                      Persecution is the baptism for every new idea that
               is great and just; it increases with the greatness and
               importance of the idea. The animosity and wrath of its
               enemies are in proportion to the fear it instills in them. It



                                                531




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 531                                              3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               is for this reason that Christianity was persecuted in the
               past and why Spiritism is today, but with the difference
               that Christianity was persecuted by pagans, whereas
               Spiritism is persecuted by Christians. The times of bloody
               persecutions have passed, that is true, but if one no longer
               kills the body, one torments the soul, attacking it in its
               innermost sentiments, in its dearest affections. Families
               are divided; mother is incited against daughter; wife,
               against husband. Even the body is attacked in its physical
               needs by taking away people’s livelihood in order to afflict
               it with hunger. (See chap. XXIII, nos. 9 ff.)

                      Spiritists, do not be troubled with the blows you are
               dealt, for they prove that you have the truth; otherwise,
               you would be left alone and unharmed. It is a test of your
               faith, for it will be because of your courage, resignation and
               perseverance that God will acknowledge you to be among
               God’s faithful servants, of whom he is even now making
               note so as to give all their share according to their deeds.

                      Following the example of the early Christians, be
               proud, therefore, to carry your cross. Believe in the words of
               Christ, who said, “Blessed are they who suffer persecution
               for righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Do
               not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul.”
               He also said, “Love your enemies; do good to those who do
               you evil, and pray for those who persecute you.” Show that
               you are his true disciples and that your doctrine is good by
               doing what he said and what he did.




                                               532




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 532                                       3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      Persecution will last only for a while; so wait patiently
               for the dawn, for already the morning star appears on the
               horizon. (See chap. XXIV, nos. 13 ff.)

               52. PRAYER. O Lord, through Jesus you said to us: “Blessed
               are they who suffer persecution for righteousness; forgive
               your enemies; pray for those who persecute you”; and he
               himself showed us the way by praying for his murderers.

                      Following his example, dear God, we implore your
               mercy on those who do not know your divine precepts, the
               only ones that can ensure peace in this world and in the
               other. Like Christ, we say to you, “Forgive them, Father, for
               they know not what they do.”

                      Give us strength to patiently and resignedly bear their
               mockery, insults, slander and persecutions as trials for our
               faith and humility. Keep from us any thought of reprisal,
               for the hour of your justice will sound for all, and we await
               it by surrendering to your holy will.



               PRAYER FOR A NEWBORN CHILD


               53. INTRODUCTION. Spirits reach perfection only after
              having passed through the trials of corporeal life. Those
              in the spirit world wait for God to allow them to take
              up another existence that will furnish them a means of
              advancement, either through the expiation of their past
              wrongs by means of the vicissitudes they must endure, or
              by fulfilling a mission that is useful to humankind. Their
              advancement and future happiness will be proportional



                                                533




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 533                                       3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               to the manner in which they will have employed the time
               they must spend on the earth. The job of guiding their first
               steps and of directing them toward the good is entrusted
               to their parents, who will answer to God for the way they
               will have fulfilled their mandate. It is in order to facilitate
               its execution that God made parental and filial love a law
               of nature, a law that is never violated with impunity.

               54. PRAYER. (By the parents). Spirit, who has incarnated
               in the body of our child, be welcome among us. Almighty
               God, who has sent it to us, may you be blessed.

                      It is a deposit that is entrusted to us and for which
               we must render an accounting some day. If it belongs to
               the new generation of good spirits who are to populate the
               earth, we thank you, O God, for such a favor! If it is an
               imperfect soul, our duty is to help it progress on the path
               of the good through our counsels and our good examples.
               If it falls into evil because of us, we will be answerable
               to you, for we will not have fulfilled our mission on its
               behalf.

                      Lord, uphold us in our task and give us the strength
               and will to fulfill it. If this child must be the subject of a
               trial for us, may your will be done!

                      Good spirits who have come to preside over its birth
               and who are to accompany it during its life, do not forsake
               it. Keep from this child wicked spirits who may try to induce
               it to evil; give it the strength to resist their suggestions
               and the courage to patiently and resignedly bear the trials
               awaiting it on the earth. (See chap. XIV, no. 9)




                                               534




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 534                                      3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               55. (Another). O God, you have entrusted me with the
               destiny of one of your spirits; enable me, Lord, to be worthy
               of the task that has been imposed upon me; grant me your
               watch-care; enlighten my mind so that I may discern early
               on the inclinations of the child that I must prepare to enter
               your peace.

               56. (Another). God of goodness, since you saw it fit to allow
               the spirit of this child to come once again to endure the
               earthly trials destined to enable it to progress, grant it your
               light, so that it may learn to acknowledge, love and worship
               you. By your omnipotence, enable this soul to regenerate
               itself in the fount of your divine teachings. Under the
               guidance of its guardian angel, may its intelligence grow,
               develop and make it aspire to draw closer and closer to
               you. May the knowledge of Spiritism be the shining light
               that enlightens it through the choices of its life. Finally,
               may it learn to appreciate the full extent of your love that
               puts us to the test in order to purify us.

                      Lord, cast a parental eye upon the family to whom
               you have entrusted this soul; may they understand the
               importance of their mission and enable good seeds to
               germinate in this child until the day in which, through its
               own aspirations, it can ascend by itself to you.

                      Dear God, deign to answer this humble prayer in the
               name and by the merit of that One who said, “Let the little
               children come unto me, for the kingdom of heaven is for
               those who are like them.”




                                                535




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 535                                      3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               FOR A DYING PERSON


               57. INTRODUCTION. The death pangs are the prelude to
               the separation of the soul from the body. One could say
               that, at that moment, the person has only one foot in this
               world and the other in the other world. This passage is
               sometimes painful for those who are deeply attached to
               matter and who have lived more for the possessions of this
               world than for those of the other, or those whose conscience
               is troubled by grief and remorse. On the contrary, for those
               whose thoughts are lifted up to the Infinite and who are
               detached from matter, the ties are easier to break, and
               the final moments are in no way painful. Hence, the soul
               is connected to the body only by a thread, whereas in the
               first case, it is held by deep roots. In any case, however,
               prayer exerts a powerful action on the effort of separation.
               (See below: Prayers for the sick; also Heaven and Hell, pt.
               2, chap. I, The Passage)

               58. PRAYER. Almighty and merciful God, this is a soul
               who is about to leave its earthly body behind to return to
               the spirit world, its true homeland. May it enter in peace
               and may your mercy be extended over it.

                      Good spirits who have followed it while on the earth,
               do not forsake it at this supreme moment. Give it strength
               to endure the final suffering it must experience in this
               world for its future advancement. Inspire it so that it
               may consecrate to the repentance of its wrongs the final
               glimmerings of intelligence or any fleeting thoughts that
               may still come to mind.



                                               536




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 536                                   3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      Guide my thought so that its action may render
               the effort of separation less painful, taking to this soul
               consolations and hope at the moment of leaving this
               earth.



               IV – PRAYERS FOR THOSE WHO ARE NO LONGER ON
               THE EARTH

               FOR SOMEONE WHO HAS JUST DIED


               59. INTRODUCTION. Prayers for spirits who have just left
               the earth do not have only the purpose of providing them
               with a testimony of sympathy, but they also have the effect
               of helping their soul’s disengagement, therefore shortening
               the state of confusion that always follows the separation,
               and rendering the awakening more peaceful. Moreover, as
               in any other circumstance, the prayer’s effectiveness lies
               in the sincerity of the thought and not in the abundance
               of words spoken more or less pompously and in which the
               heart frequently takes no part.

                      Prayers coming from the heart resonate around the
               spirit – whose thoughts are still confused – like friendly
               voices that have come to rouse it out of sleep. (See chap.
               XXVII, no. 10)

               60. PRAYER. Almighty God, may your mercy extend over
               the soul of [person’s name], whom you are calling to you.
               May the trials he/she has borne while on earth be taken
               into account, and may our prayers soften and shorten the
               suffering he/she might yet be feeling as a spirit!



                                                537




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 537                                  3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



                      Good spirits who have come to receive him/her, and
               especially you, his/her guardian angel, help him/her be
               rid of matter; give him/her the enlightenment and self-
               awareness needed to remove him/her from the confusion
               that accompanies the passage from the corporeal to the
               spirit life. Inspire in him/her repentance for the wrongs
               he/she might have committed, and the knowledge that
               he/she is allowed to right them in order to hasten his/her
               advancement toward bliss eternal.

                      [Person’s name], you have just reentered the world of
               spirits; nevertheless, you are still here amongst us; you
               can see and hear us because there is nothing between you
               and us but the perishable body that you left behind and
               which will soon be reduced to dust.

                      You have left behind the coarse envelope, subject
               to vicissitudes and death, and you have retained only
               the ethereal envelope, imperishable and inaccessible to
               suffering. If you no longer live through the body, you do
               live the life of the spirits, and that life is exempt from the
               miseries that afflict humanity.

                      You no longer possess the veil that hides from our
               eyes the splendors of the future life; from now on, you can
               contemplate new wonders, whereas we are still immersed
               in darkness.

                      You are going to travel space and visit worlds with
               complete freedom, whereas we trudge painfully along on
               the earth where we retain our physical body like a heavy
               burden.




                                               538




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 538                                     3/7/2009 18:00:41

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      The horizon of infinity is going to unfold before you,
               and in the presence of such grandeur you shall understand
               the vanity of the earthly desires, worldly ambitions and
               futile joys that make up the delight of humankind.

                      For humans, death is only a physical separation that
               lasts a few instants. From a place of exile where God’s will
               still retains us, as do the duties we must yet fulfill in this
               world, we shall follow you in thought until the moment in
               which we will be allowed to rejoin you, just as you have
               rejoined those who preceded you.

                      If we cannot go to where you are to be near to you, you
               can come to be near to us. So come to be among those who
               love you and whom you love; uphold them in life’s trials;
               watch over those who are dear to you; watch over them
               according to your ability and soften their grief with the
               thought that you are now happier, and with the consoling
               certainty that they will some day be reunited with you in
               a better world.

                      In the world where you now are, all earthly resentments
               must cease. For your future happiness, may you from this
               day onward be inaccessible to them. Forgive, therefore, those
               who committed wrongs against you, just as they forgive you
               for those you may have committed against them.

                      Remark: A few special words may be added to this
               general prayer according to the particular circumstances
               of the family or relationships and situation of the
               deceased. If it is a child, Spiritism teaches us that it is
               not a recently-created spirit, but that it has lived before
               and may be quite advanced. If its last existence was


                                                539




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 539                                     3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               short, it is because it was only a supplement to a trial
               either for it or for the parents. (See chap. V, no. 21)

               61. (Another)1 Almighty Lord, may your mercy extend over
               our brothers who have just left earth behind. May your
               light shine on their eyes. Keep them from darkness; open
               their eyes and ears. May your good spirits envelop them
               and enable them to hear words of hope and peace.

                      Lord, as unworthy as we are, we dare implore your
               merciful indulgence on behalf of this one of our brothers
               who has been called from exile. Let his return be like that
               of the Prodigal Son. O God, forget the wrongs that he might
               have committed and remember only the good he might
               have done. Your justice is immutable, we know, but your
               love is great. We ask you to attenuate your justice through
               the fount of goodness that emanates from you.

                      May the light shine on you, my brother, who has left
               the earth behind. May the good spirits of the Lord descend
               upon you, envelop you and help you rid yourself of your
               earthly bonds. Understand and behold the grandeur of
               our Lord. Yield without complaint to his justice but never
               despair of his mercy. My brother! May a true return to
               your past open to you the portals to the future, and enable
               you to understand the wrongs you are leaving behind and
               the work that remains for you to repair them. May God
               forgive you and may good spirits uphold and encourage
               you. Your brothers and sisters on earth shall pray for you
               and they ask that you pray for them.
               1
                This prayer was dictated to a medium from Bordeaux at the moment in
               which the funeral procession of an unknown person was passing by his
               window. – Auth.


                                               540




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 540                                           3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               FOR PERSONS FOR WHOM WE HAVE HELD AFFECTION


               62.      INTRODUCTION.        How      frightful   the   notion   of
              nothingness is! How we ought to pity those who believe
              that the voice of friends who weep over friends is lost in
              the void, unable to find any echo to respond to them.
              They have never known pure and holy affections, those
              who believe that it all dies with the body; that the spirit
              who has illumined the world with its vast intelligence is
              a combination of matter that is extinguished forever like
              a gulp of air; that, of the most-cherished being such as a
              father, a mother or a beloved child, nothing is left but a
              handful of dust that time dissipates without return.

                      How could persons of heart remain indifferent to such
              a thought? How could the idea of complete annihilation
              not freeze them with terror and at least make them hope
              that it is not so? If until now their reasoning has not been
              sufficient to remove their doubt, Spiritism has come to
              dissipate all uncertainty regarding the future by providing
              material proof of the survival of the soul and the existence
              of beings beyond the grave. That is why such proof has
              been welcomed with joy everywhere; confidence is reborn
              because people know from this day onward that life on
              earth is nothing but a short passage that leads to a better
              life; that their efforts in this world are not lost to them
              and that their holiest affections are not destroyed without
              hope. (See chap. IV, no. 18; chap. V, no. 21)

              63. PRAYER. Dear God, deign to favorably receive the
              prayer we are asking on behalf of the spirit of [person’s


                                                541




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 541                                           3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               name]; enable him/her to perceive your divine light and
               render easy the way to eternal happiness. Allow good
               spirits to take my words and thought to him/her.

                      You who were dear to me in this world, hear my voice
               as it calls out to give you a new token of my affection. God
               has allowed you to be delivered first; I cannot grieve this
               without being selfish, because it would be as if I wanted
               you to still be afflicted with the pain and suffering of life.
               Thus, I resignedly await the moment of our reunion in that
               happier world into which you have preceded me.

                      I know that our separation is only momentary and
               that no matter how long it may seem to me, its duration
               vanishes before the eternity of the bliss that God promises
               his elect. May his goodness keep me from anything that
               might delay that desired instant, and thus spare me the
               pain of not meeting you again upon leaving my earthly
               captivity.

                      Oh! How sweet and comforting is the certainty that
               between us there is only a material veil that hides you
               from my sight! That you may be right here by my side and
               see and hear me as before, and maybe even better than
               before; that you will not forget me as I will not forget you;
               that our thoughts may not cease to intermingle, and that
               your thought follows and upholds me always.

                      May the peace of the Lord be with you.




                                               542




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 542                                     3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               FOR SUFFERING SOULS WHO ASK FOR PRAYERS


               64.     INTRODUCTION.         In    order   to   understand   the
               consolation that prayer can provide to suffering spirits,
               one needs to recall their mode of action, as explained
               above. (See chap. XXVII, nos. 9, 18 ff.). Those who are
               imbued with this truth pray more fervently due to the
               certainty of not praying in vain.

               65. PRAYER. Forgiving and merciful God, may your
               goodness extend over all spirits who ask for our prayers,
               especially the soul of [person’s name]. Good spirits,
               whose only concern is to do good, intercede with me for
               their consolation. Make a ray of hope shine on their eyes,
               and may the divine light enlighten them regarding the
               imperfections that keep them from the dwelling place of
               the blessed. Open their hearts to repentance and the desire
               to purify themselves to hasten their advancement. Enable
               them to understand that, through their efforts, they may
               shorten the time of their trials.

                      May God in his goodness give them the strength to
               persevere in their good resolutions!

                      May these benevolent words soften their suffering
               by showing them that there are people on the earth who
               sympathize with them and desire their happiness.

               66. (Another). We pray to you, O Lord, to pour out the
               blessings of your love and mercy upon all suffering spirits,
               whether discarnate in the spirit world or incarnate among
               us. Have compassion on our weaknesses. You have made
               us fallible, but you have given us the strength to resist and


                                                  543




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 543                                        3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               overcome evil. May your mercy extend over all those who
               could not resist their evil inclinations, and who are still
               bound to the wrong path. May your good spirits envelop
               them; may your light shine on their eyes, and attracted by
               its life-giving warmth, may they fall prostrate at your feet,
               humble, repentant and submissive.

                      We also pray to you, O Father of mercy, for our
               brothers and sisters who have not had the strength to bear
               their earthly trials. You have given us a burden to carry,
               O Lord, and we must not dispose of it except at your feet;
               however, our weakness is great and courage sometimes
               fails us along the way. Take pity on these indolent servants
               who have abandoned their work before it was time. May
               your justice spare them and allow your good spirits to
               bring them relief, consolation and hope for the future. The
               prospect of forgiveness strengthens the soul; point this fact
               out, Lord, to the despairing guilty, and, sustained by such
               hope, they will have the strength even in the immensity
               of their wrongs and sufferings to redeem their past and
               prepare to conquer the future.



               FOR A DECEASED ENEMY


               67. INTRODUCTION. Charity toward our enemies should
               follow them beyond the grave. We must realize that the
               evil they did to us was a trial that might have been useful
               for our advancement if we knew how to take advantage
               of it. It could have been even more advantageous than
               purely material afflictions in that, along with courage



                                               544




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 544                                    3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               and resignation, it allowed us to add to it charity and the
               forgetfulness of offenses. (See chap. X, no. 6; chap. XII,
               nos. 5, 6)

               68. PRAYER. Lord, it was your will to call the soul of
               [person’s name] before mine. I forgive him/her for the evil
               he/she did to me and his/her bad intentions regarding
               me. May he/she repent for it now that he/she is no longer
               under the illusions of this world.

                      May your mercy, O God, extend over him/her and keep
               from me the thought of rejoicing at his/her death. If I have
               acted badly toward him/her, may he/she forgive me, just as
               I forgive those who have acted that way toward me.



               FOR A CRIMINAL


               69. INTRODUCTION. If the effectiveness of prayers were
               proportional to their length, the longest ones ought to be
               reserved for the guiltier persons because they have more
               need than those who have led virtuous lives. To refuse
               prayers to criminals is to lack charity and to misunderstand
               God’s mercy. To believe prayers are pointless because a
               person has committed this or that wrong is to prejudge the
               Most High’s justice. (See chap. XI, no. 14)

               70. PRAYER. O Lord, God of mercy, do not spurn this
               criminal who has left the earth behind. Human justice
               may have struck him/her, but it has not exempted him/
               her from your justice if his/her heart has not been touched
               by remorse.



                                                545




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 545                                   3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



                      Remove the blindfold that hides from him/her the
               gravity of his/her wrongs. May his/her repentance find
               grace before you and relieve the suffering of his/her soul!
               May our prayers and the intercession of good spirits also
               bring him/her hope and consolation. Inspire him/her with
               the desire to right his/her bad acts in a new existence,
               and give him/her the strength not to succumb in the new
               struggles he/she will undertake.

                      Lord, have mercy on him/her!



               FOR A SUICIDE


               71. INTRODUCTION. Human beings never have the right
              to dispose of their own life, for only God can take them
              from their earthly captivity when deemed appropriate.
              Nevertheless, the harshness of divine justice may be
              softened in accordance with the circumstances, but it is
              reserved in all its severity for those who have wished to
              remove themselves from the trials of life. Suicides are like
              prisoners who escape from prison before having served
              their sentence, and who, when recaptured, are guarded
              more severely. Such is the case with suicides, who believe
              they are escaping their present miseries only to immerse
              themselves in even greater unhappiness. (See chap. V,
              nos. 14 ff.)

              72. PRAYER. O God, we know the fate reserved for those
              who violate your laws by intentionally shortening their
              days. But we also know that your mercy is infinite: deign to
              extend it over the soul of [person’s name]. May our prayers


                                               546




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 546                                  3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               and your commiseration soften the bitterness of his/her
               suffering for not having had the courage to await the end
               of his/her trials!

                      Good spirits, whose mission is to assist unfortunates,
               take him/her under your watch-care. Inspire him/her with
               repentance for his/her wrong, and may your assistance
               give him/her the strength to more resignedly bear the new
               trials that he/she will have to endure to repair it. Keep
               from him/her evil spirits who may once again lead him/
               her into evil and prolong his/her suffering by causing him/
               her to lose the fruit of his/her future trials.

                      You, whose misfortune is the object of our prayers, may
               our commiseration soften your bitterness and awaken in
               you hope for a better future! That future is in your hands;
               trust in the goodness of God, whose bosom is open to all
               those who repent, while remaining shut only to hardened
               hearts.



               FOR REPENTANT SPIRITS


               73. INTRODUCTION. It would be unjust to rank in the
               category of evil spirits those suffering and repentant spirits
               who ask for prayers. They might have been evil but they
               are no longer so when they acknowledge and lament their
               wrongs: they are only unhappy. Some have even begun to
               enjoy a relative happiness.

               74. PRAYER. God of mercy, who accepts the sincere
               repentance of the sinner, whether incarnate or discarnate,



                                                547




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 547                                     3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               here is a spirit who took pleasure in evil, but who now
               recognizes his/her errors and is entering upon the
               pathway of the good. Dear God, deign to receive him/her
               as a prodigal child and forgive him/her.

                      Good spirits, whose voice he/she failed to acknowledge,
               he/she now wants you to hear him/her from this day
               onward. Allow him/her to foresee the happiness of the
               Lord’s elect so that he/she may persist in the desire to
               purify him/herself in order to reach it. Uphold him/her in
               his/her good resolutions and give him/her the strength to
               resist his/her evil instincts.

                      Spirit of [person’s name], we commend you for your
               change and we give thanks to the good spirits who have
               helped you.

                      If you used to take pleasure in doing evil, it was because
               you did not understand how sweet the joy in doing good
               was; you also felt too lowly to hope to achieve it. But from
               the moment in which you stepped onto the good path, a
               light began to shine for you; you have begun to experience
               an unknown happiness, and hope has entered you soul. It
               is because God always hears the prayer of the repentant
               sinner and does not spurn anyone who comes to him.

                      To enter completely into his grace, apply yourself
               from hereon out, not only in no longer committing evil,
               but in doing the good, and especially in repairing the evil
               you have done. Then, you will have satisfied God’s justice.
               Each good act will erase one of your past wrongs.



                                               548




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 548                                        3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      The first step has been taken. Now, the more you
               advance the easier and more pleasant the pathway will
               seem to you. So persevere, and one day you will experience
               the glory of being counted among the good and happy
               spirits.



               FOR HARDENED SPIRITS


               75. INTRODUCTION. Evil spirits are those who have not yet
              been touched by repentance; who take pleasure in evil and
              feel no remorse for it; who are insensitive toward reproach,
              and who spurn prayer and often blaspheme God’s name.
              These are hardened souls, who, after death, take vengeance
              on incarnates for the suffering they endure and persecute
              with their hatred those whom they hated when alive,
              whether by means of obsession1 or by any sort of harmful
               influence. (See chap. X, no. 6; chap. XII, nos. 5, 6)

                      Among perverse spirits, there are two distinct
               categories: those who are downright evil and those who are
               hypocritical. The former are infinitely easier to lead to the
               good than the latter. They are most often brutish and coarse
               of character, similar to what we see among incarnates who
               commit evil more out of instinct than intent, and who do not
               try to pass themselves off as being better than they actually
               are. There is, however, a latent seed in them that must
               be brought forth, and one can almost always do so with
               1
                 Obsession (spiritual) “... is the domination that certain spirits may
               acquire over certain individuals” (Kardec, Allan, The Mediums’ Book,
               International Spiritist Council, 2006, p. 393. See ibid, chap. XXIII for a
               complete treatment of the subject of possession and its varying degrees
               of severity. See also no. 81 below.– Tr.


                                                  549




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 549                                                 3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               perseverance and firmness combined with benevolence, as
               well as through good counsel, reasoning and prayer. In
               mediumship, the difficulty they have in writing God’s name
               is an indication of a fearful instinct, of an inner voice of the
               conscience that tells them they are unworthy of it. Those
               to whom this applies are on the threshold of conversion
               and one can hold out all hope for them: all one has to do is
               to find the soft spot in their heart.

                      Hypocritical spirits are nearly always highly intelligent,
               but they do not have one sensitive fiber in their heart;
               nothing moves them. They feign all the good sentiments
               to win someone’s trust, and they are happy whenever they
               find anyone foolish enough to accept them as holy spirits,
               and whom they can subject to their will. Far from inspiring
               in them the least bit of fear, God’s name serves them as a
               mask to cover their turpitudes. In the invisible world, as
               in the visible, hypocrites are the most dangerous because
               they act in the shadows without anyone suspecting them.
               They put on the appearance of having faith, but this faith
               is not authentic.

               76. PRAYER. O Lord, deign to cast a glance of goodness
               upon imperfect spirits who are yet in the darkness of
               ignorance and who do not know you, especially upon the
               spirit of [person’s name].

                      Good spirits, help us to enable him/her to understand
               that inducing people to evil, obsessing and tormenting
               them, will prolong his/her own suffering. Allow the example
               of the bliss you enjoy to be a source of encouragement for
               him/her.



                                               550




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 550                                        3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      Spirits who still delight in evil, you have heard the
               prayer we are offering for you; it should show you that we
               desire to do good to you, even though you do evil.

                      You are unhappy because it is impossible to be happy
               by doing evil. So why remain in suffering when it depends
               on you to get out of it? Look at the good spirits around
               you; see how happy they are and if it would not be more
               pleasing for you to enjoy the same happiness!

                      You will say that this is impossible for you; but nothing
               is impossible for those who want it, for God has given you,
               as he did all his creatures, the freedom to choose between
               good and evil, that is, between happiness and unhappiness,
               and no one is condemned to doing evil. If you have the will
               to do evil, you also have the will to do good deeds and to
               be happy.

                      Turn you eyes toward God; uplift yourselves for only
               an instant to him in thought, and a ray of his divine light
               will come to enlighten you. Say with us these simple words:
               My God, I repent; forgive me. Try repenting and doing good
               instead of evil and you will see that his mercy will quickly
               extend over you, and that an unknown well-being will
               replace the anguish you now feel.

                      Once you have taken one step along the pathway
               toward the good, the rest of the way will seem easy. You
               will then understand how much blissful time you have
               wasted through your own fault. But a future radiant and
               full of hope will open before you and will make you forget
               your miserable past, full of trouble and mental torment,
               which wouldbe hell for you if it were to last forever. A day
               will come when your torment will be such that, no matter


                                                551




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 551                                       3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               what the cost, you will want it to stop. The longer you wait,
               however, the more difficult it will be.

                      Do not believe you will remain forever in your present
               state; no, that is impossible. You have two prospects before
               you: one of suffering even more than you have been till
               now, and the other to be as happy as the good spirits who
               surround you. The former is unavoidable if you persist in
               your obstinacy, but a simple effort of your will is enough to
               pull you out of your current bad situation. So make haste,
               for each day of delay is a day lost for your happiness.

                      Good spirits, permit these words to find access to this
               backward soul, so that they may help it grow closer to
               God. We ask you in the name of Jesus Christ, who had
               such great power over evil spirits.



               V – PRAYERS FOR THE SICK AND THE OBSSESSED

               FOR THE SICK


               77. INTRODUCTION. Sicknesses are part of the trials
               and vicissitudes of earthly life; they are inherent to the
               coarseness of our material nature and the low degree
               of evolution of the world we inhabit. The passions and
               excesses of all sorts sow in us unhealthy seeds, often
               hereditary. On worlds that are more physically or morally
               advanced, the more purified and less material human
               organism is not subject to the same infirmities, and the
               body is not silently undermined by the devastation of
               the passions (see chap. III, no. 9). Thus, we must resign
               ourselves to endure the consequences of the environment



                                               552




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 552                                     3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               into which our less-evolved nature has placed us until we
               merit a transfer. While waiting for this to happen, it should
               not keep us from doing what depends on us to better our
               current situation; but if, despite our efforts we fail to do so,
               Spiritism teaches us to resignedly bear our transitory ills.

                      If God had not wanted bodily sufferings to be dissipated
               or softened in certain cases, God would not have placed
               healing means at our disposal. God’s provident solicitude in
               this regard, in conformity with the instinct of preservation,
               indicates that it is our duty to seek and apply them.

                      Alongside the usual medication developed by science,
               magnetism enabled us to understand the power of the
               fluidic action; afterward, Spiritism came to reveal another
               power in healing mediumship and the influence of prayer.
               (See mention below [no. 81] on healing mediumship)

               78. PRAYER. (To be said by the sick person). O Lord, you
               are wholly just; I must have deserved the sickness you saw
               fit to send me, for you make no one suffer without cause.
               I deliver myself to your infinite mercy to be healed; if it
               pleases you to restore me to health, may your holy name
               be blessed. On the other hand, if I must suffer some more,
               may your name be blessed just the same. I surrender myself
               without complaint to your divine decrees, for everything
               you do can have no other purpose than to be for the good
               of your creatures.

                      O God, enable this sickness to be a healthy warning
               to me and to lead me to make a self-assessment. I accept it
               as an expiation for the past and as a trial for my faith and
               submission to your holy will. (See prayer no. 40)



                                                553




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 553                                       3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               79. PRAYER. (For the sick person). O God, your designs
               are impenetrable, and in your wisdom you have deemed
               it right to afflict [person’s name] with sickness. I pray
               that you will cast your compassionate gaze upon his/her
               suffering and deign to put an end to it.

                      Good spirits, ministers of the Almighty, I ask you to
               second my desire for his/her relief. Direct my thought so
               that it may pour out a healthy balm over his/her body and
               consolation on his/her soul.

                      Inspire him/her with patience and submission to
               God’s will. Give him/her the strength to endure his/her
               pain with Christian resignation so that he/she may not
               lose the fruit of this trial. (See prayer no. 57)

               80. PRAYER. (To be said by the healing medium). Dear
               God, if you would deign to use me, unworthy as I am, I
               may heal this suffering if it is your will, because I have
               faith in you; but without you I can do nothing. Allow good
               spirits to bestow their health-giving fluid on me so that I
               may transmit it to this sick person, and keep from me any
               thought of pride and selfishness that may alter its purity.



               FOR THE OBSESSED


               81. INTRODUCTION. Obsession is the persistent action
               that an evil spirit exerts upon an individual. It presents
               very distinct characteristics from a simple moral influence,
               without any perceivable outward signs, to the complete
               disturbance of the organism and mental faculties. It


                                               554




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 554                                      3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               obliterates all mediumistic faculties; in writing mediumship
               it is displayed by the tenacity of one particular spirit to
               manifest itself to the exclusion of all others.

                      Evil spirits swarm all around the earth as a result
               of the low degree of moral evolvement of its inhabitants.
               Their malevolent action comprises part of the afflictions
               targeting humankind in this world. Like all the illnesses and
               tribulations of life, obsessions must therefore be regarded
               as a trial or an expiation, and be accepted as such.

                      Just as illnesses are the result of physical imperfections
               that render the body accessible to pernicious exterior
               influences, an obsession is always the result of a moral
               imperfection that exposes the body to an evil spirit. To
               a physical cause one applies a physical force; to a moral
               cause it is necessary to apply a moral force. To prevent
               illnesses, one strengthens the body; to avert obsessions,
               one must strengthen the soul; hence for obsessed persons
               the necessity to work for their own betterment, which
               is often quite enough to free them from their obsessor
               without the help of other persons. However, such help
               becomes necessary when the obsession degenerates
               into subjugation and possession, because then patients
               sometimes lose their will power and their free will.

                      Obsession is nearly always the result of vengeance carried
               out by a spirit, and most often it originated in the relationships
               that the obsessed person had with the spirit in a previous
               existence. (See chap. X, no. 6; chap. XII, nos. 5, 6)

                      In cases of grave obsession, it is as if the obsessed
               person is enveloped and impregnated with a pernicious


                                                555




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 555                                         3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               fluid that neutralizes and repels the action of healthy
               fluids. It is therefore necessary to rid the person of this
               malevolent fluid; however, an evil fluid cannot be deflected
               by a similar evil one. By means of an action identical to that
               of a healing medium in cases of illnesses, it is necessary to
               expel the evil fluid with the aid of a better fluid that somehow
               produces a reactive effect. This is the mechanical action,
               but it is not enough; it is also and especially necessary
               to act upon the intelligent being, who must be addressed
               with authority, and this authority derives only from moral
               ascendancy – the greater the ascendance, the greater the
               authority.

                      And that is not all. To ensure liberation, the wicked
               spirit must be led to renounce its evil intentions; with the
               help of ably directed instructions and personal evocations
               made with its moral education in mind, it is necessary to
               awaken in it repentance and the desire to do good. Then,
               we may have the two-fold satisfaction of delivering an
               incarnate and converting an imperfect spirit.

                      The task becomes easier when the obsessed person
               understands his/her situation and lends the concourse of
               his/her will power and prayers. This cannot occur if the
               person seduced by the deceiving spirit is deluded regarding
               the qualities of the obsessor and takes pleasure in the
               error in which it has immersed him/her, for then, rather
               than helping, the obsessed person spurns all assistance.
               This is the case with fascination, always infinitely more
               rebellious than the most violent subjugation. (See The
               Mediums’ Book, chap. XXIII)



                                               556




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 556                                       3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



                      In all cases of obsession, prayer is the most powerful
               aid for acting upon the obsessor spirit.

               82. PRAYER. (To be said by the obsessed person). Dear
               God, allow good spirits to free me from the evil spirit that
               has attached itself to me. If it is an act of vengeance that
               it is pursuing for the wrongs I might have committed
               against it in the past, you have allowed it, dear God, for my
               punishment, and I bear the consequence of my wrong. May
               my repentance merit your forgiveness and my deliverance!
               But whatever its reason may be, I ask that your mercy be
               upon it. Deign to make easier its path of progress, which
               will divert its thought from doing evil. On my part, may
               I repay evil with goodness, thereby leading it to better
               sentiments.

                      But I also know, dear God, that it is my imperfections
               that have rendered me accessible to the influence of
               imperfect spirits. Give me the necessary enlightenment
               to recognize them; especially, combat within me the pride
               that blinds me toward my own faults.

                      How unworthy I must be to have allowed an evil spirit
               to dominate me!

                      Dear God, may this blow to my vanity serve as a lesson
               for the future; may it strengthen me in the resolution I have
               made to purify myself through the practice of goodness,
               charity and humility so that from now on I may set up a
               barrier to evil influences.

                      Lord, give me strength to bear this trial with patience
               and resignation. I understand that, just like all other
               trials, it will aid my advancement if I do not ruin its fruits



                                                557




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 557                                     3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          CHAPTER XXVIII



               by complaining, since it furnishes me the opportunity to
               show my submission and to practice charity toward an
               unhappy brother/sister by forgiving the evil he/she has
               done to me. (See chap. XII, nos. 5, 6; chap. XXVIII, nos. 15
               ff., 46, 47)

               83. PRAYER. (For the obsessed person). Almighty God,
               deign to give me the ability to set [person’s name] free from
               the spirit who is obsessing him/her. If it is in your designs
               to put an end to this trial, grant me the grace to speak to
               this spirit with the necessary authority.

                      Good spirits, may you assist me, and you, my guardian
               angel, may you lend me your concourse. Help me unburden
               him/her of the impure fluid enveloping him/her.

                      In the name of Almighty God, I entreat the evil spirit
               tormenting him/her to withdraw.

               84. PRAYER. (For the obsessing spirit). God of infinite
               goodness, I implore your mercy for the spirit who is
               obsessing [person’s name]. Enable it to glimpse the divine
               light so that it may see the path of error it has taken. Good
               spirits, help me make it understand that it has everything
               to lose by doing evil and everything to gain by doing good.

                      May the spirit who has been taking pleasure in
               tormenting [person’s name] listen to me because I am
               speaking to you in God’s name.

                      If you would think about it, you would understand
               that evil cannot prevail over the good, and that you cannot
               be stronger than God and the good spirits.

                      They can protect [person’s name] from any blow on
               your part, and if they have not done so, it was because he/


                                               558




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 558                                      3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                 A COLLECTION OF SPIRITIST PRAYERS



               she has had a trial to endure. But when this trial reaches
               its end, they will block all your actions against him/her.
               Instead of harming him/her, the evil you have done will
               have served for his/her advancement, and for that he/she
               will be nothing but happy. Thus, your wickedness will have
               been a plain loss for you and will rebound against you.

                      God, who is All Powerful, and the high order spirits,
               his delegates, who are more powerful than you, shall
               thus put an end to this obsession when they wish, and
               your tenacity shall break before this supreme authority.
               However, because God is good, he wants to leave to you
               the merit for having ceased through your own free will. It
               is a respite that is being granted to you; if you do not take
               advantage of it, you will suffer its deplorable consequences;
               great punishments and cruel sufferings await you; you will
               be forced to beg for the mercy and prayers of your victim,
               who has already forgiven and prays for you, which is a great
               merit in God’s eyes and will hasten his/her deliverance.

                      So, think about it while there is still time, for God’s
               justice will strike you like all other rebellious spirits. Realize
               that the evil you are doing now will surely have a limit,
               whereas if you persist in your obstinacy, your suffering
               will increase without ceasing.

                      When you were on the earth, did you not find it foolish
               to sacrifice a great good for the tiny satisfaction of one
               moment? The same applies now that you are a spirit. What
               will you gain by what you are doing? The sad pleasure of
               tormenting someone, which does not keep you from being
               unhappy, no matter what you might say; it will only render
               you even unhappier.


                                                559




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 559                                         3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                            CHAPTER XXVIII



                     Moreover, look at what you are losing; look at the
               good spirits around you and see if their situation is not
               preferable to yours. The happiness they enjoy will be your
               lot whenever you wish. What must you do? Pray to God
               and do good instead of evil. I know that you cannot change
               all of a sudden, but God does not ask what is impossible;
               what he wants is goodwill. So try it and we will help you.
               Make it so that soon we will be able to say for you the
               prayer for repentant spirits (no. 73) and no longer rank
               you among the evil ones as you wait for the time when you
               can be counted among the good ones.

                                   (See also no. 75, prayer for hardened spirits).

                    Comment: The healing of grave obsessions demands
               much patience, perseverance and devotion. It also demands
               tact and skill to lead frequently extremely perverse, hardened
               and cunning spirits to the good, because there are those who
               are rebellious to the highest degree. In most cases, one must
               proceed according to the circumstances; but whatever may
               be the character of the spirit, it is a sure fact that nothing
               can be obtained by violence or threat; all influence lies in
               one’s moral ascendancy. One other truth, also proven by
               experience as well as by logic, is the complete ineffectiveness of
               exorcisms, formulas, sacramental words, amulets, talismans,
               outward practices or any material symbol.

                    Greatly prolonged obsessions may cause pathological
               disorders and sometimes require simultaneous or
               subsequent magnetic or medical treatment to reestablish
               the organism. Once the cause is destroyed, all that
               remains is to combat the effects. (See The Mediums’ Book,
               chap. XXIII: Obsession; Revue Spirite, Feb. and Mar. 1864;
               Apr. 1865: “Examples of healings for obsessions.”)


                                                  560




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 560                                          3/7/2009 18:00:42

               Explanatory Note 1


                      Today they believe and their faith is unshakable, because
                      it is based on evidence and demonstration, and because
                      it satisfies reason. […] Such is the faith of Spiritists, and
                      the proof of their strength is that they endeavor to make
                      themselves better, to control their evil inclinations and to
                      put into practice Christ’s maxims, regarding all humans
                      as brothers and sisters regardless of race, caste, or sect,
                      forgiving their enemies and repaying evil with good in
                      accordance with the divine model. (KARDEC, Allan. La
                      Revue Spirite, 1868).

                    A strictly rational and scientific study of facts that
               revealed the communication of human beings with spirits,
               accomplished by Allan Kardec, resulted in the codification
               of the Spiritist Doctrine, which was systematized according
               to scientific, philosophical and religious aspects.

                    Beginning in 1854 and lasting until his death in 1869,
               Kardec’s endeavor was comprised of five basic works: The
               Spirits’ Book (1857), The Mediums’ Book (1861), The Gospel
               according to Spiritism (1864), Heaven and Hell (1865) and
               Genesis (1868), in addition to the book What is Spiritism
               1
                Publisher’s note: This “Explanatory Note”, published due to an agree-
               ment with the Brazilian Federal Department of Justice (Ministério Públi-
               co Federal), is intended to demonstrate the absence of any discrimination
               or prejudice in certain passages of the works of Allan Kardec, which are
               all characterized by upholding the principles of Christian fraternity and
               solidarity contained in the Spiritist Doctrine.




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 561                                                3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               (1859) and a series of booklets and 136 editions of La
               Revue Spirite (Jan. 1858 – Apr. 1869). After his death, the
               book Posthumous Works was compiled (1890).

                      A meticulous and unrestrained study of these works
               will enable us to extract a number of basic conclusions: a)
               all human beings are immortal spirits created by God
               under equal conditions, subject to the same natural laws
               of progress that gradually lead all to perfection; b) progress
               occurs by means of successive experiences in innumerable
               reincarnations necessarily encompassing all social classes,
               which is the only way the spirit can accumulate the
               learning experience needed for its development; c) in the
               period between reincarnations the spirit lives in the spirit
               world and can communicate with humans; d) progress
               obeys the moral laws taught and lived by Jesus, our guide
               and model, who is the reference for all people who desire
               to evolve consciously and intentionally.

                      At several points in his work, the Codifier refers to
               spirits who have incarnated in uneducated and primitive
               tribes that existed at the time in a few regions of the planet,
               and that, in contact with other segments of civilization,
               were undergoing innumerable transformations – many of
               which were obviously beneficial for their members –
               resulting from the general progress to which all ethnicities
               are subject, regardless of the color of their skin.

                      In Kardec’s time the phrenological ideas of Gall and the
               physiognomic ideas of Lavater were accepted by eminent
               scientists. Also, the publication in 1859 – two years after the
               release of The Spirits’ Book – of Charles Darwin’s book The
               Evolution of Species, containing the natural misconceptions
               and misunderstandings that every new science entails, caused


                                               562




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 562                                      3/7/2009 18:00:42

                                          EXPLANATORY NOTE



               enormous excitement in the means of communication within
               the scholarly community and the general population.
               Furthermore, the belief that facial traits reveal the character of
               an individual is ancient and implies that there is an apparent
               relationship between one’s physical and moral bearing.

                      The Codifier did not agree with many aspects presented
               by these so-called sciences. Thus, he tried to appraise the
               conclusions of such eminent scholars in the light of the
               Spirits’ revelation, bringing to the discussion the spiritual
               element as the decisive factor in resolving the issues
               regarding human diversity and inequality.

                      In the principles of the Spiritist Doctrine, Kardec found
               explanations that point to wise and supreme laws, which is
               why he affirmed that Spiritism enables “… the solving of
               thousands of historical, archeological, anthropological,
               theological, psychological, moral, social, etc. problems” (La
               Revue Spirite, 1862). In fact, the universal laws of love,
               charity, immortality of the soul, reincarnation and evolution
               comprise new parameters for understanding the development
               of human groups in the many regions of the planet.

                      This understanding of the Divine Laws allowed Kardec
               to state:
                      The body proceeds from the body, but the spirit does not
                      proceed from the spirit. There is no other link than blood
                      kinship among descendants. (The Spirits’ Book, no. 207)

                      […] Spiritism, restoring to the spirit its true role in creation
                      by demonstrating the superiority of the mind over matter,
                      naturally puts an end to all the established distinctions
                      among human beings according to bodily and worldly
                      advantages, upon which pride alone founded castes and the
                      stupid prejudices of color. (La Revue Spirite, 1861)


                                                 563




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 563                                              3/7/2009 18:00:43

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



                      The privileges of race have their origin in the abstraction
                      that humans normally make of the spiritual principle by
                      taking only the outward physical being into consideration.
                      From the constitutional strength or weakness of some,
                      the difference in color of others, the birth into wealth or
                      poverty, and noble or plebian blood kinship, they concluded
                      that there is a natural superiority or inferiority. Upon such
                      data they based their social laws and race privileges. From
                      this limited point of view – for they take only the physical
                      life into consideration – certain classes seem to belong –
                      and really do belong – to different races. However, if they
                      would take their point of view from the spiritual being, the
                      essential and progressive being, i.e. the spirit, preexistent to
                      and surviving everything and whose body is nothing more
                      than a temporary envelope that varies like clothing in shape
                      and color; moreover, if from the study of spirit beings proves
                      that such beings are of an identical nature and origin, that
                      their destiny is the same and that all take their departure
                      from the same point and tend toward the same objective;
                      that corporeal life is nothing more than one incident, one
                      of the phases in the life of the spirit, and necessary for its
                      intellectual and moral advancement; that in light of this
                      advancement the spirit may successively clothe itself in
                      many different envelopes, be born into different situations,
                      then they would arrive at the crucial consequence of equality
                      of nature, and from there, the equality of social rights for all
                      human individuals and the abolition of race privileges. This
                      is what Spiritism teaches. You who deny the existence of the
                      spirit in order to consider only the corporeal individual, the
                      continuation of the intelligent being in order to look only at
                      the present life, you deny the sole principle upon which the
                      equality of rights that you demand for yourselves and your
                      fellow beings is rightly founded. (La Revue Spirite, 1867)

                      With reincarnation, race and caste prejudices collapse,
                      since the same spirit can be reborn rich or poor, great lord


                                                 564




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 564                                              3/7/2009 18:00:43

                                          EXPLANATORY NOTE



                      or proletarian, boss or subordinate, free or slave, male
                      or female. Of all the arguments against the injustice of
                      servitude and slavery, against the subjugation of women
                      to the law of the mightiest, there are none that logically
                      prevail over the material fact of reincarnation. Therefore, if
                      reincarnation rests upon a law of nature – the principle of
                      universal fraternity – it also rests upon the law of the equality
                      of social rights and, consequently, of liberty. (Genesis, chap.
                      I, no. 36. See also La Revue Spirite, 1867)

                      At the time, Kardec knew only what various authors
               wrote about African primitives, who were always reduced to
               nearly complete animality when they were not mercilessly
               enslaved.

                      It was based on this “scientific” information of the
               time that, using other words, the Codifier repeated what
               European scholars described upon returning from their
               journeys to Black Africa. However, it was crucial that he
               address the issue of racial prejudice:
                      We labor to give faith to those who believe in nothing; to
                      spread a belief that encourages them to behave better
                      toward one another, which teaches them to forgive their
                      enemies and to regard each other as brothers and sisters
                      without distinction of race, caste, sect, color or political or
                      religious opinion; in other words, a belief that gives birth to
                      the true sentiment of charity, fraternity and social duty. (La
                      Revue Spirite, Jan. 1863)

                      Moral persons are kind, humane and benevolent toward all
                      regardless of race or creed, because they regard all people
                      as their brothers and sisters. (The Gospel according to
                      Spiritism, chap. XVII, no. 3)

                      It is also important to understand that the texts
               published by Kardec in La Revue Spirite were intended to


                                                  565




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 565                                               3/7/2009 18:00:43

                                THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SPIRITISM



               submit to general scrutiny the communications received
               from spirits, as well as to compare their teachings with the
               theories and systems of thought in force at the time. In a
               footnote in chapter XI, number 43 of the book Genesis, the
               Codifier explains this methodology:
                      In the January 1862 issue of La Revue Spirite, when we
                      published an article on the interpretation of the doctrine of
                      the fallen angels, we presented this theory as a hypothesis,
                      with no other authority than that of a debatable personal
                      opinion, because, at the time, we lacked elements sufficiently
                      complete for an absolute assertion. We put it out as a trial
                      essay, seeking to elicit examination of the issue, fully
                      determined to abandon it or modify it if need be. Today,
                      however, this theory has endured the test of universal
                      control. It has not only been accepted by the majority of
                      Spiritists as the most rational and most in agreement with
                      God’s justice, but has also been confirmed by most of the
                      instructions given by the Spirits on the subject. The same
                      applies to the origin of the Adamic race. (Genesis, chap. XI,
                      no. 43)

                    Finally, one must realize that the principal scope of
               the Spiritist Doctrine lies in the moral perfection process of
               the human being, which is the reason why scientific and/
               or philosophical investigation and examination occupy
               a secondary, although important, position, considering
               their provisory character resulting from overall progress
               and improvement. In this sense the Codifier’s warning is
               justified:
                      It is true that this and other issues lie outside the moral
                      point of view, which is the essential goal of Spiritism. Hence,
                      it would be a mistake to make them the object of constant
                      preoccupation. Moreover, with respect to the principle of



                                                566




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 566                                             3/7/2009 18:00:43

                                          EXPLANATORY NOTE



                      things, we know that since spirits do not know everything,
                      they speak only of what they know or what they think
                      they know. However, since there are persons who might
                      draw from the divergence of these theories an induction
                      against the unity of Spiritism precisely because they have
                      been formulated by the Spirits, it is useful to be able to
                      compare the reasons for and against, in the interest of the
                      Doctrine itself, and to support on the basis of the majority
                      the judgment that may be made as to the worth of certain
                      communications. (La Revue Spirite, 1862)

                      In light of the above considerations, one must conclude
               that in the Spiritist Doctrine absolute respect is rendered
               to human diversity, and it is the Spiritist’s responsibility
               to cooperate in the progress of humankind by practicing
               charity in its most far-reaching sense (“benevolence toward
               all, indulgence for others’ imperfections and the forgiveness
               of offenses), just as Jesus, our Guide and Model, taught,
               without prejudices of any kind as to color, ethnicity, gender,
               creed or economic, social or moral standing.

                                                                   The Publisher




                                                567




Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 567                                          3/7/2009 18:00:43

Evangelho - Inglês - FORMATADO.indd 568   3/7/2009 18:00:43
