

The uninitiated interpret Imagination as something ‘imaginary’  in the popular sense of the word; i.e. something unreal. But  imagination is a reality. 

When a man imagines he actually creates a form on the  Astral or even on some higher plane; and this form is as  real and objective to intelligent beings on that plane, as our  earthly surroundings are to us. 

This form which Imagination creates may have only a  transient existence, productive of no important results; or it  may be vitalised and then used for good or evil. 

To practice magic, both the Imagination and the Will must  be called into action, they are co-equal in the work. Nay more,  the Imagination must precede the Will in order to produce  the greatest possible effect. 

The Will unaided can send forth a current, and that current  cannot be wholly inoperative; yet its effect is vague and in-  definite, because the Will unaided sends forth nothing but the  current or force. 

The Imagination unaided can create an image and this image  must have an existence of varying duration; yet it can do  nothing of importance, unless vitalised and directed by the  Will. 

When, however, the two are conjoined — when the Imagina-  tion creates an image — and the Will directs and uses that image,  marvellous magical effects may be obtained. 

The following instances may serve to illustrate the operation  of magical projection, which I have practised myself, and  partly taught. 

But here a caution is necessary — though this method became  known to me by study and reflection before I was initiated 

1 Resurgam was the Order name — the so-called magical motto — of  Dr. Berridge. (Editorial Note.)  IMAGINATION AND WILL-POWER 


into the G.D., so I only deemed it safe to entrust the process  to two others, who I knew could be trusted. 

It must never be forgotten that an occult process which  may be used for good may also be used for evil. A black magi-  cian possessed of this knowledge might strengthen himself  thereby, and protect himself from the danger of the recoil of his  own evil actions on the occult plane, and so become energised  for further evil. Added to which — one knowledge leads to  another, and a single clue may lead to further important dis-  coveries. 

The more I reflect on the matter, the more I feel convinced  that this knowledge should not pass beyond our Order. 


First Illustration 

A few years ago, I noticed that invariably after a prolonged  interview with a certain person, I felt exhausted. 

At first, I thought it only the natural result of a long con-  versation with a prosy, fidgetty, old gentleman; but later it  dawned upon me, that being a man of exhausted nervous vita-  lity, he was really preying upon me. I don’t suppose that he  was at all externally conscious that he possessed a vampire  organisation, for he was a benevolent kind-hearted man, who  would have shrunk in horror from such a suggestion. 

Nevertheless, he was, in his inner personality an intentional  vampire, for he acknowledged that he was about to marry a  young wife in order, if possible, to recuperate his exhausted  system. 

The next time, therefore, that he was announced, I closed  myself to him, before he was admitted. I imagined that I had  formed myself a complete investiture of odic fluid, surrounding  me on all sides, but not touching me, and impenetrable to any  hostile currents. 

This magical process was immediately and permanently suc-  cessful — I never had to repeat it. 


Second Illustration 

A lady, hoping to develop herself spiritually had allowed  FLYING ROLL NO. V 

herself to become passively mediumistic, and her health began  to fail. 

On one occasion, feeling very weak, she asked me to mes-  merise her. I availed myself of this opportunity, and while  apparently only making mesmeric passes over her I occultly  surrounded her with a protective aura as in my own case. The  result was successful, she improved in strength, and, as a well-  known student of occultism observed to me, ‘she looked more  human’; and with all this, her mediumistic experiences ceased.  Had she followed my advice, and held herself positive; I believe  she would have fully recovered her health and strength; but  she again drifted back into her former condition of passive  mediumship, her health broke down, and after a lingering ill-  ness, she died. 

I had not been initiated into the G.D. then, or should have  afterwards used the Banishing Pentagram for my own pro-  tection. About two weeks after, I had a vivid dream that I was  endeavouring to evoke an elemental, which attacked me, causing  a sudden choking in the throat, and an electric shock in the  body. The dream had an astrological meaning; and at the same  time I believe it had a physical basis and that same vampirising  spirit which had been preying on its victim, determined to  attack me, in revenge for having thwarted its designs. 

Third Illustration 

A lady asked my occult aid against a man whom she often  met, whose presence invariably made her exhausted and ill. 

He had bad health, and I judged it to be another case of  vampirising. 

1 obtained a description of this man, but without telling the  process, or when I would undertake it. 

First, I imagined they stood facing each other; then I inter-  posed a shield of defence. I then formed round her a complete  investiture of odic fluid . 2 I also made the ordinary Invoking  Pentagram upon her for protection. The injurious effects which 

2 The phrase ‘odic fluid’ is derived from nineteenth-century mes-  merism. It is roughly equivalent to the Astral Light of Levi and the  Akasha of the Theosophists. (Editorial Note.)  IMAGINATION AND WILL-POWER 

she had formerly experienced never returned and she remained  ever completely passive to him. 

Fourth Illustration 

A lady told me of a man who exercised a peculiar fascination  over her; she was always thinking of him, although she did  not care for him. 

As I had received some intimation that he had some acquain-  tance with Voodoo magic I determined to sever the chain. 

I imagined they stood facing each other and that he had  thrown out currents of odic fluid, which had entangled her in  their meshes. Then I imagined a sword in my hand with which  I severed them, and then with a torch burnt up the ends of the  filaments still floating round her. 

The unnatural fascination soon ceased and in a few months,  their acquaintance came to an end. 

Fifth Illustration 

A man complained to me, that some years ago, he was con-  stantly having another man make use of a peculiarly profane  expression, which ever after haunted him, obtruding itself into  his mind at the most inopportune times. 

It seemed to me that the words constituted what the Oriental  occultists call a mantram; that is, a word or phrase which can  produce occult effects by setting up vibrations in the akasa. 

I judged that some elemental had been vitalised thereby, and  had attached itself to a sensitive. I advised him the next time  the phrase troubled him — first to imagine he saw before him  some horrible creature as the embodiment of the profanity itself  — next to hold this creature firmly before him, and then to send  forth an occult dynamite shell, penetrating into the elemental,  and then exploding and blowing it to atoms. 

When I next saw him he said that he had not succeeded in  disintegrating the elemental, but that he had driven it away,  and was now very little troubled by it. 

One further caution may be made in conclusion. 

While it is always lawful, and often advisable, to consult with  some higher Adept before commencing any important magical  FLYING ROLL NO. V 


work; yet, in every other direction, absolute secrecy must be  maintained until the work be done. If it be talked about to  others it tends to decentralise it, and so dissipate the force, be-  sides running the risk of meeting with inharmonious currents  from their minds. 

If it be mentioned to the one on whose behalf the work is  done, it tends to disturb his equilibrium by causing a state of  nervous expectancy, which is unfavourable for the reception  of the Occult good intended. 


Supplementary Remarks  By G. H. Fra. N.O.M . 3 

The paper now read by our V. H. Frater Resurgam seems to  me to require a preliminary chapter of introductory and more  simple matter. 

His remarks are valuable, and his instances are such as you  may yet each possibly attain to the performance of; they are  a credit to himself. 

I can only add a few notes. 

Imagination must be distinguished from Fancy — from mere  roving thoughts, or empty visions: By it we now mean an  orderly and intentional mental process, and result. 

Imagination is the Creative Faculty of the human mind, the  plastic energy — the Formative Power. 

In the language of Esoteric Theosophists, the power of the  Imagination to create thought forms is called KRIYA SAKTI,  that is the mysterious power of thought which enables it to  produce external phenomenal, perceptible results by its own  inherent energy when fertilised by the Will. 

It is an ancient Hermetic dogma that any idea can be made  to manifest externally if only, by culture, the art of concentra-  tion be obtained; just similarly is an external result produced  by a current of Will Force. 

The Qabalah taught that man, by his creative power through 

*The initials are short for Non Omtiis Mo riar, one of the magical  mottoes of Wynn Westcott. (Editorial Note.)  IMAGINATION AND WILL-POWER 

Will and Thought — was more Divine than Angels; for he can  create — they cannot. He is a step nearer the Demiurgos, the  Creative Deity — even now that he is encased in matter — nearer  than the Angelic Hosts although each Angel is a Spirit only —  and not tainted with matter. 

Even the orthodox conception of an Angel is that of a being  who executes commands and not of one who originates, creates,  and acts ‘de novo'.  Flying Roll No. I, Part II 

A Subject for Contemplation  By G. H. Frater N.O.M. 


To obtain magical power, one must strengthen the will. Let  there be no confusion between will and desire. You cannot will  too strongly, so do not attempt to will two things at once,  and while willing one thing do not desire others. 


Example 

You may at times have passed a person in the street, and as  soon as passed may have felt some attraction, and the will to  see him again; turning round (you) may have found that he  also turned to you. 

The will, although untrained, may have alone done this. But  if you, untrained, walk out again, and decide to make the  experiment of Willing that he who passes you shall turn round,  and try it, you will fail. Because the desire of gratifying your  curiosity has weakened the force of your will.  Flying Roll No. II, Part I 

A Subject for Contemplation  By G. H. Frater N.O.M. 

Before even strength of will, you must have purity of body,  mind, intellect and of emotion if you hope for magical power. 

The spiritual powers will flourish only as you starve the  animal soul, and the animal soul is largely dependent on the  state and treatment of the animal body. The animal man is to  be cared for and protected, kept in health and strength, but  not petted. 

Be moderate in all things human. Extreme ascetic habits, are  to you here, a source of another danger, they may lead only  to a contemplation of your own Heroism, in being abstinent.  To be truly ascetic is indeed to submit to discipline and to  curb unruly emotions, thoughts and actions. But, who is a slave  to his animal soul, will practice vice even in a Forest; while  he who restrains himself among the crowds of a city, and passes  through a busy life — unpolluted, shows more resistance and  suffers a severer discipline, and shall obtain a greater reward.  Flying Roll No. II, Part II 

Remarks upon Subject for Contemplation  By V. H. Fra Levavi Oculos 4 

Spiritual power results from the transmutation of the gross  animal nature. The various centres of sensation in the human  body can be harmonised by the equipose or circulation of the  contrary forces of attraction and repulsion — or, on the other  hand, the vehicle of excess. 

If ‘Our God is superlative in His unity’, analogy must follow  between the greater and lesser worlds. 

One of Danton’s clairvoyants once described a lake of gold  in the centre of the earth, and we have the injunction ‘visita  interiora terrae, etc.’ The primum mobile of even a common-  place vessel is placed in the centre of the ship. Now, the place  of power and seat of equipoise is in numbers; the number 5 as has  been pointed out : — 

1234 56789. 

That is the Sephira Geburah ‘Where there is Gold’, whose  lineal figures traced with the single point uppermost is the most  powerful continuous symbol there is.® 

By the sign of the Microcosm is symbolized the athanor of  the Alchemists — at everybody’s hand without their knowing  it. 

‘A strong and decided will’, says Levi, ‘can in a short space  of time arrive at absolute independence’. 

This condition of equipoise is therefore necessary before the  manipulation of the will is even possible; and will is some-  thing more than the ascending of our higher desires over the  lower, being a kind of electric force, the executive of desire. 

In this light it is the creative power, which fashions accord-  ing to the ideal forms or subsisting types. It is therefore through  the agency of the will that the hidden becomes manifest,  whether in the Universe or Man. 

4 Levavi Oculos was the magical motto of P. W. Bullock (Editorial  Note). 

5 1 .e. — the Pentagram. (Editorial Note.)  IMAGINATION AND WILL-POWER 

The student has to learn to arouse those forces within him  or her self. 

This masterly indifference is the great theme of the Bhaga-  vada Gita and the Indian Yogis — in fact both East and West  unite in teaching us to preserve that equal mean between two  extremes, which is the law of immortality.  Flying Roll No. II, Part III 

Three Suggestions on Will Power  By 

S.S.D.D. 

Head i. In studying the nature of the will force we are aided  by our Minutum Mundi scheme. Mars, Geburah, Fire, Aries,  each expressive of the will force on different planes, are all  red in colour. The Red Lion was used as a symbol by the Alche-  mists to express the highest powers of the Adept. The whiteness  of purity having been attained, the heat must be violently  increased, until the redness of perfect strength manifests itself.  Head 2. Now the danger which attends our labours arises  from attempting to exercise this will power, before we have  purged ourselves of ignorance and darkness. 

Until we know we must refrain from doing. This sounds as  if the case was pretty hopeless; but we have each in our own  persons all the materials for experiment, and as long as we  desire light, and do all we know to obtain it, we are not likely  to do ourselves permanent harm; but at the same time we can-  not be too careful in applying the very superficial magical know-  ledge we have at present to others, especially to those who are  uninitiated. The danger I have found is that though the first step  is most difficult, I mean it is extremely difficult to gain control  over another's will so as to alter their natural tendencies; yet  this once done the force you have set in motion becomes almost  uncontrollable, the other individual seems sometimes to only  live in your presence, and the last state of that person is worse  than the first. This is a noticeable feature in the cases of those  who have been cured by faith healers; or professional hypnotists.  Head 3. Having explained these dangers, the method I advise  for cultivation of will is, to imagine your head as centre of  attraction with thoughts like rays radiating out in a vast globe.  To want or desire a thing is the first step in the exercise of  Will; get a distinct image of the thing you desire placed, as it  * The initials stand for Sapicntia Sapicnti Dona Data, the magical  motto of Florence Farr. (Editorial Note.)  IMAGINATION AND WILL-POWER 

were, in your heart, concentrate all your wandering rays of  thought upon this image until you feel it to be one glowing  scarlet ball of compacted force. Then project this concentrated  force on the subject you wish to affect.  Flying Roll No. VI 

Concerning Flying Roll No. II  A Note by G. H. Frater  D.D.C.F. 7 — 7° = 4° 

With regard to the admirable note by V. H. Soror S.S.D.D. on  Will Power and Use — I would suggest that: — 

Before bringing the scarlet ray into such intense action in  the Heart, as is explained by her, that the Adept should elevate  his thought and idea to the contemplation of the Divine Light in  Kether, and considering Kether as the crown of the head,  to endeavour to bring a ray from thence, into his heart — his  Tiphereth through his path of Gimel and then to send the scarlet  ray into action; the effect will be powerful and the process  safer : otherwise there is a risk to the heart, and a risk of fever,  ff it be frequently done. 

7 These are the initials of the Deo Duce Comite Ferro, one of the  magical mottoes of S. L. MacGregor Mathers. (Editorial Note.)  Astral Projection 

being 

Flying Roll No. IV  Flying Roll No. XI  Flying Roll No. XXV  Flying Roll No. XXX  Flying Roll No. XXVI  Flying Roll No. XXXIII 




Prefatory Note 


I feel it advisable to preface the following material with a short  note on the Golden Dawn technique of using symbols as a  means of obtaining controlled astral visions; that is to say,  meaningful, extremely vivid, and completely coherent day-  dreams in which the dreamer retains all his normal powers of  choice, will-power and judgment. In these dreams, so it is  believed, the seer is enabled to come into contact with deepest  levels of what Jungian depth-analysts call the Collective Un-  conscious and the mediaeval Hermetic philosophers called Anitna  Mundi — the Soul of the World. 

The process used is best described as auto-hypnosis by means  of a symbol. The seer begins by holding before his mind a  symbol — it may be physically present, painted on a card, or,  more difficult, formulated in the imagination only — and persists  in this until no other factor is consciously present in his think-  ing. He then, in his mind’s eye, deliberately transforms the  symbol into a vast door (or sometimes a curtain, ornamented with  the symbol), wills the door to swing open, passes through it  in imagination, and allows the day-dream to commence. It is  perhaps worth saying that most experimenters with this tech-  nique have found that the dream experienced bears a real  relationship to the symbol used. Thus if the seer uses a symbol  equating with Elemental Fire he may find himself near a vol-  cano or observing the self-immolation of a Phoenix, but never  will he find himself bathing in a lake or flying through the air. 1 

The symbols normally used by the beginner in this practice  were, and are, the Tattvas and sub-Tattvas, coloured symbols  of the Elements and sub-Elements. These simple geometic forms,  which Mathers and his fellow Chiefs seem to have derived from  an early Theosophical treatise, Nature’s Finer Forces, by Rama 

1 This congruence between symbol used and vision experienced  was described by W. B. Yeats in The Trembling of the Veil, Book  III, Section II-VI inclusive. Yeats claimed that he had made York  Powell talk of a burning house at a dinner party by imagining Tejas,  the Fire Tattva.  Prasad, are five in number and from them are obtained a further  twenty sub-symbols. The five mother-symbols are Tejas, a red  equilateral triangle representing Elemental Fire, Prithivi, a yel-  low square representing Elemental Earth, Apas, a silver horizon-  tal lunar crescent representing Elemental Water, Vayu, a blue  circle representing Elemental Water, and Akas, a violet-black  egg shape representing Elemental Spirit. The twenty sub-Tattvas  are formed by taking a mother-symbol and placing in the midst  of it a small-scale representation of any of the four symbols.  The various sub-symbols must not be confused with one another.  For example Tejas of Prithivi, Fire of Earth, represented by a  small red triangle on a yellow square, is a very different thing  from Prithivi of Tejas, Earth of Fire, represented by a small  yellow square on a red triangle. 

After Tattva-vision had been thoroughly mastered the Golden  Dawn initiate went on to the use of more complex symbols,  for example the Tarot trumps and the strange sigils of Phaleg,  Ophiel and the other Olympic Planetary Spirits. The really  advanced students used the so-called Enochian Pyramids 2 as  their doors to the Unseen. 

It may be that some of my readers may wish to undertake  personal experimentation with this method of astral explora-  tion. If so, they should bear in mind that any traditional symbol  may be used to induce the required state of auto-hypnosis. Thus  some contemporary occultists use the sixty-four Hexagrams of  the Chinese Yi King, simple black and white symbols, made up  of whole and broken lines, which are held much more easily  in the imagination than more complex glyphs such as the Tarot  trumps. If the Yi King is used in this way there seems to be,  once again, a real causative link between the symbol used and  the visions experienced. This connection is splendidly illustrated  by an experience undergone by W. B. Seabrook, the American  journalist and traveller. 

2 The last Flying Roll printed in this section is concerned with  visions obtained in this way. I have therefore felt it advisable to  give a brief explanation of the Enochian magical system, its letter-  squares, and the Sphinxes and Pyramids derived from these letter-  squares, in Appendix B of this book.  Seabrook had been experimenting for a year or so with ‘travel-  ng through the door’ — he had probably learnt the technique  rom Aleister Crowley, with whom he had at one time been  riendly, using a Yi King Hexagram, chosen at random by  hrowing tortoise-shell sticks in the air, as the symbol on the  oor. Seabrook himself does not seem to have had any parti-  ularly interesting experiences beyond the door, and he usually  aund himself looking for a mysterious lost object, the exact  ature of which he remained unaware. His friends seem to have  een more fortunate; one was transformed from a staid Profes-  ar of Greek into a wanton female Corybant, another found him-  ;lf in the body of a mediaeval Benedictine monk. The really  xciting and significant experience was undergone by an ex-  inger named Nastatia Filipovna, a White Russian refugee. 

Nastatia had been experimenting with astral projection for  ame time, obtaining the required disassociation of conscious-  ess by gazing fixedly into a crystal ball. No symbol was used,  nd the experiences she underwent were unpleasant, mono-  mous, and completely outside her conscious control; almost  [ways she found herself in a primitive nomadic camp, engaged  1 skinning and gutting a dead bear with a stone knife. 

In the summer of 1923 Nastatia re-met Seabrook, an old  cquaintance whom she had not seen for some years, and told  im of her crystal gazing and its unsatisfactory results. In re-  am Seabrook told her of the use of the Yi King Hexagrams in  stral travel; inevitably Nastatia wanted to try the experiment  nd asked her friend to arrange it. Seabrook agreed and took  er along to the scarlet draped studio of }ohn Bannister, a  r ealthy occult dilettante, where they were joined by a young  nglishman, the British vice-consul in New York, who was  nxious to witness anything that might happen. 

The experiment began with the tortoise-shell sticks — notched  n one side, smooth on the other — being thrown into the air.  hey fell in a pattern which formed Ko, the forty-ninth Hexa-  ram. 

Nastatia knelt in the centre of the semi-dark studio, her eyes  tosed, formulating the Hexagram in her imagination. For three  ours there was silence, save for a complaint from Nastatia  about her aching knees. Then she spoke : 

The door is moving. The door is opening. But it’s opening  into the outdoors ! I supposed it would open into another room.  Its beautiful out there . . . and yes . . . I’m going. 

‘Snow ... everything’s white ... everywhere snow, and the  moon . . . the moon on the white snow . . . and black trees there  against the sky. Yes, I’m outside now, I am lying in the snow  . . . pressed against the snow ... I am not cold ... I am wearing  a fur coat . . . and I am warm in the snow . . . flat with my belly  and chin on the snow I lie. It is good to lie warm in the snow.  I am moving now . . . but I am not walking I am crawling on  my hands and knees ... why am I crawling? I’m not crawling  now, I’m running, on my hands and feet, lightly . . . now ! now !  now ! ... I’m running lightly like the wind . . . how good the  snow smells ! I have never smelled the snow before. And there’s  another good smell. Ah ! Ah ! Faster . . . faster. . . .’ 

Seabrook said that by this time Nastatia ‘was breathing  heavily, panting. Her big handsome mouth was open, drooling.  And when she next broke silence, it was with sounds that were  not human. There were yelps, slaverings, panting, and then a  deep baying such as only two sorts of animals on earth emit  when they are running — hounds and wolves.’ 

All three observers were alarmed by the girl’s condition and  the Englishman attempted to bring her round by slapping her  cheeks. Nastatia’s reaction was astonishing; she snarled and  leapt, fortunately unsuccessfully, at the vice-consul’s throat.  Falling back to the ground she crawled, snarling, into a corner of  the studio. Seabrook described how he and his companions dealt  with the crisis : 

‘We had the lights on, snared her in big blankets, wrapped her  tight as she struggled like a maniac, put ammonia under her  nose, and she came out of it. 

‘We helped her to a couch. We brought a towel and a basin.  We didn’t talk much. We brought her brandy. In a few minutes  she made us find her handbag with powder and makeup. She  went into the bathroom. She came out and sank into an arm-  chair and lighted a cigarette and said “What time is it?” ’ 

It might be thought that Nastatia’s experience was simply a  rather nasty case of wish fulfilment, that beneath her placid  Slav exterior she nursed a bestial desire to rip, tear, kill and revel  in blood — such unpleasant fantasies are not uncommon. I think  that this was probably so, and I have no doubt that the particular  form the girl’s animal transformation took was conditioned by  her own unconscious desires; but the really interesting thing is  that there was an animal transformation. For Ko, the name of  the Hexagram used, literally means skin, hide, fur, an animal  pelt, moulting. Even more significant are the traditional Chinese  commentaries on the lines of this Hexagram. One of them reads  ‘wrapped in the hide of a yellow cow’, another reads ‘the great  man changes like a tiger’, still another reads ‘the superior man  is transformed into a panther’. All of them express the idea of  transformation in one form or another — so there was a link  between Nastatia’s experience and the symbol she used; a link of  which she herself was unaware, for her personal knowledge of  the Yi King was limited to what little Seabrook had told her of  the subject. 

I do not think that the average astral experimenter is likely  to undergo such odd experiences as the one I have related — even  if he or she is using the forty-ninth Hexagram of the Yi King —  but I would advise those who are worried by the possibility to  confine themselves to the Golden Dawn symbols and their use  as taught in the Flying Rolls printed in the following section.  Flying Roll No. IV 

An Example of Mode of Attaining to Spirit  Vision and What was seen by Two Adepti — 

S.S.D.D. and F. 3 on November 10th 1892. 

Secure for an hour or for longer absolute freedom from inter-  ruption. Then alone, or with one or two other Adepti, enter the  vault, or a private chamber. Remain in silence and contempla-  tion for several minutes. 

Rise, and perform the Qabalistic Cross and prayer. Then pro-  ceed to contemplation of some object, say a Tarot Trump : either  by placing it before you and gazing at it, until you seem to see  into it; or by placing it against your forehead or elsewhere, and  then keeping the eyes closed; in this case you should have given  previous study to the Card, as to its symbolism, colouring, analo-  gies, etc. 

In either case you should then deeply sink into the abstract  ideal of the card; being in entire indifference to your surround-  ings. If the mind wanders to anything disconnected with the  card, no beginner will succeed in seeing anything spiritually. 

Consider all the symbolism of the Tarot Card, then all that is  implied by its letters, number, and situation, and the paths con-  nected therewith. 

The vision may begin by the concentration passing into a state  of reverie; or with a distinct sense of change, something allied in  sensation to a faint, with a feeling urging you to resist, but if  you are highly inspired, fear not, do not resist, let yourself go;  and then the vision may pass over you. 

If you have anything occur or disturb you, you will come to  readily enough — or as from a doze; otherwise the vision ends  of itself, or some can check it by will, at any stage, others can  not, at first, at any rate. 


Example 

3 The meaning of S.S.D.D. has already been explained; F. was  Fidelis, the magical motto of Elaine Simpson, who later became the  mistress of Aleister Crowley. (Editorial Note.)  The Tarot Trump, the Empress 4 was taken; placed before the  persons and contemplated upon, spiritualised, heightened in  colouring, purified in design and idealised. 

In vibratory manner pronounced Daleth. Then, in spirit, saw  a greenish blue distant landscape, suggestive of mediaeval tapes-  try. Effort to ascend was then made; rising on the planes; seemed  to pass up through clouds and then appeared a pale green land-  scape and in its midst a Gothic Temple of ghostly outlines  marked with light. Approached it and found the temple gained  in definiteness and was concrete, and seemed a solid structure.  Giving the signs of the Netzach Grade (because of Venus) was  able to enter; giving also Portal signs and 5 0 = 6° signs in thought  form. Opposite the entrance perceived a Cross with three bars  and a dove upon it; and beside this, were steps leading down-  wards into the dark, by a dark passage. Here was met a beauti-  ful green dragon, who moved aside, meaning no harm, and the  spirit vision passed on. Turning a corner and still passing on in  the dark emerged from the darkness on to a marble terrace  brilliantly white, and a garden beyond, with flowers, whose  foliage was of a delicate green kind and the leaves seemed to  have a white velvety surface beneath. Here, there appeared a  woman of heroic proportions, clothed in green with a jewelled  girdle, a crown of stars on her head, in her hand a sceptre of  gold, having at one apex a lustrously white closed lotus flower;  in her left hand an orb bearing a cross.* 

She smiled proudly, and as the human spirit sought her name,  replied : 

‘I am the mighty Mother Isis; most powerful of all the world,  I am she who fights not, but is always victorious, I am that  Sleeping Beauty who men have sought, for all time; and the  paths which lead to my castle are beset with dangers and illu-  sions. Such as fail to find me sleep; — or may ever rush after the  Fata Morgana leading astray all who feel that illusory influence  — I am lifted up on high, and do draw men unto me, I am the 

4 Corresponding to the Hebrew letter Daleth according to the G.D.  system. (Editorial Note.) 

* She has a shield with a dove upon it — S.A. (Wynn Westcott.)  FLYING ROLL NO. IV 

worlds’ desire, but few there be who find me. When my secret  is told, it is the secret of the Holy Grail.’ Asking to learn it, (she)  replied : — 

‘Come with me, but first clothe in white garments, put on  your insignia, and with bared feet follow where I shall lead.’  Arriving at length at a Marble Wall, pressed a secret spring,  and entered a small compartment, where the spirit seemed to  ascend through a dense vapour, and emerged upon a turret of a  building. Perceived some object in the midst of the place, but  was forbidden to look at it until permission was accorded.  Stretched out the arms and bowed the head to the Sun which  was rising a golden orb in the East. Then turning, knelt with  the face towards the centre, and being permitted to raise the  eyes beheld a cup with a heart and the sun shining upon these;  there seemed a clear ruby coloured fluid in the cup. Then ‘Lady  Venus’ said ‘This is love, I have plucked out my heart and have  given it to the world; that is my strength. Love is the mother of  the Man — God, giving the Quintessence of her life to save man-  kind from destruction, and to show forth the path to life eternal.  Love is the mother of the Christ — 

‘Spirit, and this Christ is the highest love — Christ is the heart  of love, the heart of the Great Mother Isis — the Isis of Nature.  He is the expression of her power — she is the Holy Grail, and  He is the life blood of spirit, that is found in this cup.’ 

After this, being told that man’s hope lay in following her  example, we solemnly gave our hearts to the keeping of the  Grail; then, instead of feeling death, as our human imagination  led us to expect, we felt an influx of the highest courage and  power, for our own hearts were to be henceforth in touch with  hers — the strongest force in all the world. 

So then we went away, feeling glad that we had learned that  ‘He who gives away his life, will gain it’. For that love which  is power, is given unto him, — who hath given away his all for  the good of others.  Flying Roll No. XI 

Clairvoyance 

By G. H. Frater D.D.C.F. 

In order to obtain a clear idea of the relation of Man to the  Universe, and to the spiritual planes, it is necessary to under-  stand and perceive that the scheme of the Ten Sephiroth, and  their symbolic representation as the Tree of Life is to be applied  both to the Macrocosm and to the Microcosm; to the Celestial  Heavens to Stars, Planets, the World, and to Man. One aspect of  this assertion that has been recently pointed out to you, and  has been demonstrated to you on the globe, is in reference to the  scheme of Divination; you must further extend this idea when  considering the rationale of Clairvoyance and must recognise  a Sephirotic arrangement in the constitution of every Star, and  of every atom, of Man and his principles. 

We look above us into heaven, and see the Stars, and it is  commonly supposed that we see the material globes, their Mal-  kuth, but they are complex in constitution and we see but their  luminous aura or atmospheres, containing the rest of the Sephi-  roth, etc., or a reflection of them. 

Then as to ourselves, we must never forget our own complex  Sephirotic symbolism, and that our bodies that we feed and  clothe are but our Malkuth on its lowest plane, and that the  higher nine Sephiroth hover around us in our auras, or atmos-  phere. 

We pass through life affecting others, and being affected by  others through these akashic envelopes that closely surround us —  so that when we close the eyes of the body and senses upon the  material world, we first apprehend by interior vision the essences  of our own and contiguous natures. This perception of our own  environment is a source of error to the beginner in Clairvoyance;  for he believes himself to have gone away and to see elsewhere,  and may be but among the confused images of his own aura. 

An old name of Clairvoyance, in our ancient MSS was ‘Stay-  ing in the Spirit Vision’; becoming a ‘Stayer’ was not simply  becoming a Seer, but one who descries what he seeks, not only  the impassive receiver of visions beyond control or definition. 

When one stands in common life in the kingdom of Malkuth,  there is but little confusion of sight, but when one voluntarily  leaves the dead level of materialism and passes up the Path of  Tau towards Yesod, then there is a confusion of lights; one  comes within the scope of the crossing, and reflected, and  coloured, rays of the Qesheth, the Rainbow of colours spread  over the earth, and here then we require instruction and guid-  ance to avoid confusion and folly. And yet this stage must be  passed through — to go higher. 

Beyond Yesod you enter the path of Samekh, the strait and  narrow path which leads to truly spiritual regions of perception,  this is attained by the process called Rising in the Planes. 

Our subject falls most conveniently into three heads, which  are however, closely related, and the three forms or stages pass  one into the other. 

1. Clairvoyance. Descrying in the Spirit Vision. 

2. Astral projection. Travelling in the Spirit Vision. 

3. Rising in the Planes. 

Begin with simple Clairvoyance, and then pass to the other  states. 

It is well to commence this form of practical occultism by  means of a Symbol, such as a drawing, or coloured diagram,  related in design, form and colour to the subject chosen for  study. The simple and compound Tattva emblems are suitable  for this process. It is better for them not to be in the com-  plementary 'flashing’ colours for this purpose as though more  powerful, they are also more exhausting to the student. The  Symbol should be of convenient size, for the eye to take it in at a  glance, and large enough not to require too close an application  of sight to realise the details. 

There are several scales of colour, but for our present purpose  we need only note two. Firstly, the scale of the King, that of the  G.D.; and that of the Adept Minor. Scarlet is Fire, Yellow is Air,  Blue is Water, Four dull colours are Earth and White is Spirit.  Secondly, the Tattva scheme, which is nearly the same as our  FLYING ROLL NO. XI 

scale of the Queen, which is applied also to the Sephirotic  colours in the Minutum Mundum Diagram. Red is Fire, greyish  White is Water, Golden Yellow is Earth, Blue (greenish) is Air,  Violet Black is Akasha or Spirit. 

Tablets and Telesmas are described as being made in Flashing  Colours, when in one tablet, a certain colour and its direct com-  plementary are shown in opposition and shine by contrast. In  such tablets do the elemental forces manifest most readily, and  most students can perceive their flashes of radiance, which are,  however, partly subjective and partly objective. They attract  and reflect the rays of light from the akashic plane enveloping 

them. 

These tablets when formed by an Adept of high spiritual  attainments receive from him a charge of akashic force of a  magnetic character; as line by line and colour by colour is added,  the Telesma grows in virtue as well as progresses to completion.  But the beginner fails, thus, to impregnate his work with his  vital astral force and his finished Telesma needs a ceremony of  consecration, after which the figure should remain sacred to his  touch alone. All Telesma, however, are better consecrated cere-  monially, for they then hold more firmly the ‘charge’ of force,  and if carefully preserved, apart from contamination, and from  influence by other Telesma, will retain force for an indefinite  period. All powerful Occult work, such as this, exhausts the  Vital force, especially from beginners, and you will feel at first  distinct exhaustion from loss of akasha, which however is not  lost but transferred to the symbol and there preserved, fading  away from thence, only slowly into the ocean of energies. 

To use the Symbol for Clairvoyance, place it before you, as on  a table, place the hands beside it, or hold it up with both hands, 

then, with the utmost concentration, gaze at it, comprehend it,  formulate its meaning and relations. When the mind is steady  upon it : close the eyes and continue the meditation, and let the  conception still remain before you, keep up the design, form,  and colour in the akashic aura, as clearly as they appeared in  material form to the outward seeing. Transfer the Vital effort  from the optic nerve to the mental perception, or thought seeing  as distinct from seeing with the eye; let one form of apprehen-  sion glide on with the other — produce the reality of the dream  vision, by positive will in the waking state. All this will be only  possible if the mind is steady, clear and undisturbed and the will  powerful. It cannot lead to success if you are in an unsuitable  state of anxiety, fear, indignation, trouble or anticipation. You  must procure peace, solitude and leisure and you must banish all  disturbing influences. 

But, above all, never attempt these Magic Arts if there be any  resentment in the mind, anger, or any evil passion; for if you  do, the more you succeed, the greater will be the evil that will  follow — for yourself. 

With the condition favourable, the process may be continued,  and this, by means of introducing into the Consciousness and by  formulating into sound, the highest Divine Names connected  therewith; this invocation produces and harmonises currents of  spiritual force in sympathy with your object. Then follow with  the sacred names of Archangelic and Angelic import, producing  them mentally, visually and by voice. 

Then, maintaining your abstraction from your surroundings,  and still concentrating upon the symbol and its correlated ideas,  you are to seek a perception of a scene, panorama, or view of a  place. This may also be brought on by a sense of tearing open,  as a curtain is drawn aside and seeing the ‘within’ of the symbol  before you. As the scene dawns upon you, particularise the  details, and seek around for objects, and then for beings, entities  and persons — attract their attention, call mentally to them by  suitable titles and courtesies, and by proper and appropriate  signs and symbols, such as the signs of the Grades, Pentagrams,  etc. Test them by divine and angelic names, observing their  attitude and responses thereto. Thus losing sight of the symbol,  you see its inwardness, perceive things as in a mirror by Reflec-  tion. In this form of Descrying, note, that you see objects  reversed, as to right and left, for which suitable allowance must  be made. You project, in this process, part of your own nerve  and spirit force upon the symbol, and by this you attract and  attach to it more akashic force from the environment, hence the  results obtained. If, instead of this Simple Spirit Vision, a ray of  yourself is sent and actually goes to a place (astral projection)  FLYING ROLL NO. XI 

there is not necessarily the sense of reversal of objects. 

In using Symbols it is necessary to avoid Self hypnotisation,  for this occurrence would dispose you to mediumship, and to be  the playground of forces you must control, and not permit to  control you. For this reason, partly, it is well not to have the  Symbol too small. It is of advantage to pursue these researches  with the aid of the presence before you of the four Magical  Implements, and even to hold the one suitable to the investiga-  tion. If you enter upon the Spirit Vision without a Symbol you  proceed by a mental symbol, imagined in the Astral Light : this  is not a wise proceeding for learners because it opens the door  to other Astral effects; you create a vortex, into which other  astral influences are drawn and hence confusion and mischief  may result. 

The process of working by a small symbol placed upon the  forehead, or elsewhere, is not wholly good; it is more liable to  derange the Brain circulation and cause mental illusion and dis-  turbance, headache, and nervous exhaustion than the first  method. 

In using symbols, placed before you — it is a useful addition to  provide a large circular (or square) tablet, around which are  placed Divine Names etc. related to the Elements, and to the  cardinal points; then after arranging this duly, with respect to  the compass, place your symbol upon and within this frame. 

Astral Projection, although from one point of thought a  development of Clairvoyance, yet is from another distinct: in  Astral Projection, the Adept emits from his Ego a perceptible ray  of his identity, and by cultured and instructed Will, sends it to  travel to the place desired, focusses it there, sees there — directly  and not by reflection — perceives its bodily home, and re-enters  it. 

In this Travelling of the Spirit the process may be caused to  start also by the Symbol, as before, or by Will alone; but anyway  the Divine names should be used and relied upon. If the ray be  emitted, and you succeed in this travelling to the place — you  perceive a different result to that of the clairvoyant, mirror-like  vision — scenes and things instead of being like a picture, have  the third dimension, solidity, they stand out first like has relief,  then you see as from a Balloon, as it is said, by a bird’s eye view.  You feel free to go to the place, to descend upon it, to step out  upon the scene, and to be an actor there. 

Having attained success in projection you should practice the  method when opportunity offers, and having passed to any  place, should make efforts — and if you Will — success will follow  — to pass through all elements, Water and Earth as well as  through Air — practice will enable you to fly through air either  quickly or slowly as willed, and to swim through water, or pass  through earth and through fire fearlessly with the aid of the  Divine Names, in this Astral Projection. 

Seek then the forms and persons of the place or of the Plane  you reach to, seek converse with them, by voice, word, letter and  symbol and claim admission etc. by signs, and by invocation.  Every figure is to be tried and tested, whether he be as he appears  or whether a delusive and deluding embodied power. It may be,  too, that your travel is not real, and that you are wandering in  your own environment, and are misled by memory etc.; hence  you might be self-deceiving by your own reminiscences. 

Try all beings, and if offered favours or initiation by any, try  and test them by Divine names and forces; and ever remember  your own Adept Obligation and your allegiance to it, to your  own Higher Self, and to the Great Angel HVA, before whom  you stood fastened to the Cross of Suffering, and to whom you  pledged your obedience. 

This old Proverb enshrines a great truth, as many of them do :  ‘Believe thyself there and thou art there.’ 

Rising in the Planes is a spiritual process after spiritual con-  ceptions, and higher aims; by concentration and contemplation  of the Divine, you formulate a Tree of Life passing from you to  the spiritual realms above and beyond you. Picture to yourself  that you stand in Malkuth — then by the use of the Divine  Names and aspirations you strive upward by the Path of Tau  toward Yesod, neglecting the crossing rays which attract you  as you pass up. Look upwards to the Divine Light shining down  from Kether upon you. From Yesod leads up the Path of Tem-  perance, Samekh, the arrow cleaving upward leads the way to  Tiphereth, the Great central Sun of Sacred Power.  FLYING ROLL NO. XI 

Invoke the Great Angel HU A, and conceive of yourself as  standing fastened to the Cross of Suffering, carefully vibrating  the Holy Names allied to your position, and so may the mental  Vision attain unto Higher Planes. 

There are three special tendencies to error and illusion which  assail the Adept in these studies. They are, Memory, Imagination  and actual Sight. These elements of doubt are to be avoided, by  the Vibration of Divine Names, and by the Letters and Titles of  the ‘Lords Who Wander’ — the Planetary Forces, represented by  the Seven double letters of the Hebrew alphabet. 

If the Memory entice thee astray, apply for help to Saturn  whose Tarot Title is the ‘Great One of the Night of Time’. 

Formulate the Hebrew letter Tau in Whiteness. 

If the Vision change or disappear, your memory has falsified  your efforts. If Imagination cheat thee, use the Hebrew letter  Kaph for the Forces of Jupiter, named ‘Lord of the Forces of  Life’. If the Deception be of Lying — intellectual untruth, appeal  to the Force of Mercury by the Hebrew letter Beth. If the trouble  be of Wavering of Mind, use the Hebrew letter Gimel for the  Moon. If the enticement of pleasure be the error, then use the  Hebrew letter Daleth as an aid. 4 

Never attempt any of these Divine processes when at all in-  fluenced by Passion or Anger or Fear — leave off if desire of sleep  approach, never force a mind disinclined. Balance the Mem and  the Shin of your nature and mind, so as to leave Aleph like a  gentle flame rising softly between them. 

You must do all these things by yourself alone. No one can  make you nor take you. Do not try to make, or take others. You  may only point out the Path, and guide but must not help  others. 

A strong person can galvanise a weak one, but its effect is only  a temporary folly, doing good neither to the strong nor to the  weak. Only offer guidance to those who are making necessary  efforts of themselves : don’t assist a negligent pupil, nor encour-  age one whose desire is not in the work. 

4 Use the Hebrew letter Peh for Mars to coerce sense of anger and  violence. Use the Hebrew letter Resh for the Sun to coerce sense of  haughtiness, vanity. (Note in original.)  This rule is open to some alteration when, passing from our  Mystic studies, you refer to the worldly guidance of childhood  — a parent is in a special position, and has a natural duty in-  cumbent upon him or her to train, guide, and protect a child. 

Still, even here, do protect and lead, but don’t ‘obsess’ a child,  don’t override by your peculiar personal predilections all the  personal aims of the offspring. A man’s ideal of true propriety is  often himself, and his idea of doing good to a child is to make it  like himself. Now, although this father may be a good man, his  form of goodness is not to be made a universal type, and there  are many other forms equally existing, and equally fit to exist,  and any attempt to dictate too closely a child's ‘thought life’  may, while failing of success, yet warp aside from the truth  what would otherwise pass into a Good Path, through its own  peculiar avenue. 

It is well to make all symbols for Clairvoyant use yourself,  otherwise, to obtain a purely individual result, you have to  banish the influence of him who made them. 

It is best to do high Clairvoyance alone, or only with others of  the utmost purity, and in whom you have the utmost confidence. 

If more than one, is attempting in concert the same process,  there is the source of error that there becomes formed in the  Astral Light a complex symbol, and a struggle ensues as to who  shall lead the direction of the currents. When two sit together,  as in the Vault, they should be balanced : and so with three.  For two; one each side of Pastos or one at each end; for three  assume the position of the angles of a triangle, say one at head  of Pastos, one at the Right and at the Left hand of the form of  Christian Rosycross. 


Example 

The V.H. Soror V.N.R. 6° = 5°, sat at a table, robed, and took  a Tattva card coloured symbol (Tejas — akasha) — an erect red  triangle, upon which is a dark violet black egg shaped centre.  She placed her hands beside her side, or held it in turns before  the eyes (held the Magic Fire Wand). Gazed and contemplated  FLYING ROLL NO. XI 

and considered as the Symbol grew before her, so enlarged and  filled the place, that she seemed to pass into it, or into a vast  triangle of flame. She realises that she is in the presence of a  desert of sand, harsh, dry and hot. 

Thinks of and vibrates — Elohim. Action seems set up, in-  crease of heat and light. Passing through the symbol and scene :  seems to arrive and descend there, feels the hot dry sand — per-  ceives a small pyramid in the distance — Wills to rise up and fly  through air to it, descends beside it, passes around, sees a small  square door on each side. Vibrates — ‘Elohim — Michael — Erel —  Seraph, Darom. Ash.’ 

Stamps five times — figure appears at an entrance, stamps  again five times and vibrates Seraphiel. A Warrior figure leads  out a procession of Guards, she asks for his Seal — he shows a  complex Symbol of four triangles around a central emblem — ?  deceptive. Draw Beth before him — he appears terrified. With-  draw Symbol — he is courteous — ask him about pyramid: he  says they conduct ceremonies there — she seeks admission —  gives sign of o° = o° — there is a sense of opposition — gives sign  1° = 10°, this appears to suffice — But he gives signs of Adeptship  — Guards kneel before her and she passes in — dazzling light, as  in a Temple. An Altar in the midst — kneeling figures surround  it, there is a dais beyond, and many figures upon it — they seem  to be Elementals of Fiery nature — she sees a Pentagram, puts a  Leo into it, thanks the figure who conducts her — Wills to pass  through the pyramid, finds herself out amid the sand. Wills her  return — returns — perceiving her body in Robes seated in the  Second Order Fall.  Flying RoU No. XXV 

Essay on Clairvoyance and Travelling in the Spirit  Vision 7 By Sub.Spe — Zelator Adeptus Minor 

The best theory of the phenomenon of Clairvoyance seems to be  founded on the relation between Man as the Microcosm and the  Universe as the Macrocosm; regarding the former as a reflection  in miniature of the latter, as in a grass field full of dewdrops each  drop might present a perfect tiny image of trees and mountains,  the sky, clouds, the sun and the stars. 

If, then, everything in the Cosmos is somehow reflected or  pictured on each man’s own sphere of sensation, or Akashic.  envelope, it follows that if he could but be conscious of the pic-  tures so reflected or imprinted he would at once be possessed of  all actual or potential knowledge of everything in the Cosmos,  and further assuming that time itself is merely an illusion, and  that the reality of things is, as it were, one vast picture along  which we travel seeing point after point in succession and pro-  ducing the idea of lapse of time, then it further follows that the  full and complete knowledge of all that is reflected in our sphere  of sensation includes all knowledge past, present and future. 

The reason, then, why we have not such knowledge con-  sciously to ourselves must be from the obtuseness of the Sensor-  ium, the actual physical brain, which cannot perceive the  images on the sphere of sensation. If, then, all knowledge lies  ■within each man’s own sphere, it is by looking within, or  intuition, that such knowledge is made available. 

Know thyself and thou wilt know everything. But seeing  that the brain and sensorium are physical, it is necessary at first  to use physical means to produce the sensitiveness necessary to  consciously perceive the images on the Sphere of Sensation. And  the readiest and safest means is the use of a symbol. This is fami-  liar in everyday life, but so much so as to escape notice. 

For example — to a depraved and debauched person an obscene 

7 A totally different version of this Flying Roll is given in Appendix  C of this book. (Editorial Note.)  word or figure — carelessly drawn and seen by chance, is a sym-  bol calling up a host of unclean images and ideas. To a lover  the name of his mistress spoken by chance in his hearing — the  sight of a colour she usually wears, or the scent of a familiar per-  fume will suffice to raise the image of the beloved form almost  visibly before him and to produce quickened pulse, heightened  colour, etc. 

To the soldier the sight of the flag of his country or his regi-  ment, produces visions of martial glory, ideas of devotion,  loyalty, patriotism and unflinching courage. 

In all these cases ideas and visions are produced in the brain  by the symbol, and if the above theory be accepted it follows  that the effect of the symbol is to render one portion of the  physical brain more sensitive, or it may be more translucent, so  that the images lying within the corresponding region of the  Sphere of Sensation may be dimly perceived (such sensitiveness  of brain may be produced in other ways, such as by Hypnotism  or self-induced Trance, by Obsession, Disease, etc. — but the  method by symbol seems to remain the surest and the best). 

This theory is made use of in the practice of inducing Clair-  voyance. 

A large number of well known and recognised symbols have  a definite relation to certain portions of the Sphere of Sensation  and the corresponding regions of the Cosmos, and also to the  regions related thereto of the physical brain. 

The experimenter should know thoroughly the attributions  and meanings of the symbol employed, as this knowledge pro-  duces an immediate concentration of thought, of vital energy,  of nerve force, and of actual physical blood on the tract of brain  related thereto, and thus materially aids the establishment of a  special sensitiveness there. 

Thus if the Tejas Tattva card be taken, the knowledge that it  belongs to fire will at once charge with nerve force and with  blood all the centres of the brain relating to fire, and will in-  voluntarily recall the various Divine and Spirit names which  the experimenter has learnt connected therewith. The actual  speaking of these with the solemnity and impressiveness of the  Vibration will increase the effect — gazing fixedly at the symbol  FLYING ROLL NO. XXV 

and touching the appropriate implement which is also a symbol  of the same brain tract, momentarily increases the force — vires  acquiret eundo — until every other brain cell is shut down,  muted and inhibited; the whole consciousness is concentrated  on the perception of fire. 

The physical brains thus become sensitive and translucent in  this respect and able to perceive dimly in the Sphere of sensation  the reflection of the Macrocosmic idea of fire, with all its con-  notations. 

The sensation is as though one stepped out through a window  into a new world. 

The reality probably is that the new sensitiveness enables the  actual physical brain to become conscious of ideas and pictures  hitherto unknown. 

At first it seems as though everything thus perceived were  just the product of one’s own imagination — i.e. that one simply  took scraps of memory, scraps of other men’s ideas gleaned from  books, pictures, etc. and built them up at will into a composite  picture. But a little further experience generally convinces one  that the new country one has become conscious of has its inviol-  able natural laws just as the physical world has : that one cannot  make or unmake at will, that the same causes produce the same  results, that one is in fact merely a spectator and in no sense a  creator. The conviction then dawns on one that one is actually  perceiving a new and much extended range of phenomena; that,  in fact, which is known as the Astral World or Astral Plane. 

Here, then, comes an experimental confirmation of the theory  above set forth, which will probably be deepened and intensified  with every experiment which is carefully made. 

Personal experience confirms the foregoing: On taking any  symbol whereof I know the meaning, such as a Tattva — or Tarot  card, the abstract idea of the meaning of the symbol comes first  — as fire, or water in the abstract — and a pose of mind cognate  and sympathetic thereto, a desire for that particular element —  not keen but perceptible — gradually the feeling of the physical  effects of the element — as of warmth — moisture — etc. — and  especially the sound as of the roaring or crackling of fire, the  rush — or patter, or ripple of water. Gradually the attention is  withdrawn from all surrounding sights and sounds, a grey mist  seems to swathe everything, on which, as though thrown from  a magic lantern on steam, the form of the symbol is projected. 

(This I conceive is due to the withdrawal of blood and nerve  force from other centres of the brain and their consequent inhibi-  tion.) 

The Consciousness then seems to pass through the symbol to  realms beyond but, as above-said, I think it more probable that  visions and pictures from beyond come on to the hypersensitive  brain centres and, as these have been sensitised by the symbol  and the first effect has been the vision of the symbol itself on  the grey mist, so they seem to take the form of the symbol and  to pass through it. At all events the sensation is as if one looked  at a series of moving pictures, although there are beings in this  new world with whom one can converse, animals that one can  dominate, or that attract one, yet to me personally it is all no  more solid than the pictures of a Kinetoscope or the sound of a  phonograph. 

Yet when this sensitiveness of brain and power of perception  is once established there seems to grow out of it a power of  actually going to the scenes so visionary and seeing them as solid,  indeed, of actually doing things and producing effects there. 

This is what I imagine is termed Travelling in the Spirit  Vision. 

Whether it is more than an extension of the power of per-  ceiving the pictures on the Sphere of Sensation or Akashic en-  velope is very difficult to determine. The sensation, however, to  me personally is first to become, as it were, dimly conscious of a  figure walking among the scenes of the new country — or the  Astral Plane — gradually to become conscious that it is my own  figure I am looking at — gradually, as it were, to be able to look  through the eyes — and feel with the sensations of this doppel  ganger. Further to be able consciously to direct its motions, to  control it, to inhabit it, and in this body to be able to visit the  scenes and persons I had previously only looked at, as it were,  through a telescope. 

It is as though my Consciousness had extruded from my own  body to take possession of a body which I had either created for  FLYING ROLL NO. XXV 

the purpose, or invoked out of the Astral Sphere as a vehicle for  myself. 

It seems, however, almost more probable that as the Sphere of  Sensation reflects everything that is in the material Universe so  it must needs contain a reflection also of the material body of  the percipient and if this be so it is not hard to suppose that such  reflection can be made to travel about within the Sphere of  Sensation and visit all things therein reflected with as much  ease (or more) as the will of the man can make his physical body  travel to material places on the earth. 

The Perception of the Astral plane seems to be peculiarly  liable to delusions, arising probably from defects in the sen-  sorium or physical brain — as an object seen through faulty glass  is distorted, that is to say the personal element, or what scientists  call the ‘personal equation’, becomes so strong as to produce  actual error. 

As the brain can be rendered sensitive in a particular direc-  tion by symbol — so can these errors also be corrected by symbol.  The various qualities in each man’s nature are symbolised by  the planets — hence when this symbology is well known the  planetary symbols may be used to correct errors arising from  the particular quality attributed to each. Thus the error could  be that the visions are merely compounded from memory. 

In this case build up in brilliant white light in front of any  image which you suspect to be merely a product of memory the  letter Tau, the symbol of the Path of Saturn, ‘The Great One of  the Night of Time’ — whose sober and steadying influence will  cause a memory picture to disappear. Similarly Beth for Mercury  formulated in the same way will cause to vanish any product  of lying intellectual delusion — or Daleth for Venus is used for  the result of intellectual vanity — Gimel for Luna for a wavering  mind — Resh for the Sun for delusions of haughtiness, vanity,  etc. and Kaph for the path of Jupiter against imagination, and  Peh for the path of Mars against revenge, hatred etc.  Flying RoU No. XXX 

Tattva Cards and Tattvic Clairvoyance  and Hierophant rising o° = o° signs  By G. H. Fra. D.D.C.F 

1. Concerning Tattva Cards and Tattvic Clairvoyance or  Skrying 

The Cards used should be of a convenient size. The Tattvas  thereon should be as uniform as possible, that is the full sized  Apas should be as nearly as possible of the same area as the full  sized Tejas — that is if it can conveniently be done. 

The Tattvas should be placed on the card so that their perpen-  dicular coincides with the card’s length rather than its breadth if  the card be oblong i.e. 


not thus 


Fig. 2 

This is not of great importance, but the horizontal method is  apt to increase the negative side too much. 

The Sub-Tattva should occupy about one fifth of the area of  the main Tattva — one quarter is rather too large, and makes the  Sub-Tattva nearly as important to the eye of the operator as the  main Tattva when the former is superimposed upon the latter. 

The cards should be clean and the colours correct when first  made; not dirty cards whose uncleanliness is covered over to the  physical eye by the Tattva pasted thereon. For if the cards are  thus made they are apt, without the intention of the maker, to  attract evil and delusive Elemental Influences from the fact that  their formulae necessarily imply hidden iniquity.  2. Of Tattvic Skrying 

The Skryer, using the proper Names, Implements etc. should  endeavour to attain the following results for passing the C.  Examination in Tattvic Clairvoyance. 

He should test everything in the vision, that is to say, every-  thing at all doubtful to him. He should describe carefully and in  detail the landscape etc. of the vision, and discover, if possible : — 

The special attributes and varying natures of the Plane. 

Its Elemental Nature. 

The Inhabitants (Elemental, Spiritual etc., etc.). 

The Plants, Animals, Minerals etc., which would be corres-  pondent to the Nature of the Plane. 

The Operation of its Influence in the Universe or Macro-  cosm upon (a) this particular Planet (b) animals, plants and  minerals. 

The Operation of its Influence upon the Microcosm, i.e.  Man. 

He or she who is operating should avoid carefully any self-  hypnotisation by the Tattva, for this will simply lead to foolish  and hysteric visions, the offspring of the intoxication of the  Operator’s astral sphere by the Tattva. 

Of the Mode of delivering the Signs of the o° = o° in a Temple  of the Outer Order 

The Initiated Hierophant, or any other member of the Second  Order present in a Temple of the Outer Order, should give the  Signs in the manner laid down in the Z Ritual, and should teach  them to be given thus; but he must on no account describe their  secret formulae, confining himself to the explanation usually  given in the Ritual of the o° = o° Grade of the First Order. It  does not matter so much whether the First Order members give  them quite properly, but the Second Order initiated members  should always do so.  Flying RoU No. XXVI 

By G. H. Fra. D.D.C.F 

In Flying Roll XII there appears Venus (Daleth) as Water of  Earth. 8 

The Planets are not Tattvas but have a sympathy with them. 

The Planets are not Elements but have a great sympathy with  them. 

Planets represent, for the most part, the compound action of  the Elements with the Spirit. For the Spirit enters into their  composition from their attributions not only to the Paths, but  also to the Sephiroth. Here follows a Table of Attributions and  correlations between Planets, Elements and Tattvas. The Ele-  ments may be in any proportion, but chiefly and better with the  Element first mentioned preponderating in each case. Save in  the case of Luna, the Akasha Tattvic symbol is not to be ex-  pressed, but Akasha represents the darkening aspect of the  Spirit, that is, in a too neutral and negative sense. 


Saturn 

Spirit Air 

Earth 

Earth of Air 

Jupiter 

Spirit Fire 

Water 

Water of Fire 

Mars 

Spirit Fire 

Earth 

Earth of Fire 

Sun 

Spirit Fire 

Air 

Air of Fire 

Venus 

Spirit Earth 

Water 

Water of Earth 

Mercury Spirit Air 

Water 

Water of Air 

Luna 

Spirit Water Earth and Alchemic 

Earth of Water 



Mercury 



The Tattvas however, are not exactly the Aspects of the Spirits  with the Four Elements, as we treat them. They almost coincide  with these five forces in our Hermetic and Rosicrucian Scale of  the Queen — the complete understanding of which comes later.  They are powerful as representing the Natural Passive condition 

8 Hying Roll XII is not included in this volume as it was printed  by Regardie on pages 66-73 °f the fourth volume of his Golden Dawn  where the attribution of Venus to Water of Earth can be found on  page 67, line 4. (Editorial Note.)  of the Forces and are, in a sense, dangerous; because, if ill under-  stood and directed, their operation induces too passive a condi-  tion and one too subject to fatality. 

Their roots are in the material reflections of the five forces in  the Scale of the Queen in the Earth’s atmosphere; and they are  more nearly material in their nature than those of the more  active Scale of the King. Wherefore their forces are more easily  perceivable materially, though less powerful in reality, than ours  in the Scale of the King; because there is a certain mode of com-  bination wanting in them which is present in our Scale of the  King. 

Used with the full knowledge of a Zelator Adeptus Minor,  they are perfectly safe, because his knowledge supplies what is  wanting in their teaching. Used by the uninitiated, they are  dangerous, as quickly leading to a dangerously passive condition.  Flying Roll No. XXXIII 

Visions of Squares upon the Enochian Tablets® 


A Vision of the Square A of the Airy Lesser Angle of the Tablet  of Water. 


The Pyramid God is Ahephi 



After vibrating the names of Airy Angle of Water and read-  ing the Call, I seemed to be in the Air, ascending in a current of  tiny drops of water which darted upward and in every direction,  and were of every colour of the rainbow, very minute and light.  On looking about for the cause, I saw below a tremendous  volume of Water falling to a great depth, and this atmosphere  in which I was, was the spray rising from it. I called on Ahephi to  appear and gradually got the God form, as before, but standing  above a pyramid composed of the living Elements. The Water  sides of the Square were like two greenish-blue waves, always  rising and falling and on all sides were in continual motion, and  gave the idea of intense restlessness. I gave the 5° = 6° Signs,  tested it, and asked to be shown the Sphynx. This appeared in  a greenish yellow mist behind Ahephi in a crouching position, 

® In all this Flying Roll contains seven visions. Only four of them  are printed here as the other three (the first, sixth and seventh) are  reproduced on pages 318-22 of the fourth volume of Regardie’s  Golden Dawn. Regardie does not state whose visions he is reproduc-  ing — so I have given the correct attributions in Appendix A of this  book. (Editorial Note.)  with the human arms stretched out in front. A silver crown on  the Lion head set with sapphires. I saluted with the Signs which  were returned. I asked for the explanation of the force of the  Square, but could not get it clearly. It seemed an ever-moving  subtle force, which working imperceptibly brought purification  and cleaning with it. 

The elementals I got were something like those of the ‘n’  Square, but smaller and in Rainbow colours, and they moved  more quickly. They carried cups in their hands, shaped like  lotuses in which they caught drops of water and darted into the  Air with them. On the Earth their work seemed to be the purify-  ing of the magnetism. I could not get anything clearer although  I tried for a long time. 

Vigilate. 

A vision of the ‘x’ Square in the Watery Lesser Angle of the 



Fire Tablet. I rose through the pyramid with the White Light,  which streamed down from the Apex, and came into the Sky,  where the same colours are repeated like sunrise etc. The colossal  pyramid and Amesheth on it, a mummified figure in white,  bands of colour like the pyramid and a blue human face (the  same blue as I have seen in Egyptian paintings). I made the  Signs and called on the Names and begged to be allowed to see  the Angel. She appeared with a blue lunar crescent on her head  and brown hair which was very long. Her robe was pale blue  with a black border, and a pentagram in red on her breast : her  wings were blue also, and so was the Cup in her left hand, in  her right hand she bore a red torch. Around her was a diamond  of red yods. She told me her office was ‘Change and purification  through suffering such as spiritualises the material nature’. I  FLYING ROLL NO. XXXIII  told her that her pale face and blue eyes had a sad and tender  expression as she spoke. The subs were similar but smaller and  not all of them winged. The elementals were like blue maids,  bearing flames and their robes were black bordered. Some wore  blue winged helmets and cloaks, red breast-plates and Swords  and black leg-armour. I was told that only through my Know-  ledge of Amesheth was all this shown unto me. 

Then I saw the Sphynx. The head was that of a Blue Eagle,  and so were the back and wings, the tail and hind legs were  black like a Bull and the fore legs and chest that of a Red Lion.  The creature lay on a black marble pedestal. I saluted it and  called on it by the Names to tell me its nature and office, its  universal quality; it said ‘It is change and development, not  apparently harmonious, but growing stable after the first  efforts’. 

In the Elements (weather) floods of rain and lightning refresh-  ing the Earth. The elementals and angels are above described.  The general effect of this Square upon the Earth is the partly  unbalanced efforts of the material universe towards perfection —  which efforts are all towards spirit and are all necessary — as  taken all together they are balanced. In the Tablels there are  equal numbers of triangles of each element. 

On this World the effect is that of the floods of water mingling  with submarine volcanoes and so disturbing the Earth under the  Sea. The animal life is that represented by the fish who rest  hidden among the rocks in warm climates. I seemed to see them,  blue with black or red specks. The plants are water-lilies, a root  in the black mud, the leaves resting on the surface of the water,  loving the Sun. In regard to minerals I saw a great blueish opal  with red lights playing in it: it rested in a black marble basin,  and from all sides radiated a lovely light. 

On man the effect of the Square is restlessness, like waves of  the sea, carrying him on with enthusiasm to some completed  work. I seemed to see a nervous (highly strung) person with a  pale face, dark deep-set eyes, and thin white hands, making a  great effort, willing to pass through fire to reach his goal, a  solid black pedestal from which I knew that he could begin to  rise to the Higher. But hot douds of steam and great water tried  to hinder him from even reaching the fire. The lesson seemed to  me that severe criticism, social difficulties, and heredity must  all be overcome before we can reach the purifying fire of Initia-  tion and, through that, the solid ground of spiritual knowledge. 

F.E.R. (i.e. Miss Horniman)  A vision of the ‘n’ Square of the Airy Lesser Angle of the Fire 



Tablet. Formed pyramid 10 over me. Went through it, looked  for pyramid of the plane and saw it immediately with its  yellow face towards me, and a large glowing white brilliance  on the top. Approached and saw Ahelphi in the centre of the  brilliance, and himself light and white. On calling on him he  turned his head and in answer to 5° = 6° Signs he inclined it.  I said I wanted to interview the Sphynx of the pyramid, he  consented to my doing and I descended thereunto. 

I saw him easily and at once, but his colours were not bril-  liant. I asked him to explain to me the forces to which he  corresponded, beginning with the universal force he represented.  Answer (By expression, I am deaf to words) ‘I represent active  forces acting between the waters above and the waters below  the firmament dividing the waters and energised by Fire. Two  active forces operating in the midst of a polarised passive force.  You personally cannot see a universal application of this cor- 

10 Remember that the pyramid is only the symbolic Formula of the  plane, and not a solid material pyramid (This is only a symbolic aid).  (Original Note.)  FLYING ROLL NO. XXXIII  respondence; but you may see it in nature in the weather, where  the Fire and the Air keep the upper and nether Waters apart.  It represents a cloudy atmosphere with a sea below, but the  air between is dry and in active motion : there is no chance of  rain, nor is there much evaporation from the surface. It is a  very stable weather with plenty of circling clouds high in  the atmosphere.’ Later on he said — ‘In creation I represent the  separation of the Waters; the expression of physical form out of  the all-containing Astral; and also the reverse, the restoration  to the physical of that which keeps it in that condition; hence  the return of the physical to the Astral. I am but one of the  forces through which Fire would act . 11 In Man’s figure you  have a type with round face and full lower parts and legs, with  active and strong, but perhaps less clumsy, back and arms;  the type of mind, however, is a very good one, it will be  meditative, and its meditation will be accompanied by subtle  and keen reasoning and energetic thinking. It will lead him  to compare the lower with the higher and the higher with  the lower. Just the sort of mind to find out for itself that ‘as  above so below’ is a great truth in nature. Because he directs  his attention to the upper and to the lower equally he is hence  a philosopher combining religion and science into a sublime  union.’ 

Among animals, I caught nothing but the Elephant, and from  the nature of the Elephant’s mind, which may be considered  meditative from an animal point of view, his intelligence, phy-  sical force, bulky watery build, and warm blood I am inclined  to think this attribution correct, although it seemed incon-  gruous at first. Furthermore the use of Tau did not alter the  vision. 

Among vegetables I received the impression of the banana.  Among minerals I saw an orange crystal column with pyramidal  ends (I think hexagonal). 

I asked him (the Sphynx) to show me the Angel and to  accompany me outside to see her. She appeared as follows : face 

II This seems to me to be a force spoken of in Alchemy as that  which ‘fixes the volatile’ and ‘volatilises the fixed’, according to which  way it is directed. (Original Note.)  roundish, short curly hair, light brown brilliant halo, and a  small golden crown. Robe blue at the neck and bottom, girt  with a white and gold belt, with the name in gold, and the  robe white in the centre. Wings small and bluish-white. In her  right hand she held a small wand of wood like cedar, with a  gold top nearly cubical in shape, and in her left hand a pecu-  liarly shaped, dark maroon coloured base. 

Then, from the summit of the pyramid, I surveyed the sur-  rounding country. On the yellow side at some distance was a  sea, passing round to the right there was a dark thick wood,  the land gradually rising till opposite, the red side of it (the  pyramid) rose apparently as a sandy desert hill until it encoun-  tered a fogbank which hid all behind it; passing round to the  fourth side the country was very flat. There were lakes and  marshes and beyond them some slightly wooded land. The  lakes and marshes seemed as if partly salt and partly fresh  water. As if the pyramid stood at a spot where the waters from  the land came in contact with the waters from the sea, though  I could not see where or how either the one or the other, the  salt or the fresh, got there. There was no inlet from the sea, nor  was there a river from the land. 

Anima Pura Sit (i.e. Dr. Pullen-Berry)  A Vision of the Square ‘c’ of the Earthy Lesser Angle of the 

Tablet of Air 



Having rehearsed the 8th Angelical Call and enclosed myself  within a pyramid as above, vibrating the Names, I followed the  ray and found myself in a hot, very dry atmosphere; I therefore  invoked the God Kabexnuf by the power c.n.m.o. on whose  FLYING ROLL NO. XXXII 

appearance I used all the tests I knew, whereby he was  strengthened. At my request he then made manifest the Sphynx  of his power, who became visible to me. He was resting upon  a black cube. Having once more used the Signs and applied  the tests I asked for information respecting the Square, when  my repeated invocations brought before me the Angel, a power-  ful virile figure of exquisite proportion and strength. He then  showed me the action in the Macrocosm, which appeared to be  the solidifying of Nebulae into Worlds by mutual attraction  of the particles. Then, on this planet, we rested in the mouth  of a volcano in active eruption, so much so that we were sur-  rounded by flying lava. It was intensely hot, and almost mecha-  nically I formulated in myself the idea of wrapping myself in  an Apas, but a stern voice said: ‘You must not, if you want  to learn you must bear the discomfort.’ Embedded in the sides  of the volcano were crystallised jets and drops of fire which,  I was told, was living gold; I asked for another scene and was  taken on to a higher plane where there was a luxuriant forest  of tropical plants of gorgeous scarlet and orange waving to and  fro in an imperceptible breeze. The earth in which they grew  was of a rich black colour, but there poured on them such  fierce rays from the Sun that I looked to see them wither, but  was told that they were on a higher plane than our flowers, and  defied the scorching rays by virtue of their own internal heat  which sustained their life. This Square being akin to our tropics,  we went there, and saw a beautiful scene smiling in the heat  of the Sun; suddenly a hot wind arose, bearing with it stones and  dust with which it devastated the whole landscape. Here I was  shown many tigers, and for flowers tiger lilies and Japanese red  lilies in abundance. The type of human being I was shown was  such a man as Chopin playing madly on a piano in a large  empty room. The elemental is a bird like creature which hops  rapidly over the ground; its influence on human nature gives  the desire for violent sensation. 

R csurgam (i.e. Dr. Berridge).  Rosicrucian Adeptship 

being 

Flying Roll No. XVI  Flying Roll No. XVIII  Flying Roll No. XIX 




Flying Roll No. XVI 

The History of the Rosicrucian Order  By 

G. H. Frater N.O.M. 

The opening words of that part of the 5° = 6° Ritual which  deals with the History of the Order of R.C. are as follows:  ‘Know them O Aspirant, that the Order of the Rose and Cross  hath existed from time immemorial and that its mystic rites  were practised and its hidden knowledge communicated in the  initiations of the various races of Antiquity, Egypt, Eleusis,  Samothrace, Persia, Chaldea and India alike cherished these  mysteries, and thus handed down to posterity the Secret Wisdom  of the Ancient Ages ’ 

This statement is one which comes home to every member of  the 5° =6° Grade, for although, in a sense, one in that position,  is but on the threshold of really serious Occult study and de-  velopment it is still easy enough to trace the masterful manner  in which our mystic knowledges has been consolidated; and  the essential unity of the system speaks eloquently of the Wis-  dom which formulated it. 

‘Albeit the manner of its introduction into mediaeval Europe’  is chiefly interesting to us. C.R. is the great figure-head around  which has clustered the most romantic traditions of mediaeval  Occultism. History has not passed down the real name of this  unique character: for C.R. is obviously a fictitious or assumed  name chosen for mystic purposes. 

Born in 1378 and dying in 1484 a life of 106 years was  apparently the term of his physical manifestation: and to his  exertions and efforts, it is that we may ascribe the great re-  formation of Occultism in the West. Fired by a noble purpose  and ensouled by divine energies, his was the beau ideal of a life  of Occult usefulness: it recks little if the world knew nought  of that obscure personality, but it was a matter of supreme  importance to the progress of Western Occultism and the full  significance of this observation will probably be only apprecia-  ted by you in proportion as you may advance hereafter. The first  years of his eventful life were spent in study, both intellectual  and occult, to be eventually followed by a series of initiations  at several places (out of Europe) ‘Where there existed Temples  of our Order.’ Thus were laid foundations ‘whereon to erect a  more extended superstructure of practical application’ and,  having chosen three other Fratres to share with him the heat  and burthen of the day, the establishment of the Order was  effected in Europe. With the principal features of their sub-  sequent activity you are already familiar and it suffices to say  that when our Founder ‘entered into his chamber’ his work was  accomplished, and every member among us thereby placed under  a lasting debt of gratitude. 

It is to be observed that there are three important epochs in  the history of the Rosicrucian Order: the first being the life  period of Christian Rosycross, who died before the time of the  Protestant Reformation — the second, the 1 20 years of silence and  secrecy, being the period from 1484 to 1604 — and, the third,  the period subsequent thereto, and subsequent to the Reforma-  tion. It was during the latter period that the opening of the  Vault formed the historical basis for the subsequent publication  of the Fratna Fraternitatis; or a Discovery of the most laudable  Order of the Rosy Cross the publication of which took place  at Cassel in 1614, though this tract is dated 1610. This event  called forth most intense curiosity and excitement and the  enormous effect which it had upon the learned world of that  time may be better understood when it is stated that no less  than 600 tractates exist at the Museum at Berlin, all criticising  — either favourably or otherwise — the mysterious association  revealed by the ‘Fama’. In 1614, then, public attention was for  the first time directed to the Order and many thousands are  said to have responded to the invitation proffered by the ‘Fama’ :  those who were admitted being bound over to keep the matter  secret, and that larger proportion who received no response to  their overtures believing the whole thing to he an illusion. 1 

‘The sudden publication by a secret Lodge of Students of a  Manifesto, and semi-public initiation to Occultism — such as then  occurred has been recently repeated, for similar reasons by the Eastern  School — which in 1875 sent from India the learned woman H.P.B. —  FLYING ROLL NO. XVI 

It will be obvious upon reflection that the ceremonial and  allotment of Rituals and instruction in the Second Order as  now existing, cannot be identical with that which obtained  prior to the opening of the Vault because the principal symbo-  lism of the 5 0 =6° Grade chiefly centres around the discovery  and opening of the Vault: this being so, it may be noted in  passing that the two preceding epochs, already referred to, may  be attributed by sequence of comparison to the Grades of 6° = 5°  and 7° = 4° respectively: the former — a degree of death and  solmnity — referring to the precedent stage of obscuration, dur-  ing which silent study and meditation may be considered as  the typical condition — the latter — the Grade of Adeptus Exemp-  tus — being referred to the higher and. more exalted rank and  attainments of him who founded the Rosicrucian Order, as a  new formulation of that Occult philosophy or Wisdom Religion  which, we cannot doubt, has never been entirely absent since  the manifestation of human intellect with a capacity for the  apprehension of things Divine. 

On comparing the Esoteric historical account given in the  Fama with that contained in our 5°=6° Ritual, several impor-  tant divergencies and discrepancies become apparent: for the  Fama was written for the public and is therefore not absolutely  correct. Instances of the ‘blinds’ introduced into the Fama  occur where in the description of the Vault it is stated ‘This is  all clear and bright, as also the seventh (the Seven Sides — the  7th was not different) side and the two heptagons . . .’ And  again later on — ‘Every Side or Wall is parted into ten squares  every one with their several figures and sentences . . .’ ‘Every  Side or Wall’ is moreover represented as having a door for a  chest wherein many things and books lay — including the vocabu-  larium of Paracelsus who lived from 1493 to 1541 — or during  the 120 years of closure before referred to. This was an obvious  inconsistency — and was in fact an intentional blind inserted  for the purpose of disappointing the critics of that day: (the 

an initiate to make a semi-public Propaganda — and also to admit a  few selected persons to Esoteric teaching issued from a lodge of  concealed instructors — whose published names are probably substi-  tutes, mottoes, or symbols. (Original Note.)  critic is rarely or never an Occultist: the Society, to ensure  the exclusion of such men, did cunningly when it authorised  the publication of a tract, with a blot which would condemn it  straight off in their eyes — and so kept such men from clamour-  ing for admission). For, be it remembered, the Fama was an  official manifesto, the publication of which was authorised by  the Fratres then empowered. Subsequently, on account of the  great stir roused by its publication, and especially on the asser-  tion of some that the principles of the Order were subversive  of the simple orthodox faith of Christianity, its publication by  Valentine Andreas was authorised (in 1615) with a Supplement  under the Title Confessio Fraternitatis R.C. ad Erudotos Europa.  This was prefaced by an advertisement to the effect that the  ‘gentle reader’ should find ‘incorporated in our Confession thirty-  seven reasons of our purpose and intention, the which according  to they pleasure thou mayest seek out and compare together,  considering within thyself if they be sufficient to allure thee’.  The point of this, however, is that examination of the contents  does not reveal the thirty-seven reasons, nor do the Hebrew  Letters representing that number form any Word which might  seem to be the secret meaning, but by Temurah, two pregnant  words are shown forth, thus LHB = 30 + 5 + 2 = Flame, Lux.  Light. Illumination and LGD = 3o + 3 -I- 4= ‘For the Society’, or  army. 

There is another reference to Paracelsus in the Fama which  has a curious interest: it runs ‘although he was none of our  fraternity, yet, nevertheless hath he diligently read over the  Book M., whereby his sharp ingenium was exalted.’ Now Para-  celsus was taught by Johann Trithemius of Spanheim, Abbot  of Wurtzburg, and Solomon Trismosin: he also travelled in the  East, and being taken captive in Tartary (Compare with  H.P.B’s initiation in Thibet. — Paracelsus was not a Rosicrucian  yet after initiation taught very similar tenets — he found an-  other allied Temple in the East) was initiated there; he is more-  over said to have received the Stone in Constantinople from one  Sigismund Fugger. 

Although the Fama is in some cases deficient in its historical  account, it contains here and there redundant description, which  FLYING ROLL NO. XVI 

affords food for reflection: — thus, it is said ‘In another chest  were looking-glasses of divers virtues, as also in other places  were little bells, burning lamps, and chiefly wonderful artificial 

songs ’ — The latter are of course, the Mantrams of the 

Easterns, Carmina or incantations, — instructions on the vibra-  tory mode of pronouncing divine ames. 

The only other important Rosicrucian publication was a very  curious work entitled the Hermetic Romance, or the C hy mical  Wedding, which likewise excited much controversy: — it is full  of perplexities (for the casual reader) though the meaning is  entirely allegorical and only to be seized by violence. Of this  class of study, all that can be said is ‘Sometimes a light surprises  the student on his way.’ The date of publication was 1616, the  year following the appearance of the ‘Confessio Fraternitatis’. 

I should mention that an English translation of the Fama  was done in London by Eugenius Philalthes. (Thomas Vaughan)  in 1652; — he was at that time Supreme Magus in Anglia, or  Chief Adept in charge in our phraseology. — 

In conclusion it only remains for me to point out that while  the historical element has a unique interest for every member  of the 5 0 =6° Grade of the Second Order; this in itself is a  minor consideration as compared with the mystic symbolism  involved therein. The 120 years has other references, as the  5° =6° Ritual itself testifies. This was the number of  Princes, which Darius set over his Kingdom, — and Daniel was  a Magus among the Chaldees; — while another hint as to its  meaning lies in the suggestion as to how that number was  arrived at. 

In the 5 0 =6° Grade the symbolism of the Rainbow Colours  is especially exemplified, — a range of Colour which may be said  to be the most apparent and obvious: — while the 6° = 5° Grade  is of interest to many of us, especially because the colouring is  different. The 7° =4° refers still further back and possesses an  even more arcane symbolism. 

Supplementary Notes 

It is especially desirable that when our brethren meet, the  ancient form of salutation should be preserved: — thus on meet-  ing they should salute each other in the following manner ‘Ave  Frater’. The second shall answer ‘Roseae Rubeae’, whereupon the  first shall conclude with ‘et Aureae Crucds’. 

It was also the ancient custom after having thus discovered  their position, for one to say to the other Benedictus Dominus  Deus nostcr qui Dedit nobis signum — (uncovering Cross or Seal).  This latter form should also be observed on all formal occasions  and especially when Fratres meet who are little acquainted with  each other. 

Members are moreover further requested to endeavour upon  all occasions when taking leave of each other to use the old  formula Vale, adding ‘Sub umbra alarum tuarum, Jehovah !’ 2 

The effect of the foregoing observance is to directly maintain  the psychic link which has ever served to bind the Members  of this Ancient and Honourable Order one to the other; — in  this light it is something more than a mere form. 

The following beautiful sentences were inscribed upon the  Tablet. At the head was written. 

‘Granum Pectaris IH SH VH insitum’ — 

A grain — or seed, sown or planted — in the heart of Jehoshua  (The worn out physical body — laid aside — from whence has  escaped the Spiritual entity which shall function in a spiritual  body — as Paul said; until — if ever — it be again required to  clothe itself with skin, and come down — again to teach and  guide others) in commemoration of Frater C.R.C. our prototype. 

Pater dilectissimies = Most loved father ! 

Frater Suavissimus=Most courteous brother! 

Preceptor fidelissimus=Most faithful instructor! 

Amicus integerrimus = Strongest friend ! 

Well indeed shall your life have been spent in helping the  world, and teaching others, if you can earn such an Epigraph. 

2 A wand to guide you and protect you in the ascent of the  Mountain is the Staff of Hermes, about which the twin Serpents  of Egypt twine : above the wings of Binah and Chokmah — shrouding  the sacred Diamond lying on the Crown of Kether — the Supernal.  Sub utnbra alarum tuarum ; beneath the rays of spiritual Under-  standing emanating from Divine Wisdom, you may indeed be safe,  trusting to the protection and aid of the High and Holy Powers  summed up in the great Name JHVH. (Original Note.)  Flying Roll No. XVIU 

Progress in the Order  By F.e.R . 3 

A few words on the natural wish to make progress in our Order  may interest some of those who have just joined us and also  whose efforts seem to lead to little or no result. 

Of course the experience of each one is unique, and must be  so; no one could have been led into the path of serious occult  study without a certain determination of character, and in most  cases the necessity of overcoming opposition at the outset, is  a test in itself, which shows individuality and fixity of purpose.  Naturally, when first asked to join and told that he is considered  suitable, the Candidate feels strongly that he must be rather a  remarkable person to be so chosen. That was the first stage with  me, and it lasted until I was actually admitted into the Order  nearly two years later. Of course some spiritual gifts are neces-  sary to make true progress, but it is very hard to judge which  person has them or even to tell our own power until time and  training have developed the tendencies hidden in our innermost  natures. At first it is probable that the Neophyte will exaggerate  every little astral incident that happens and the only way to  fight against that temptation is to force the mind to serious  study so as to gain strength; and by the power which will  come gradually to the earnest student, to learn to distinguish  the false from the real, the Astral from the Spiritual. 

The uncongenial spiritual surroundings in which most of  us are obliged to live out our lives have their uses; we learn  to concentrate our minds amidst the distractions which are the  more dangerous to our progress when they are not in active  opposition to it. 

For the first few weeks the secrecy enforced on us by our  Obligation is a novelty, but when the Knowledge in the first  lecture is learned and found to be information easily gained 

3 These initials are those of Annie Horniman’s motto of Fortiter  ct Rccte — but see my note on this Flying Roll in Appendix A.  (Editorial Note.) 


Ill 



ROSICRUCIAN ADEPTSHIP 

from other sources, a questioning feeling arises as to the need  of so much fuss about labels for MSS, mottoes to be used instead  of names etc. etc. If we look a little closer, however, it will  appear only reasonable; we must be trained to be silent and  perfectly discreet, so that secrecy will be no effort to us, when  after much labour and many struggles we are gradually en-  trusted with the hidden knowledge belonging to the higher  Grades of our Order. 

Some of the obstacles which keep the Fratres and Sorores in  the lower Grades are quite trivial in themselves and might be  easily overcome by an effort of Will; but they do not realise  that the fault lies in themselves and put down the fact of their  standstill to many other causes. If our Order be anything deeper  and higher than a mere dub for the dissemination of archaeolo-  gical and literary knowledge, the obstacles to be overcome must  be more subtle than those which come between us and success  in the ordinary aims of life. 

Acts which were meaningless trivialities before are serious  matters to a Frater or Soror who is truly striving to rise as high  as possible during this life. Habits of indecision and caprice in  the minor matters of conduct have a great cumulative force  and weaken the will and leave us open to astral influences which  must be conquered as completely as our present strength allows.  A strong feeling of disinclination for study at convenient times,  once given way to, grows into indolence, and then when each  succeeding lecture if found to be more difficult, the thought that  perhaps it is not worthwhile after all, creeps in and gradually  the student loses interest and occult study becomes tedious to him.  On the contrary, great opposition and difficulty spur us on in  this, as in any other, course, and when the opportunities for  study have to be made they are seldom neglected. Do not accept  the excuses you feel inclined to make to yourselves — that you  have to live alone amongst people who are only hindrances, that  no one takes particular interest in your progress, or that you  will have more time bye and bye. 

Not one of us has any time to lose; youth and strength do  not last us very long, and the present opportunities may never  arise again. Work done to please or gain approbation from  FLYING ROLL NO. XVIII 

another is not what we want, but that real enthusiasm which  overcomes difficulties and grows the stronger because of them.  Naturally, members of higher Grades take a personal interest in  those with whom they are connected by social ties, but some-  times that is a source of disappointment. Each must strive up-  wards by himself, for himself, no help can take away the real  difficulties, for they are the tests which must be passed, and  by which our spiritual fitness for Higher Things is shown.  Uncongenial surroundings are an obstacle, because they seem to  waste the strength, but is it truly as difficult to work when  unhappy after the performance of burdensome duties, as to  overcome the far more insinuating influences that come into  play when all seems smooth before us? Sometimes in those  painful surroundings there are others also struggling towards  the light which we are longing to reach ourselves; we may not  as yet be able to help except by sympathy and kindliness; but  when the time comes, then we can stretch forth a helping hand  with a full understanding of the need for assistance. 

To those who have made some little progress the true pros-  perity of our Order is very dear, and we look back with real  gratitude to those who watched us until they thought fit, and  then brought us in to what has become a great and important  part of our lives. In some cases it was an intimate friend, in  others a comparative stranger whose acquaintance at first seemed  to be of very little importance. 

Of course, we are often disappointed; when beginners our-  selves we were most anxious for those dear to us to come in  also, but as time goes on we see how rare are the qualities  required and we find that we must have great patience and  hope in regard to our friends, who as yet do not want to  sympathise with our Hermetic aims. 

Those who expect worldly or social gain for themselves  through this Order will be disappointed, yet none of us who  have made sacrifices for it in a right spirit are disappointed with  the result. 

To some natures ceremonies are repulsive, to others they are  most attractive. They are part of the necessary discipline which  insists upon us all being treated exactly alike, which seems  arbitrary to some minds, yet without it, we could be trained  to understand those causes which lie behind the ordinary events  of life and form our characters for good or evil. 

We must all take courage and look our difficulties full in  the face, neither magnifying them nor avoiding them; and we  shall find in many cases that a little self-denial, a little exertion  of Will, or even a little commonplace prudence will vanquish  them completely. Nothing impossible will ever be asked of any  of you, but what will be possible to each of you is in the Future,  none can say exactly what. With knowledge will come strength,  and then experience will follow and the power and the wish  to use that Knowledge rightly. 

It is a gradual process, and often a painful one to experience,  but well worth the sorrows to be borne and the difficulties to  be overcome by the earnest student. 

Trondhjeim. June 1893.  Flying Roll No. XIX 

The Aims and Means of Adeptship  By N.O.M. 

Among the objects for which you have joined the Second Order  some are specially named by the Obligation which you have  taken, and others are indicated by the documents which you  have received on loan. 

Speaking generally however, we may say that the main  object is what is called the Higher Magic or the development of  the Spiritual sides of our natures in contradistinction to the  purely intellectual. 

As regards Spiritual Development you promised in the Obliga-  tion to use every effort to purify and exalt the Spiritual Nature  so that you may be able to unity yourselves with what the  Hermetist calls his ‘Higher Genius’. 

A second aim we may say is the extension of our powers of  perception so that we can perceive entities, events and forces  upon the super-sensuous planes. 

Thirdly, and in connection with the other two, you are  encouraged to practice the system of divination of which there  are several but which are only aids to your intuition and  methods by which the intuition may be developed and encour-  aged. 

Fourthly, there is what may be called the procuring of the  influence of Divine Powers through the peculiar modes taught  in our Order and Vibrating of Divine Names. 

There are then these four aims — Spiritual Development —  extension of the powers of perception; learning the modes of  Divination and becoming familiar with the vibratory mode of  pronouncing Divine Names. To these may be added the practical  study of the particular influences of colour and 1 thus we are  called Lords of the Path of the Chameleon. 

Now as regards this Spiritual Development in the first place  we mean by it that you perform or endeavour to perform the  transmutation of the vital forces of life into higher currents of  life or rather their transmutation out of the lower into the  higher so that you can use them for the purposes of Theurgia.  Transmutation of physical force is what is discussed in many of  the old alchemical books. A large proportion of these books  which have come down to us refer to purely physical processes.  But there was an opposite pole of thought of which the language  referred entirely to man and by transmutation was meant the  directing of physical life and force into the channels of spiritual  perception and the higher magical powers generally. 

Secondly, as to the extension of our powers of perception be-  yond the plane of matter into the super-sensuous world, you  must remember that the Theosophical view is the correct one and  that our Thinking Personalities are incarnated into these material  bodies and are acting therefore under the consequent disadvan-  tages. It is because the mind is immersed in matter that its  powers are so limited, and we can readily understand that a  mind freed from constraints of the body would enjoy vastly  enlarged powers. Thus, although our senses are the means by  which we perceive; yet at the same time they necessarily limit  the extent of our perception. It is therefore our material bodily  organs which circumscribe as well as bestow. All of our five  senses are capable of enlargement and development. It is how-  ever the sense of sight which we most commonly seek thus to  develop. Having intellectually learned the laws which relate  to sight and colour we are encouraged to practice Clairvoyance  and to seek to see beyond material things into the plane most  adjacent to us — the Astral, and then we seek to travel in the  Spirit Vision through the confusions and the uncertainties of  the Astral into the planes beyond. 

One of the first of your experiences when practising in the  Vault in the dark will be the appreciation of the minuter gradua-  tions of light and darkness. 

You will find it very difficult to get perfect darkness, but  you will often find that there are certain days when you can  get the Vault quite dark. 

The cultivation of your sight will enable you to perceive  the variations of colour and especially to note, observe, and fix  in your minds, the contrasts of colour on which our Rituals  place so much importance, and the flashing colours. Allied to this  FLYING ROLL NO. XIX 

is the cultivation of View in the Mirror. 

The ears also require to be cultivated until you obtain some  success in what is called Clairaudience. This is sometimes easier  than Clairvoyance but development in either direction implies  great perseverance and must be carried out with energy and  enthusiasm. 

Among Theosophists the phenomenon which you hear most  commonly mentioned in connection with Clairaudience is that  known as the Astral Bell. This is almost entirely Eastern: if  you find a Hermetist who can hear sounds that others cannot  hear, they very rarely take the form of a bell. 

Those who get a certain amount of Clairvoyance also often  get the power of hearing sounds which the world cannot hear  and it is often a definite sound sent for a definite purpose.  Touch, also is a sense which should be cultivated. I will mention  some examples of the way in which this sense may be trained,  and by touch I do not mean simply the touch which comes  through the fingers. One of the most elementary methods is  the perception of magnetism. You will find that, with closed  eyes, you can detect the presence of a magnet held near the  skin, and that with continued practice you will be able to  appreciate the difference between the North and South Poles  of the Magnet. 

You will find that the forehead is the best point upon which  to experiment. We need not dwell upon the senses of taste and  smell, but these can also be developed. 

Theosophy tells us that corresponding with all other Sep-  tenaries in Nature there are also two more senses. I may say  that the sixth can be called that of Astral perception, or the  power of perceiving forces and entities on the plane next to the  earth; and the seventh, of which, no doubt, some of you will  get glimpses in due time is the faculty of receiving Knowledge  from spiritual sources. There is no organ corresponding to these  senses, so that, where necessary, we must utilise the organs  which we already possess. Now by what means do the Adepts  suggest that these powers may be obtained? It has been urged  against us that, as a society, we do not preach the necessity  for such strict purity of life as do the Theosophists. It may be  true that we are not always preaching it, and as we do not  hold public meetings, the same opportunities for doing so do  not exist. If, however, there is one thing more than another  which I would impress upon you as a social sin, it is that of  hypocrisy. As to asceticism, the Hermetists have always taught  that this necessary purity of mind should and can be combined  with the absence of all ostentatious morality and of un-natural  habits of life. 

The Western Teachers have always recognised the fact that  for so long human life has been so painful, that to most people  these studies would be denied if they were to insist upon asceti-  cism, and they have found by experience that a very considerable  amount of success without attendant danger may be obtained  by those who are willing to make strenuous efforts, without the  aid of positive asceticism. It seems to me that the chief danger  of asceticism in a city like this and at the present time is that  even if we succeed, the extra advantage which we shall derive  from totally abstaining from these things of the sense, will  be counterweighed by a distinct and added danger of falling,  on the other hand, into the Scylla of hypocrisy which I have  mentioned. What is apt to happen is this, — that a man is liable  to compare himself with his neighbours, and say how much  better he is than others. Now self congratulation is second only  to open hypocrisy, and we hold that it is just as harmful to  spiritual progress. On the other hand if you make strenuous  efforts to lead a moral life, if you do this while leading a pure  life in the city, if you succeed in doing these things, you may  depend upon it that your reward will be greater than his  who removes himself from his fellows and shuts himself up in  a forest. The reward of a man who can remain pure and yet  live in the midst of a crowded city is greater than his who  avoids the responsibilities of life by burying himself in a  wilderness. 

It is possible even there to commit many sins which you  would not like to confess! 

The next principle which we formulate is the necessity for  studying and doing all Hermetic exercises from a positive point  of view. We look upon the negative attitude of simple abstinence  FLYING ROLL NO. XIX 

from sin and exertion and effort, in which are comprised to a  great extent the methods of the East, and we think that this is  an error of judgment and of practice. 

I am sure that any attempt at a negative attitude is a mistake.  Many persons are, I am sure, deterred from taking up Theo-  sophical studies more closely by the sense of coldness, and an  apparent want of human sympathy, which is sometimes exhi-  bited and felt in Theosophical Lodges. Theosophy itself teaches  that we should give ourselves up to humanity, and yet their  private lodges are often marked by the absence of that enthu-  siasm for their work which should distinguish them. 

The Hermetists have always been noted for their social  relations, and this is, I believe, in every way compatible with  the strictest purity of life. We believe that a harmonious whole  is thereby produced and one likely to lead to success in practical  magic. 

The next point of importance which is insisted upon in our  Obligation and Rituals and put forward with great solemnity in  the Vault itself is the extreme necessity for refraining from  judging other people. This does not mean that you are not to  condemn sin, but it means that you are not to go out of your  way in condemning the sinner. It does not imply that you are  to condone faults, but it does imply that you are not to  endeavour to seek grievances against your fellows, or seek to  rule or supervise them, unless you happen to be in authority  over them. Very few people are in this position of being rulers.  Such have to bear the Karma of occasionally judging their  fellow members. It is at any rate a duty which falls upon some  of us. You must however, avoid the opportunity of thus judging  others until the obligation is thrust upon you. 

The opportunity and the act should both be avoided as far  as possible. Thus the Ritual says ‘therefore art though inex-  cusable, whoever thou art, who judgest another’. 

Let me now say a word about the risks of negativity. It  seems to me that the negative attitude and the negative con-  stitution required to be checked and controlled. Firstly because  we do not progress under these conditions, and secondly because  they carry with them definite risks to ourselves are those from  elemental forces which may attack us. 

So long as you lead an ordinary life you are safe from the  assaults of influences beyond the material world of your brother  men; but as soon as you get outside of that world and put  yourself in a position to seek out occult mysteries, you bring  yourself under the action of forces of which you know very  little or nothing. The only way to avoid being controlled by such  forces, to which you have rendered yourself liable, is to preserve  what we call the positive attitude, which is the extreme contrast  to what is called mediumship. A medium is one who cultivates  negativity and such a person is therefore one to be avoided.  The condition we want you to cultivate is that of positivity. I  could give you a very good example of a person who is nega-  tive and who has got into trouble almost entirely through that. 

The next thing which we are taught and enabled to practice  is Divination. There are at least three distinct systems suggested  to you, but they are all of them methods whose routine may  be superseded, when you get on far enough. The first of these  systems is that of Geomancy and there is also that of Astrology.  It will be noticed that the lectures of the First Order give brief  outlines of these systems, but there is no direct encouragement  to perfect yourself in them. 

The third system which is virtually introduced and taught in  the Second Order is that of the Tarot. 

This goes very much deeper than either of the other two and  gives results which are more true because its points of contact  with the world, with man, and the influences which surround  him, are more numerous. The fact that this is more complicated  gives you more of such points of contact than either of the  other two systems. With a properly conducted Tarot process  and with a cultivated intuition you can obtain almost anything  you wish for, but as the process is so complex it is a most  difficult system to learn, but having once grasped it you can get  results which are most amazing. When you have mastered the  first six manuscripts of the Order and are familiar with the  Rituals of the Pentagram and Hexagram, and have made your  Implements, the Tarot is then suggested to you as a desirable sys-  tem to learn. Moreover its study is so enticing that you would  FLYING ROLL NO. XIX 

be apt to neglect those things which should precede its practice. 

By these systems of divination you are really inducing and  cultivating the intuitive power. Now in order to get success  in Divination it is necessary to cultivate the Will. First you  want an intellectual knowledge of the subject. Then a cultiva-  tion of the intuitive power is necessary, and finally you must  develop the Will. You must have a steady will or else your  intuition will be of little avail. Now this cultivation of the  Will should be a process which is continually going on. There  are fallacies which exist in connection with the Will. A person  may say to you, I am extremely interested in all these studies  and I am always willing and endeavouring to succeed in them,  and he will say to you that he is thinking of the Tree of Life  or of some other occult subject while he is doing his accounts  or interviewing his wife. Now I am sorry to say that I have  to tell such a person that he is on the wrong tack. If you want  success you must will only one thing at a time. The habit of  doing two or three things at once is fatal to the Occultist.  The Will which is necessary is an undivided Will and its cultiva-  tion must be continued at all times. 

It is therefore necessary to get into the habit of never Willing  more than one thing at a time. Never allow your Will to be  mixed up with any desire. The Will which is divided is not  the Will which can be of any use to you. It is quite impossible  to Will strongly to see an elemental, for instance, unless you  are able to think only for that moment. 

A fixed concentration of mind must be encouraged if you  want to have success. We often get strange demonstrations of  the strength of the Will. I will give you an example. We con-  tinually find that if we turn round in the street to look after  someone whom we have just passed, that person is also turning  round to look after us. If however, you deliberately try to do  this you will probably fail, and the point is that in this latter  case your mind is divided between the will to succeed 1 , and  the desire to show your power, and the Will is thereby weakened. 

The other two principal items are the Vibration of the Divine  Names and the properties of colour, but as these ought to be  demonstrated in the Vault, I will not go into them today.  Man, God and the Rosicrucian  Initiation 


being 

Flying Roll No. XV  Flying Roll No. X 




Flying RoU No. XV 

Man and God  By N.O.M. 

The circle of Members of the Adeptus Grade of the Order R.R.  et A.C. is a fraternity of students of the Hermetic Sciences and  of the Hermetic Art. 

The chain which unites us in the acceptance of the doctrines  and wisdom contained in the Rituals of our Order. The same  assertion is true of the Order of the G.D., that preliminary  course of instruction through which all must have passed. The  common ground of brotherhood is the sincere acceptance of  the Hermetic ancient philosophy, as expressed in the Ritual,  and Pictorial and Symbolic representations which have been  tendered to us at each stage of our progress. 

The G.D. teaching has reference mainly to Religion and to  Philosophy; but it is of course obvious that our Rituals are but  outlines and landmarks in the world of thought. 

The vacant spaces each member fills for himself or leaves  blank. 

A little consideration will assure us that these vacant spaces  are filled by individual members in very different manners.  Every shade of unorthodoxy is represented among us; and some  of us are almost orthodox, yet we are all sensible of a mighty  tie which binds us together : this is our Ritual Wisdom. 

Whence these rituals come, through whom they come, and  even who are our present Temple Chiefs are all matters of  secondary interest. The personal element of rule is but a ques-  tion of the arrangements of time, place and finance, and there  is no claim of authority by any beyond the accepted Ritual.  You who are here today to listen to this lecture (or you who  read it hereafter), have come to this Hall only to seek from  my words further suggestions of thought on Occult teachings,  you are well aware that I represent myself alone, in what I  say, and that you are each perfectly free to take what seemeth  good unto you and to reject the refuse. In my honour to the  Order in which I bear a part, I have always made the clearest  MAN, GOD AND THE ROSICRUCIAN INITIATION 

distinction between the Ancient Ritual and our modern com-  ments, and this distinction you must always bear in mind, for  it must not be considered that the doctrines of any single elder  or ruler are necessarily all true to the Hermetic faith. All indivi-  duals go astray even if some go farther than others. The Order  here then has no Pope nor Popess and our Bible at every stage  is imperfect; we are fellow students, still crying for the Light;  and every lecture given here is but the expression of personal  opinion, from some one who has far longer than most trod  the path of Hermetic progress, and the proportion of doctrine  or fact which you accept must be estimated by yourselves, for  yourselves — it is a duty you owe to yourselves to work out your  own transmutation — to change the powers of physical sensuous  life into the refined spiritual faculties of Adeptship, in truth  as well as in name. As senior Adept among you, just now, my  duties are to keep you to the doctrines of our Rituals, as far as  they go, — to leave you quite free where they do not lead, but to  stimulate your efforts in the search for the Philosophic Gold by  occasional short essays of my own, which although quite with-  out authority, will suggest subjects and lines of thought which  those who have gone before you have found fruitful of high  ideals. 

I am about to take, today, a leaf from the clerics and say  something on two texts, from the Hebrew Bible; and so you  are all free to think as you please about the subject. 

My opinion is that a part is historical, and a part of the  history is allegorical and that while it was intended as a text  book for the populace, yet there are in it many references to  an esoteric creed held by the priests of the Nation. 

It seems to me that the Divine Names of the Hebrew Volume  especially hide and yet reveal a glimpse of the secrets of Divine  power, majesty and governance. Occult Science has in every  age seen mighty mysteries in the name Jehovah. Now the two  texts I am about to refer to, alike, allude to the great name  ‘Elohim’. 

The first text is found in Exodus XXXII, Verse I, and was  as I will remember, used as a text by my G. H. Fra. D.D.C.F. in  a lecture he gave ten years ago to the Hermetic Society of my  FLYING ROLL NO. XV 

dear Friend Anna Kingsford — it is the words of the Israelites  to Aaron, when Moses had gone up to seek God. 

‘Make us Elohim which shall go before us', or, let us make  Gods to help us, to form our ideals. The other text is in Genesis  I, 26, Veamar Elohim Nosher Adam Be Azelinunu Re demuthun.  ‘And the Elohim said let us make man ’ — ‘in our image and after  our likeness’. Note the contrast, and alternation of expression.  The men cried let us make gods — The Gods said let us make  men — We are here seeking gods, or divine ideals; — and we are  making men; for men make themselves and they make their  own gods — The Poet sings — 

The Ethiop gods have Ethiop eyes 

Thick lips, and woolly hair; 

The gods of Greece were like the Greeks 

As keen, as cold, as Fair 

A modern philosopher has written ‘The Gods may have made  man, but men have made their own Gods, and a pretty mess  they have made of it’. Let us be careful what gods we make  for ourselves, and on what pedestals we place them. 

The great Jehovah may have made man in the Garden of  Eden, it matters not to me; but I know I make myself, and I  know you are hourly making yourselves — the child is father  to the man indeed, quite as surely as that the man is father of  the child — a mighty mystery. Now Moses had gone up into  the holy mountain to seek divine help: — this Sinai was the  Mountain of God — the Mountain of the Caverns, the Mountain  of Abiegnus, the mystic Mountain of Initiation — that is of  divine instruction. Even so do we seek inspiration in the mystic  Mountain, passing through the wilderness of Horeb, that period  life which is at first a desert to us, as we cast aside worldly joys,  and seek to pass through the Caverns — our Vault, to union  with the spiritual powers above us, which send a ray of light  to illumine our minds and to fire our hearts, the spiritual centre,  with an enthusiasm for the higher life of greater self sacrifice,  more self-control — by which means alone can man reach up  to the Divine and become one with the All self — the great One-  All.  MAN, GOD AND THE ROSICRUCIAN INITIATION 

Our V.H. Sor.-S.S.D.D. has in an earlier Roll pointed out  this passing through the desert, and that volume of beautiful  thoughts, the Voice of the Silence alludes to the same period of  trial, which must precede success in the attainment of the Higher  Life — Light on the Path too, well portrays the period of transi-  tion, when by the energy of enthusiasm the inspired pupil casts  aside wordly ambition and the joys of life, the pride of the  eye, the lust of the flesh, and stands seeking the foothold of  the first step of the mystical ladder, whose ascent can fill the  heart with such sublime aspirations that the way is no longer  steep, nor the path dreary, and when the dawning Sun of  Tiphereth, shedding a ray of splendour upon the Path, en-  courages the toiler to the consummation devoutly to be desired.  I have said that we make our own gods, and this is a great  secret truth. Moses made his God, and impressed his ideal upon  the people he led — Mohomet formulated his own idea of God,  and of post mortem union with God, and of a Heaven where  men are visitors to a vast Supernal Harem. Jesus taught his  idea of his Father, and his suggestions have tinctured the God  ideal of millions; but the mere adherence of the millions to any  doctrine is but slender evidence of its truth, for as Carlyle has  said, the majority of men are fools — Man does not alone for-  mulate a Deity, but designs also a contrast to our notion of  Supernal greatness, knowledge and power. So does Genesis, for  there we find Jehovah thwarted by the Serpent; we find in the  book of Job that the Supreme One was lead into folly or in-  gratitude or worse, by Satan who came before him among the  ‘Sons of God’ and by dint of applying to Job every earthly suffer-  ing, sought to degrade him before his Master. We find the  Evangelists describing a Satan only second to Jesus, who had  power to promise, and, we must suppose, to confer upon Jesus,  either Lordship of the World or a divine supremacy over matter,  — if he would but tender a nominal submission. 

We find the mediaeval European priest formulating the  grotesque horned and tailed human demon, and lastly we are  instructed concerning the Qabalistic enumeration of the Evil  and Averse Sephiroth. Are not these all human ideals, and if we  were but philosophic at heart, should we not confess that these  FLYING ROLL NO. XV 

notions are but futile attempts to express the unknown and un-  knowable? No man can go beyond his own powers, and if we  do but formulate as divine our own highest ideal not much  harm may be done, so long as we grant equal powers of for-  mulation to our brothers. 

But in respect to Evil Beings, let us forbear, and beware of  speculating or designing forces contrasted to our high ideals;  for the mind has a creative force we but little know of, or  understand, and in our ignorance we may create in our own  auras evil personalities in spaces that might have remained  vacant. 

Never risk the creation of Evil forces, let us avoid and repel  all the evil promptings that attack us with firmness, courage  and decision — but avoid arrogance and impertinence, for even  the so-called evil forces, the contrasted powers have functions  to perform, and even the evil forces may help forward the  good, as is so beautifully alluded to in our Adeptus Ritual.  Suffice it to say, that every man has a dual nature, or every  man has dual forces — Yetza ha Ra — Yetzer ha Job — attendant  upon him; or as the Theosophist prefers to put the matter, man  has a higher and a lower manas, and the destiny of any in-  dividual is within limits under his own control. 

The general result of this present life may be upward or  downward, for Man has Free Will, within limits, and very  expansible limits too. God, or the Divine Powers, did indeed  design and constitute the plan of Man’s constitution, origin  and destiny, and it is but of slight moment, whether in philo-  sophy we view Man as a Termary, a Septenary or as a Decad,  but it is of vital importance to remember that with Free Will  comes personal responsibility, and that every thought and act;  that we are daily and hourly making the future history of our-  selves, and piling up destiny whose realisation cannot be baulked  by divine interposition nor changed by a maudlin sentimental  repentance, nor by the surreptitious substituted sufferings of  others. The type of man may indeed be viewed as emanating  from the Elohim of Life, from the High Septenary of Powers,  and his constitution may be in elementary form allotted to the  Sun as the Giver of Vital Fire, — to the Moon for the Astral  MAN, GOD AND THE ROSICRUCIAN INITIATION 

Mould of Form, to the Earth for the Material body : the Planets  and Stars may influence man’s form, stature and tendencies, but  the destiny of the Thinker will depend upon the Thoughts. This  is all true of man as a type of Creation, — Man as an Individual  hourly makes himself — One life makes another. There may be  a final Heaven, a final rest, a re-absorption into Deity, but this  is not yet. The ladder of progression from earth to heaven must  be climbed, before the foot can attain the summit. Some egos  may go up rapidly, some may pass slowly, self exertion is the  measure of success. 

Let us then make Man — make the Divine Man out of the  Human Man. Let us create the Hermetic ideal man from the  material sensual man. It is our bounden duty to rend the Veil  ‘Paroketh’ and to let our human intellect attain to the percep-  tion of the Holy of Holies which shines within us from above.  For now we see us in a Glass darkly, but with the Veil rended,  we shall see God face to face. 

How have the Alchemists of old, when passing from the  physical, drawn the picture of the Souls transmutation or trans-  lation to eternity from time, — how have they also figured this  Soul Growth and Development. 

They wrote in beautiful allegory : — 

The Heart of man is as the Sun, the reception organ for the  Divine Ray of spiritual intuition descending unto Man. The  Brain of Man is as the Moon, — the source of human intellect.  The Body of Man is the Earthy vehicle. 

Let the sun impregnate the Moon, or let Spiritual Fire prompt  the human intellect — and let the result fructify in the womb  of a purified Body, and you will develop the Son of the Sun, the  Quintessence, the Stone of the Wise, True Wisdom and Perfect  Happiness.  Flying RoU No. X 

Concerning the Sybolism of Self-Sacrifice,  and Crucifixion contained in the 5° = 6° Grade  By G. H. Frater D.D.C.F. 

This lecture was delivered on Good Friday, March 31st, 1893,  to the Adepti in College Assembled. 1 

Dealing first of all with the diagrams in the First Order  and proceeding upwards, it will be noticed that in the lowest  Grade in the Outer (o° = o°) there are no diagrams properly so  called, but that on the two Pillars is depicted the symbolism of  the passage of the Soul from the Egyptian Ritual of the Dead;  this being as it were a synthetical aspect to be developed and  explained with the advance of the candidate through the various  stages. 

After the first Grade comes the i° = io°, where we find the  first form of the Sephiroth in the Tree of Life; — this is the  representation of the Flaming Sword descending, but it is not  until the 2° = 9° comes that we begin to find the actual sym-  bolism of self sacrifice. 

The 2° = 9° Altar Diagram, then, represents the Serpent of  Wisdom twined through the Paths. In the 4° = 7° Grade, how-  ever, you are shown the same Serpent, its representation being  that of the Serpent Nechushtan. This was the Serpent of Brass  that Moses made in the Wilderness, and which was turned  around the central Pillar of Mildness, — having three cross bars  upon it, — representing a species of triple cross. 

Dealing now with the Altar Diagram of the 3° = 8° Grade,  it will be seen that Adam is the Tiphereth part : wherein he is  extended. That is to say that the form of the man is projected  from there. 

The figure of Eve stands in Malkuth in the form of the Sup-  porter. 

1 Those readers who are unacquainted with the technical ter-  minology of the Qabalah would be well advised to read the Prefatory  Note to Part Five of this book before tackling this Flying Roll.  (Editorial Note.)  MAN, GOD AND THE ROSICRUCIAN INITIATION 

The first ideal form of the Man is in Adam Kadmon — behind  the Kether form and, as it were, the prototype of the Tiphereth  form. This Tiphereth answers to the letter Vau of the Holy  Name, as representing the Prince. The letter Vau also represents  the number Six and Adam was created on the Sixth Day, for  Tiphereth is the symbol of the Creation. Furthermore, the  Hexagram consists of the two forms Fire and Water; — i.e. the  ideal Fire and the ideal Water; the Spirit and the Water of  Creation, — the spiritual Ether and the Ethereal Fire (the Fire of  the Holy Spirit). Thus, in the Creation the Man is extended  from Tiphereth i.e. the moment Adam is created, that is the  beginning of the reflection of the lower Triad, and, finally, of  Malkuth. Eve is the synthesis of Creation and represents the  Mother of Life, as the name ChaVaH is. The 3° = 8° diagram  thus represents the establishment of life, i.e., created life, and  the Good and Evil is represented in Malkuth, and it is the  Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil because it is the balance  point between Good and Evil : for in the material body we are  placed to give the victory to which we will. Hence the signifi-  cance of the words of the Serpent, ‘Ye shall be as Gods, knowing  Good and Evil’. But the knowledge of Evil brought with it the  descent into the Qlipoth, and although Malkuth is directly  involved in the ‘fall’, the Sephiroth immediately above cannot  be said to have actually entered into the knowledge of Evil.  Therefore in the allegorical account of the Creation in Genesis,  it is said that Man is checked from putting forth his hand to  take of the Tree of Life, so as not to involve the higher Sephiroth  in the ‘Fall’, which, (he being unbalanced in himself) would  only have precipitated disaster. 

In the 4° = 7° diagram we find represented the fall and the  consequent rise of the dragon, which in the 3 0 = 8° Grade is  represented coiled beneath Malkuth in the Kingdom of the  Shells; but it only raises its head to the Sephiroth by right of  the Crowns of the Kings of Edom. 

These latter represent the Worlds of unbalanced force, before  the Creation is established. They furthermore symbolize the  places of the Sephiroth which are hollowed and before the  light fills the cavities (The Light which comes down and fills the  FLYING ROLL NO. X 

cavities is to be found allegorically set forth in the story of the  usurpation of the younger brother in the story of Esau and  Jacob). ‘Before all things were the Waters, and the Darkness,  and the Gates of the land of Night’. Note also the War of the  Titans who rise and fight against Jupiter. 

The Edomite Kings, therefore, are not altogether evil, but they  are partly connected with Evil. They are the forces of restric-  tion. 

The result, therefore, on a higher plane, in the Tree, is that  the Great Serpent rises to Daath, and if the Four Worlds be  placed upon the Tree itself, it will be observed that the cutting  off by the Serpent is between Yetzirah and Briah. Thus Evil  cannot arise into the World of Briah, or indeed transcend the  limits of Yetzirah. But if we seek for the correspondence of Evil  in the Worlds of Briah and Atziluth, it will be found to consist  in a lesser form of Good — a limiting, restricting and binding  force without which you cannot have form on the higher  planes. It is only in the Worlds of Yetzirah and Assiah that the  analogue of this principle becomes absolutely Evil. 

This idea was expressed by the Gnostics when they said that  the Achamoth 2 attempted to comprehend the Pleroma, and  could not understand it, and from the grief of her were formed  the demons and the evil spirits. 

If therefore we seek to institute an analogy between the  Microcosm it will be seen that Nepheseh refers to Malkuth and  Assiah: Ruach will refer to Yetzirah, which is the World of  formation, therefore the formative principle operating in Ruach  gives form to all ideas, and is that which weighs, balances and  works in things. Ruach can also have an evil side. 

Neschamah=the higher aspirations of the Soul, which aspire  to the ideal. There can be no positively evil side to Neschamah: —  there will only be a higher or lower aspiration. 

If the Ruach overpowers the Neschamah; if the Neschamah  seeks the lower good, both will be ruined. The following of a  false idea cannot be said to be exactly evil, but is a lower Good  than it should be. 

2 The Gnostics called this Achamoth, but probably this was a  corruption of Chokmutha. (Original Note.)  MAN, GOD AND THE ROSICRUCIAN INITIATION 

Neschamah will answer to the World of Briah : — so also will  Chiah, which is allotted to Chokmah; but you cannot touch the  Yechidah part of you with your Ruach, — you must use the  consciousness of the Neschamah. This Yechidah will, together  with Chiah, be the ‘Higher Genius’, though this again will not  be the highest self. For in and behind Kether will reside a part  of the being, which it is impossible to understand, and which  one can only aim at: this is the highest Soul, and answering to  the highest part of Yechidah, cannot be touched by Neschamah.  There must be a mode of transferring the synthesis of the con-  sciousness making up the Man, — to this upper Sephirah. The  Fall, which cut away the higher from the lower Sephiroth in  Daath, was also our descent into this life, as it were, from that  Upper and Higher Soul. Therefore our object is to get into con-  tact with that again, which is only to be done through the  Neschamah, which is the Divine Mother of the Soul, — our Aima. 

When the Candidate enters the Vault and kneels down at the  second point, he does so at the centre of the Altar above the  symbolic form of the Adept, who is the synthesis of the sides of  the Vault, whence he has come forth and occupies a central  position between the Kether and the World of the Shades, —  being there protected by the rising glory of the Golden Cross and  the Rose. Then this Prayer is said : ‘Unto Thee Sole Wise, Sole  Mighty and Sole Eternal One, be Praise and Glory for Ever’. Now  it must be the Macroprosopus, the Amen, who is addressed here,  — the Lord of Kether who has permitted this aspirant who now  kneeleth before Him to penetrate thus far into the Sanctuary of  His Mysteries (which is in the centre of the Universe). Not unto  us, but unto His Name be the Glory, (which is the name JHVH  with the addition of the letter Shin) ‘Let the influence of Thy  Divine Ones descend upon his head,’ (These Divine Ones are  Angelic forces, and the higher Self is in the nature of the Angelic  Forces, as the Highest Self is in that of the Divine One) ‘and  teach him the value of Self sacrifice, so that he shrink not in  the hour of trial, but that thus his name may be written on high’  (that is that the divine NAME formulated in him may be  brought up, as it were, to the heights) ‘and may stand in the  presences of the Holy One' (which genius will be a mighty  FLYING ROLL NO. X 

Angelic power and in form far different from the petty person-  ages we are here) ‘in that hour when the Son of Man is worked  before the Lord of Spirits and his name in the Presence of the  Ancient of Days’. 

This will be the synthetical form of the Son of Man, the BEN  ADAM, who is the synthesis of the Ruach of the Universe : in  other words, the allusion is to the Great God of the World of  Yetzirah or the Microprosopus, the Son of the first Adam when  he is invoked before the Lord of Spirits, which can but be in  Kether; and his name in the presence of the Ancient of Days. ‘He  who is ancient before the Gods, ancient before time, ancient  before the formation of the Worlds, He the ETERNAL AMEN —  or even He who is before AMEN and whom the plumes of  Amen’s head-dress only touch’. 

Now the foregoing partly represents the mode in which the  initiate becomes the Adept: — the Ruach directed in accordance  with the promptings of the Neschamah keeps the Nephesch  from being the ground of the Evil forces, and the Neschamah  brings it, the Ruach, into contact with the Chiah i.e. the genius  which stands in the presence of the Holy One = the Yechidah =  the Divine Self, which stands, as it were, before the Synthetical  God of all things. That is the only real way to become the  Greatest Adept, and is directly dependent on your life and your  actions in life. 

And upon the lid of the Pastos this process is symbolically  resumed : there we see the suffering Man, pitiful and just, be-  fore whose justice and purity the heads of the dragon fall back,  but on the upper half there is depicted a tremendous and a  flaming God, the fully initiated Man, — the Adept who has  attained his Supreme Initiation. 

It will be noticed that in the 4° = 7 0 Diagram the heads of the  Dragon have seized the Sephiroth but, as before remarked, on  the lid of the Pastos they are falling back from the figure on the  Cross: they are dispossessed only by the sacrifice of the lower  Self. 

Recall to your mind that passage in one of the Eddas ‘I hung  on the Tree three days and three nights, wounded with a spear,  myself a sacrifice offered to my (highest) Self, — Odin unto Odin’.  MAN, GOD AND THE ROSICRUCIAN INITIATION 

It will furthermore be noticed that this way of looking at the  matter at once makes a reconciliation between the account in  the Gospel of the Christ as a calm, peaceful and pitiful Man,  and the representation in the Apocalypse of a tremendous and  flaming God. A glance at the top half of the Pastos shows the  descent as a flaming sword which casts out the evil, — the whole  surrounding being white with brilliance. ‘And He had in His  right hand Seven Stars ... and the Seven Stars represent the  (Arch) Angels of the Seven Churches’, or abodes in Assiah, at  His feet . . . 

The Life of Nations is like the Life of men; — they are born,  become intellectual, direct that intellect to black ends, — and,  perish. But every now and then at the end of certain periods,  there are greater crises in the World’s history than at other  periods, and at such times it becomes necessary that Sons of God  should be incarnated to lead on the new era of the Universe. I do  not affirm that Christ was necessarily a man who obtained  Adeptship in that incarnation, but rather one who had obtained  Adeptship and come down to be incarnated again to lead up the  new era. It was, however, necessary in the crucifixion of so great  a Soul, — so that the form might actually suffer, — that every-  thing except the Nephesch should be withdrawn which would  be the reason of the Cry of the Nephesch, ‘My God, My God,  Why hast thou forsaken me ? ' For the Nephesch which was tem-  porarily abandoned in this case was the cloak of that incarna-  tion. In other words, the only mortal part about the Man, or the  God, and then only after incurring that physical death, as it  were, could the other divine parts suddenly come down and  make it the resurrected or glorified body, which, according to the  description, had after the Resurrection, the apparent solidity of  the ordinary body, and the faculties of the Spirit body. Because  if you can once get the great force of the Highest to send its ray  dean down through the Neschamah into the mind, and thence,  into your physical body, the Nephesch would be so transformed  as to render you almost like a God walking on this Earth. 

The Ruach, then, has to undergo a certain check and suffering  in order to attain its Apotheosis — which is the work of our  Adept.  FLYING ROLL NO. X 

In the fully Initiated Adept the Nephesch is so withdrawn  into the Ruach that even the lowest parts of these two principles  cease to become allied to the body and are drawn into the first  six Sephiroth. This is again brought out in the Obligation, where  you say, ‘I pledge myself to hereby give myself to the Great  Work, which is so to exalt my lower nature that I may at length  become more than human and thus gradually raise and unite  myself to my higher and divine genius’. If it is a very great thing  to unite yourself to the genius, how much more so must it be  to unite yourself to the God that is behind it ! 

Looking at the Pastos, it will be seen that it represents a kind  of triple cube, the whole of which is placed between light and  darkness. The lid is half light and half darkness, the upper end  is the symbol of light, and the lower, the symbol of darkness, —  while the sides have the colours placed between the Light and  the Darkness. At the head is placed a Golden Greek Cross, rep-  resenting the Spirit and the Elements, and a Rose of 7 times 7  petals, and there are four rays which go out from it. But at the  foot, — that which the feet rest on as if they were exalted by it, —  is the Cross exalted on a pedestal of Three Steps, viz. the Obliga-  tion Cross. This latter is also to an extent represented on the top  in the crucified figure, and symbolises the voluntary sacrifice of  the lower Will, which is incidental to allying the intellect with  the higher aspirations and to the establishment of your con-  sciousness therein: — thus if the ordinary consciousness were  centred in the Ruach you could 1 touch the Neschamah, while if  it was in the latter you could touch the Genius. 

Now this transference of consciousness from Ruach to Nescha-  mah is one object of the ceremonial of the 5° = 6° Ritual: — it  is a thing which will be more readily understood when the Grade  of Adept Adeptus Minor is reached. It is especially intended to  effect the change of the consciousness into the Neschamah and  there are three places where is can take place. The first is when  the Aspirant is on the Cross, because he is so exactly fulfilling  the Symbol of the abnegation of the lower Self and the union  with the Higher Self : — and also there is the invocation of the  Angel H.V.A. 

The second place is when he touches the Rose on the represen-  MAN, GOD AND THE ROSICRUCIAN INITIATION 

tative of C.R. in the Vault, when he has taken on himself the  symbols of suffering and self sacrifice, and says that his victory is  in the Cross of the Rose. 

The third place is when he enters the Vault in the Third point  and kneels down and the Chief Adept says ‘I am the Reconciler  with the Ineffable: I am the dweller of the Invisible: let the  White Brilliance of the divine Spirit descend.’ 

In these three cases a possible exchange of the consciousness  from the Ruach into the Neschamah is initiated, so that whether  he understands it, or not, the Aspirant actually approaches his  own Genius. 

(There are some cases where the Genius may have attained a  height and fallen : — that is when, having touched the Ruach in  one incarnation, it has been so wrought upon by the sufferings  of the lower part that it has for the moment consented to slacken  the tension of their union. 

Now if the Genius part, instead of identifying itself with the  God part, identifies itself too much with the Neschamah, a fall  of the Genius takes place : which is not altogether evil, but may  entail a certain evil effect.) 

The most complete point of the actual contact is in the third  point, where the Chief Adept says: — ‘I am the Resurrection  and the Life ! He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet  shall he live, and whosoever liveth and believeth on me shall  never die’: i.e. if you can live at will in the Neschamah and  touch the Genius, you will have made a great step towards the  divine Elixir, for you will be worthy to sit with the Gods, and  that which you drink of is the real Elixir, the Elixir of the Spirit  of Life. 

Then the Second Adept says: — ‘Behold the Image of the  Justified One, crucified on the Cross of the Infernal Rivers of  death’, and the Third Adept shows deific antithesis, — the exalta-  tion into the Divine. Then the Chief Adept says again : — ‘I am  the First and the Last’ — the Aleph and the Tau and the Yod and  He final of the sacred Name, — ‘I am He that liveth but was dead,  and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen’, that is using the  name of the Egyptian Deity AMON, or Amen, who represents  the Ideal God force, — ‘and I hold the Keys of Death and of Hell’  FLYING ROLL NO. X 

(Because if you stand on Malkuth and keep your touch with the  Gods, you hold the Keys of that which is below) — 

But the lower self all this time has an existence, for it cer-  tainly is not quite eliminated: — it is cast forth from the  Nephesch, yet preserving a link with it, it goes down into the  Qlipoth, and in this connection, it is well to observe that what  may be really Evil on this Earth plane, may be even as a God  among the Demons. 

The words ‘He descended into Hell’, have such a significance. 

This Third point then represents the attainment of the  Divine : — and the Second Adept proceeds to say : — ‘He that  hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Assem-  blies’ (i.e. in Malkuth) and if the Voice of the Divine is found in  Malkuth it must find its echo in the realms beneath. 

Then follows the exaltation into Neschamah of the Conscious-  ness of the Chief Adept, whose Voice seems as if he were sym-  bolically standing with his head in Atziluth, whence it rever-  berates through the Worlds, sinking down below Malkuth unto  the dominion of the Shells and he says : — ‘For I know that my  Redeemer liveth’ (the Redeemer is he that brings again) ‘and  that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth. I am the  Way, the Truth and the Life. No Man cometh unto the Father  but by me etc.’ This whole passage of the Chief Adept is formed  of a collection of utterances, which are, as it were, the speeches  of the Great Gods, which he can only hear when he is still fur-  ther exalted into Kether. ‘I am the Way, the Truth and the  Life’, is the reflected Triad. No Man cometh unto the Father, but  by me. Then the Neschamah speaks; down to ‘I have entered into  the Invisible’. Then it is as if the Consciousness went into the  Genius, which says ‘I am the Sun in his rising, I have passed  through the hour of Cloud and Night’. 

Then follows: — ‘I am Amon the concealed one, the opener  of the Day,’ — like the Great God in Atziluth — ‘I am Osiris  Onnofris, the Crucified One,’ who is perfected in the balance and  risen above all considerations that come from Maya, or illusion,  and who only seeks the eternal life from above, and then, as if in  a supreme moment ‘I am the Lord of Life, triumphant over  death, there is no part of me that is not of the Gods’. (That is the  MAN, GOD AND THE ROSICRUCIAN INITIATION 

voice of Kether.) This again is followed by a synthetical cul-  mination, as if all the divine ones united in the utterance : ‘I am  the Preparer of the Pathway, the Rescuer unto the Light! Out  of the Darkness let the Light arise ! ’ 

Then the Aspirant is prompted to say — ‘Before, I was blind,  but now I see,’ — representing again the blindness to the Nes-  chamah Consciousness and the passage into this. 

Whereupon the Chief Adept says: — ‘I am the Reconciler  with the Ineffable! I am the dweller of the Invisible: let the  White Brilliance of the Divine Spirit descend’. 

The Aspirant is now told to rise an Adeptus Minor of the  Rose of Ruby and the Cross of Gold, in the sign of Osiris slain, —  and then ‘We receive thee as an Adeptus Minor in that sign of  Rectitude and Self Sacrifice.’ 

The affirmation of the three parts is then proceeded with. —  The Chief Adept says : 

‘Be thy Mind opened unto the Higher,’ Second : ‘Be thy heart  the centre of Light’, and Third : ‘Be thy body the Temple of the  Rosy Cross’. 

The Pass Word is then announced, which is formed from the  Mystic Number of the Grade, 21, — this Pass Word, however is  the divine Name of Kether: — and it is used as the Pass Word  of this Grade of Tiphereth in order to affirm the connection be-  tween the two. 

Then the Chief Adept says that the Key Word is I.N.R.I. The  three Adepts themselves represent Chesed, Geburah and Tipher-  eth. The Creator, the Destroyer and the Sacrificed One, ISIS,  APOPHIS and OSIRIS = the name IAO. The Symbol of Osiris  slain is the Cross; V is the sign of the mourning of Isis : the sign  of Typhon and Apophis : x the sign of Osiris risen : = LVX,  the Light of the Cross, or that which symbolises the way into  the Divine through Sacrifice. So that the symbolism in its  entirety represents the exaltation of the Initiate into the Adept.  Esoteric Psychology 

being 

Flying Roll No. XX  Flying Roll No. XXI 




Prefatory Note 


For the sake of those readers of this book who are not familiar  with the Qabalistic system used in the Western Esoteric Tradi-  tion I think it best that I should give a brief outline of that  system as an introduction to the Flying Rolls which follow. 

The Qabalah is essentially a system of classification. The  various factors that make up both the universe (the macrocosm)  and the soul of man (the microcosm) are classified in accordance  with ten numbers, the Sephiroth of the Tree of Life, and twenty-  two letters, the Paths of the Tree of Life . 1 

The manifested universe is further divided into Four Worlds,  each containing a Tree of Life of its own. The Four Worlds are  classified as follows : 

Atziluth, Archetypal — Pure Deity 

Briah, Creative — Archangelic 

Yetzirah, Formative — Angelic 

Assiah, Action — Man, Matter, Shells, Demons. 

In each of these Four Worlds are the ten Sephiroth of that  World, and each Sephirah in turn is divided into a Tree of Life  made up of ten Sephiroth. This makes four hundred Sephiroth in  all — the number of the letter Tau, last letter of the Hebrew  alphabet, the completion of all things. 

When the Tree of Life is applied to the nature of Man it is  divided into three, Nephesch, Ruach, and Neschamah — roughly  equivalent to the Body, Soul and Spirit of St. Paul. 

Nephesch is equated with Malkuth and Yesod, the two lowest  Sephiroth of the Tree of Life, and is usually translated as ‘Animal  Soul’. It is the vehicle by which the mind is brought into contact  with matter and, broadly speaking, it corresponds with the  ‘etheric’ and ‘lower astral’ bodies of Theosophical terminology.  Ruach, the second principle, is usually translated as Mind or 

1 These thirty-two factors were usually represented in diagramma-  tic form This diagram — the Tree of Life — may be found in such  easily available works as Dion Fortune’s Mystical Qabalah, W. Gray’s  Ladder of Lights, and R. G. Torrens’ Golden Dawn — Its Inner  Teachings. (Editorial Note.)  Intellect. It is made up of the five Sephiroth (Chesed, Geburah,  Tiphereth, Netzach and Hod) that lie above Yesod. Ruach is a  set of five intermeshing intellectual principles, ‘divided for love’s  sake, on the chance of union', concentrated upon their central  core, the Sun of Tiphareth, the human consciousness and will, of  which the other four Sephiroth are, after a certain fashion, ex-  tensions. 

The Neschamah is subdivided into three; the Jechidah, or  Divine Spark, the Chiah, or Will, and the Neschamah proper. 

The Jechidah is the Divine Spark, ‘that in me which is more  than me myself’, the deepest layer of consciousness. It is at the  same time that which all men have in common and that which  differentiates one man from another. On the Tree of Life it cor-  responds with the topmost Sephirah, Kether, the Crown. 

The Chiah, or essential will, is the creative impulse of the  Jechidah, through which the latter obtains its self-realisation. On  the Tree of Life it equates with Chokmah, Wisdom. 

The Neschamah itself corresponds with the Great Mother  Binah, or Understanding, the third Sephirah of the Tree. It is  the Jechidah’s own understanding of itself. 

It must be realised that Jechidah, Chiah, and Neschamah form  a trinity — it is impossible to conceive of one of them without  the other two.  Flying RoU No. XX 

The following diagram will of course be immediately recognised  by all of you : — 





ESOTERIC PSYCHOLOGY 

Now supposing a physical man to be here represented, Kether  is the Crown and is above the head. The junction of Chokmah  and Binah in Daath is in the head itself. Then Chesed and  Geburah will correspond to the arms and shoulders, Tiphereth  and Yesod to the trunk and body, Netzach and Hod to the hips  and legs, and Malkuth to the feet alone. 

Now I will put to you the question, where was the mystic  body of our Founder, Christian Rosenkreutz discovered? In  Tiphereth. And what is Tiphereth? The centre. That is to say  it is in the centre of the middle Sphere and when that middle  Sphere is projected what does it represent? The Polar Axis.  Representing then the Polar Axis it will be in a sense invisible  from the outside. Therefore the outermost form of the whole  projection will be spherical. Now that would imply that Tiphe-  reth corresponds to the heart and Tiphereth represents the  place where the Chief Adept is found and it is the Polar Axis,  and the influence which is surrounding this physical body of the  man is a Sphere like that of the Universe. This Sphere then sur-  rounds the body. Thus it will be the Assiah Plane of the Man, the  Malkuth containing the reflection of the other Ten Sephiroth.  Now this Sphere is what we of the Rosier ucian Order, call the  magical mirror of the Universe, or the Sphere of sensation of the  Microcosm. It is the Aura of the man. Now you will understand  that as the Chief Adept is placed in Tiphereth you may expect  to find the most vital portion of the body about the heart. The  heart will therefore represent the King of the physical body. All  this is, of course, much better explained in the lecture on the  Microcosm which you will get later on. 

This sphere, answering to the Sphere of the Macrocosm, you  will naturally expect that it will have the forces of the Macro-  cosm reflected in it. Towards which part of the Zodiac then  would you expect the man in the centre to face? He will face  towards that point in his Sphere of sensation which represents  the ascending degree in his horoscope and that ascending degree  will therefore be the point which is opposite. His object is the  development of the Daath principle which is in the head. This  principle is, you will observe, the link between Ruach and  Neschamah.  FLYING ROLL NO. XX 

Now thus is the Consciousness attributed. In Chiah is the  beginning of the Self of Man. The real Self is in Jechidah, and its  presentment in Chiah. Thus Jechidah is called the Divine Con-  sciousness ‘Conscire’ means ‘to know with’ and ‘to be in touch  with’ and only your Kether can do this as regards the Divine and  your Kether is then the Divine Consciousness. In Ruach is the  human Consciousness and the human Will. In Jechidah is the  Divine Will; so that the human Will is like the King of the  material body. The automatic Consciousness, as it is called, is in  Yesod, and has to do with the lower passions and desires. Being  automatic, that is moving of itself, it can hardly be said to be  Will. Now this is the danger which threatens the man who  yields to the temptations of the lower desires. The Human Will  which should be seated in Tiphereth, in the heart, is attracted  to contemplation of, and union with, the automatic Conscious-  ness so that the human Consciousness abdicates its throne and  becomes automatic. You will find in the life history of men that  vice brings about a species of automatic condition which com-  pels them always to move in the same grooves, and it is a known  fact that it recurs at regular intervals like a disease, and it is  indeed a disease. 

This automatic Consciousness in its right place refers to Yesod  which is the part which attracts the material atoms, and here  it is in its proper place. When, however, it usurps the place of  the Human Consciousness then it rules instead of being subject  to the Human Consciousness, and this destroys the balance of  the Sephiroth. 

Now in Daath is the Throne of the Spiritual Consciousness  and Daath being the result of Chokmah and Binah it is the pre-  sentment of the seven following Sephiroth, that is to say that in  the head are the seven planets of which the eyes will answer to  the two luminaries — the right to the Sun and the left to the  Moon. 

You will now at once see that spiritual consciousness does not  partake of the physical body but is the light which radiates. The  way in which thought proceeds is by radiation, that is to say, its  rays are thrown vibrating through this sphere of Astral Light.  This will explain to you a very fruitful source of mistaken Clair-  voyance. The many errors arise therefrom : It is really a selfish-  ness of the thought plane. The Consciousness is content, as it  were, to receive the reflections which are in its sphere and which  have necessarily been modified by the person himself. Let us take  an example of individual modification and we will choose that  of the planet Mars. Fire will be red. That is to say, that in all  cases of a fiery nature the judgment will be fairly accurate. But  the fault will be manifest when you come to a watery nature. It  will then be represented by violet instead of by blue as it should  be, and he will always want to bring the nature of the Fire into  the watery natures. Here then is a fruitful source of error in  Clairvoyance, especially arising in natures which are not selfish  in the ordinary sense, but which have that more subtle selfish-  ness which arises from too much study of oneself. This is why,  in our system of Occultism we are contrary or converse to that  taught by the Theosophical Society. The Theosophists appar-  ently advise the student to commence with the study of the  Universe; and while I quite agree that he may arrive at his end  by that means, there is the danger of that spiritual or thought-  selfishness, and this is the reason why we study the Microcosm  before the Macrocosm. 

This continual dwelling on one’s own nature with the idea of  reforming and making oneself better is apt to give you too con-  tracted a view, and you are threatened with the selfishness which  you have yourself engendered. This is also the danger of too  great asceticism, because it is apt to bring about the feeling that  you are better than another person. These are the dangers. If  you can escape these dangers you will arrive at the goal. There-  fore to the student who is studying Clairvoyance, it is particu-  larly advisable that he should rather repress that form of it  which tends in his own direction, for fear of encouraging that  spiritual selfishness which is so subtle as to escape his attention  until it is too late. If he continues along this path his errors will  increase, and he will arrive at a period of depression. From this  will arise a series of miserable feeling which might have been  checked in the beginning. 

You see now that the sin of the Automatic Consciousness is  what is commonly called vice. The sin of the Human Conscious-  FLYING ROLL NO. XX 

ness is that of the intellectual man. 

The sin of the Spiritual Consciousness is the error of a some-  what psychic nature; you cannot have sin of the Divine Con-  sciousness because you cannot have any error in Kether. Here  again, you see, we have the representation of the four Planes in  Man, or YHVH.  Flying RoU No. XXI 

Know Thyself 

Address to the Zelator Adepti Minores  of the Order R.R. et A.C. By  Vestigia Nulla Retrorsum 6° = 5° 

Perfect knowledge of Self is required in order to attain Know-  ledge of Divinity, for when you can know the God of yourself  it will be possible to obtain a dim vision of the God of All, for  the Go d of the Macrocosm only reflects Himself to Man through  the God of Man’s Microcosm. 

Therefore, before you would invoke the Shining Ones be cer-  tain that you have called upon the Lord of Yourself, that is to  say, that the You in Daath (the seat of the Spiritual Conscious-  ness) have allied yourself to the You in Tiphereth (the seat of the  Human Consciousness) and to the You in Kether (the seat of  the Divine Consciousness), and from thence the Kether sending  rays downwards; from it to the Daath, from Daath to Tiphereth  and from thence to Yesod, which is the seat of the Automatic  Consciousness. 

This combination must have taken place with the consent of  the Lower Will (in Tiphereth) as being the Human Will. 

If you have succeeded in accomplishing this you are com-  mencing the real Initiation, (therefore, should an Adeptus  Minor strive to begin the practice of such an operation). 

It is said elsewhere that The Beginning of Initiation is the  Search for the Shining Light. For if the Man through Pure Know-  ledge and Aspiration has been able to place himself with his head  resting immediately under Kether the Crown, he has come into  contact with his First Light. 

But his Knowledge must be true, and his aspirations pure.  How else is he able to wear his Crown, upon which poureth the  Influx from Jechidah? 

It is this development of the Man that must have been inten-  ded by the Apostle Paul when he said : — ‘Till we all come . . .  to the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a Perfect Man, unto  the measure of the stature, of the fulness of Christ.’ That is, that  Man must grow sufficiently in his Spiritual growth, that he may  attain to that stature where his head will come into contact with  his Kether — that is, unto the Knowledge of his Higher Self. 

Regarding this, I will also quote 1 another passage from the  New Testament in which Christ says : — ‘Whosoever shall con-  fess me before men him shall the Son of Man also confess before  the Angels of God’ : — signifying that he who shall raise him-  self by linking his Human to his Divine Self, being consequently  in touch with the Kether of his Assiah, he will be able to rise still  further to the Plane of the Angels, that is to say, that through  the Kether of his Assiah he can be admitted to his plane of Yet-  zirah, his Angelic Self; for he has accepted the Christ within  him, his power of Ascent. ‘But he that denieth me before men  shall be denied before the Angels of God,’ meaning that he who  denies the me, the power of the letter Shin, the letter of the  Holy Spirit that makes of Jehovah the Name Jeheshua, hath  denied that Spirit, that Higher Self, which is his one link with  the Truth of Life, and so hath refused the Christ that can be  within him, the only part which would enable him to rise to his  Divine Self, whence he could receive the descent of the Divine  Spirit, which ever comes to him who seeketh for it. 

Kether is the Crown, then, which is placed on the head of  the complete Initiate; and a great King must he indeed be who  is fitted to bear such brilliance, and well must he have worked  towards the developing and perfecting of his Kingdom to have  made it worthy of that Divine Crown. 

Therefore must he whose aim is to become the Initiate, work  well at the development of the Forces of the Being; seeking to  purify and to exalt them. 

He, the man, standing in his Sephiroth, can well be compared  to a King in his Kingdom which if he wishes to govern well, he  must first learn to know and understand, for only after having  a complete knowledge of the constitution, character and inhabit-  ants of his realm, will it be possible for a just Ruler to bring  about such reforms as he may deem necessary; — hence the  great assistance given to us in the teachings of our Order which  insist on a careful study of the Kingdoms of the Macrocosm and  the Microcosm side by side with our Spiritual Development, one  study helping the other; in fact the two are almost inseparable.  FLYING ROLL NO. XXI 

Now the Kingdom of the Microcosm, the man, with which  this lecture is chiefly occupied, has distinctly its character, its  constitution, its inhabitants etc. — The King is placed in his  sphere, that is the boundary, the frontier of his realm. 

The constitution consists of his Sephiroth, upon which the  principal scheme of the Kingdom is modelled. 

Its character would be the general aim and tendency of the  Kingdom. (This would depend on the inclination of the pole of  its sphere as regards the Macrocosm.) 

The King’s abode is in Tiphereth where is placed his throne,  the seat of the Human Will, whence he wields the reins of  government either as a great ruler inspired by his masters above,  the Spiritual and Divine Consciousness, or as the Ruler debased  (inspired or, more accurately speaking, obsessed) by the volun-  tary abdication of his rule, through being led astray by the  temptation of the Automatic Consciousness to descend therein  and make Yesod his chief abode instead of Tiphereth, thereby  permitting the usurption of the Higher by the Lower. 

This fall, according to the nature of the man, (besides leading  to other evils) may bring him to the Phallic School of Symbolism  or to the grossest sensuality, for these two things are merely  the expression of the same error in different natures. 

His people are the many Forces of the Sephiroth of Ruach,  working in Malkuth through Nephesch (Nephesch=Malkuth)  The Priesthood, or rather the Prophets and Magicians, alone  ascending as far as their Daath, they dwelling on the Threshold  of their Divine Consciousness. 

The Nobles will be with the King himself, about his throne in  Tiphereth; as well as all the petty rulers, and professions and  trades governed by the Sun. 

In Chesed are the various occupations under Jupiter. 

In Geburah, Netzach and Hod are all those under Mars,  Venus and Mercury. 

Yesod, as the seat of the Automatic Consciousness, can hardly  be said to be an inhabitant, a conscious being; rather might it be  represented by the machinery, works and tools of the nation. 

Of course each Sephira will have its own Ten Sephiroth  within it, which would give its various types — professions,  trades, etc. — for example — Chesed; — in its Kether might be the  Priest (this naturally supposes the Priest to be true and upright;  the Prophet as the inspired Priest, which we mentioned before,  is placed in the Daath of the man.) 

A Philanthropist would be in its Chesed; in its Tiphereth — a  judge; and probably an artisan working under Jupiter in its  Yesod. 

Now he who is a just ruler will try to know well these people,  his subjects; neither giving undue attention or preference to  either one class or another, nor permitting strife in any one of  them, — therefore must one of the works of a student for Adept-  ship be to learn to bring perfect order into the Six Sephiroth of  hi s Ruach, then will the Qlipoth 2 who may be called the Wild  Beasts of the Nation, be forced to retire, they only having been  permitted to remain through Disorder. 

He will then be able to banish them to their own plane, the  land beyond Malkuth; as they, working in their own habitation,  therefore in their own element, they will be as the lecture on  the Microcosm says ‘equilibrated therein and the Evil Persona  (their synthesis) will become as a strong yet trained animal,  whereupon the man rideth, this bringing added material  strength unto the man’, which is a thing to be desired, if it be  completely governed by the Higher. 

One school of Occultism insists on the Neophyte retiring from  the world, on his leading a thoroughly ascetic life, and in every  way trying to exist without thought or desire for anything of  that which is Human. 

Now to some of us this may appear to be the only method for  the attainment of that self-development which we express in  the Tiphereth clause of the Adeptus Minor Obligation, when we  pledge ourselves to become more than human. 

We know that all the works of Nature are gradual in their  growth, therefore must a man also be gradual in his growth,  and before attaining to that more than human, that is to say,  Yetziratic, Briatic and Aziluthic planes he must certainly be  the Perfect Man in Assiah. 

It must be our object then, to become that Perfect Man, in 

2 The evil and averse Sephiroth. (Editorial Note.)  FLYING ROLL NO. XXI 

order to attain ultimately to that Angel, that Archangel, and  that Divinity, which are in Yetzirah, in Briah, and in Atziluth. 

And the Zelator Adeptus Minor, is not actually given any  special manner of life to follow; rather is he advised to deter-  mine for himself what shall be his relations with his family  business, society, etc., seeing that we human beings are so varied  in our character as in our surroundings so that the discipline  which will be beneficial for one may often be evil for another. 

One thing, however, is greatly insisted upon, and that is that  we should not retire from the world, for we can succeed in  perfecting ourselves in what is required of us without isolation. 

In certain cases, it might be advisable for the execution of  certain experiments connected with more advanced studies to  avoid contact with others for a short time; but this would only  be permissible in special cases. 

One of the reasons why we are told not to isolate ourselves is  that isolation tends to make a man egotistical — it will become a  habit to him to study and to pay too much attention to his own  Microcosm, whereby he will neglect other Microcosms which  together with his form part of the Macrocosm; and this Egotism  of the Spirit, (though not so gross a sin as is that of the Animal  or the Human Consciousness) will yet be a far greater snare to  him, as being more subtle and therefore less easy to be perceived  and checked. 

For the chief danger of spiritual egotism lies in the self-  righteous spirit so easily developed, which while gradually  absorbing the true Occult Aspiration flatters its victim with the  idea that he is rapidly attaining his proposed Goal. 

It will be best, then, for us to live amongst our fellows, and  in our contact with them are we advised to avoid preaching and  proselytising; which often leads also to a condition of self-  righteousness in the Preacher, and is generally useless to the  listener. 

Rather would we influence them by our example, and by  keeping our thoughts as well as our actions pure. 

Our Order teaches that one of our aims should be the Re-  generation of the Race of the Planet. 

We who are but beginners, and but on the Threshold of the  Second Order, can do but little yet in this Great Work, but we  are daily approaching this end, if we are fitting ourselves to  become the Perfect Man, for he, the Perfect Man, the Adept,  whose Human Will is at one with his Divine Will, therefore  always in contact with his Genius, or Angelic Self, can attract  yet Higher Forces. These Forces sending down Divine Rays till  they radiate through him, he, the Adept, is able to give out this  Force to the human beings who are ready to receive it, and thus  is he helping in their regeneration; an Angel or a God not being  so fitted for the contact with ordinary mortals, as is the Adept  who, though exalted is still a man, and of Assiah. 

Most of you will recall that passage in Bulwer Lytton's  Zanoni, (that romance which contains so many valuable hints  on Occult study and which is a good lesson to us on the dangers  of untrained Occultism) when he says, speaking of Zanoni, that  ‘those with whom he principally associated, the gay, the dissipa-  ted, the thoughtless, the Sinners and publicans of the more  polished world — all appeared rapidly, insensibly to themselves  to awaken to purer thoughts and 1 more regulated lives.’ 

We who are but Neophytes in the Great Initiation, can only  at very rare moments be so in touch with our Higher Self, that  our head is immediately under our Kether. For those few  moments we are standing in the position in which the Adept  ever stands — yet must we on no account imagine that during  those few seconds we have equal power with the Adept, for un-  accustomed as we are to the Divine Vision, it almost blinds us  and it can therefore only be partially transmitted to our Spiritual  and Human Selves; yet is this partial vision greatly to be desired,  for it is a Force unto us, and it also gives us a glimpse of what we  may one day attain. 

Let us try then to ascend unto our Higher Self, and to stand  with our head under the Crown, before deciding on any great  and important action in our life, and especially, and this most  especially, when we are judging another, or trying to modify  the life of another, for that is indeed a grave responsibility; —  for we imperfect mortals are ever ready to lean towards the  Pillar of Mercy or the Pillar of Severity, and even if we do  remain standing in the Middle Pillar, the Pillar of Mildness; how  FLYING ROLL NO. XXI 

few of us raise our heads to our Kether — only with his head  touching his Crown, his Kether, can a man have perfect Know-  ledge of the things of his Assiah. 

He who leans much towards the Pillar of Mercy, will think  him the Perfect Judge, cruel when that Judge deems it necessary  to extend his arm on the side of Severity. 

He who leans to the Pillar of Severity will also have corrupted  vision, for judging from thence, the action of the Perfect Judge  will appear to him feeble, when that Judge may have found it  well to extend his arms on the side of Mercy. 

He who stands straight in the Middle Pillar will not be so  prejudiced as his brothers who lean towards Severity or Mercy,  but unless he is linked with his Kether, he does not take in the  whole scheme of his Sephiroth; — is therefore incomplete, and  his judgment imperfect. Let us be careful, then, in judging  another, we see how easily we may be deceived, and let us insist  and force ourselves to aspire to, and be convinced that we are  indeed with our Higher Self, before pronouncing such a judg-  ment, seeing how much mischief may be worked through the  action of Unbalanced Mercy or Severity, or of the insufficient  judgment of the Middle Pillar without the Crown; — as the  Hiereus in the o° = o° Ceremony hath said: — ‘Unbalanced  Severity is cruelty and oppression; Unbalanced Mercy is but  weakness and would permit Evil to exist unchecked, thus mak-  ing itself an accomplice of the Evil’. 

Referring again to the Six Sephiroth of the Ruach, and to the  necessity of keeping them balanced; it will occur to most of us  (who almost without exception are given to some profession or  occupation) that we shall be delayed in Spiritual Development  by tending, in our daily duties, to throw out more rays from  the Spiritual Consciousness to some portions of our Sephiroth at  the expense of the others, and thereby becoming unbalanced. 

Though far more difficult to live than the life in which we  can dispose of our time, more or less, at will, this need not be a  delay in our development; these daily duties may indeed be an  increased strength to us. But in such a case, must we aim always  at the Purest and the Best of that occupation, whatever it may  be, and attempt to develop in i t those qualities that we may be  weak or deficient in, such as courage, resolution, patience, con-  centration, etc., which can be learned in the performance of any  work, however petty. 

So that if we are really doing our best, we are bringing in-  crease of strength to the Highest part of the Sephirah in which  we may happen to be working; — and to increase the Power of  the Kether of anyone of our Sephiroth can but be an added  strength to the Self of the Whole; for the Kether of each of our  Sephiroth is the reflection of that of our Microcosm, which  again is a reflection of its Higher Prototypes, and being Kether  (or rather its reflection) in its action, however great its strength,  it will not become disorderly and attempt to over-ride another  Sephirah, but will be reflected again into the Kether of the man,  thereby becoming an increased force to him, for seeing that it  is a presentment of the Divine no Kether can be unbalanced. 

For we see that even the Kether of the Qlipoth can hardly  be said to be unbalanced, being composed of Two Forces, ever  contending certainly, for it is that quality of contention that  makes them partake of the Qlipoth; yet are they balanced, for  were they not of equal strength, how could they ever be at war  with one another? Sooner or later one would have to surrender. 

Therefore is it evident, — that many are the means to Know-  ledge, and many are the paths by which we may reach the Goal  of the Initiate — wherefore — I would say to each of you; — absurd  and ill-judged is it to rule that all shall crowd into one path,  because that happens to be the one chosen by one member.  There is too much tendency to wish all to follow the Ideal of  one, — we are apt to forget that the Ideal of each will lead to the  same Truth. We can help each other better, then, by helping  each to rise according to his own ideas, rather than, as we often  Unwisely do, in advising him to rise to what is best in ourselves  only. 

That error of wishing to make another as ourselves is another  and a very hurtful form of most subtle egotism. All we can do  is to help him to elevate himself and to study to ‘Know Him-  self’, in order that by working at that Knowledge, he may cross  FLYING ROLL NO. XXI 


the Threshold of the Portal, which leads to the Knowledge of the  Divine. 

Ex Deo Nascimur ! 

In Yeheshuah Morimur ! 

Per Spiritum Sanctum Reviviscimus !  Hermetic Love and the Higher 

Magic 


being 

Flying Roll No. XIII  Flying Roll No. XXVII 




Flying RoU No. XIU 

Secrecy and Hermetic Love, 

By S.S.D.D. 

We have all no doubt heard of the terrible physical tests applied  in Egyptian Initiations and are aware that violence amounting  to torture was used in the Ancient Mysteries before the Neo-  phyte was considered fit to take the first steps in his Ascent of  the Mountain of God. 

Though the methods of our Order are different the Spirit is  the same, and unless we have learned indifference to physical  suffering, and have become conscious of a Strong Will, a will  which fears nothing fate can do to us, we can never receive a  real Initiation. 

These ceremonies in the lower grades of Our Order are prin-  cipally active in disciplining our minds; they lead us to analyse  and understand ourselves. They deal with the Four states of  Matter, the Four Elements of the Ancients which with their  synthesis answer to the five Senses. Our Senses are the paths  through which our Consciousness approaches the central power  which for want of a more accurate word I will call the Will. 

It is the object of our lives as initiates to bring this Will to  such a state of perfection, strength, and wisdom, that instead of  being the plaything of fate and finding our calculations entirely  upset by trivial material circumstances, we build within our-  selves a fortress of strength to which we can retire in time of  need. 

The natural Man is a chaotic mass of contradictory forces. In  the higher grades of the First Order, (by presenting a perfectly  balanced series of symbols to the senses) we endeavour to im-  press upon the imagination of the initiates, the forms under  which they can obtain perfection and work in harmony with  the world force. 

In the o° = o° Ceremony the principles most insisted on are  Secrecy and Brotherly Love. Apart entirely from the practical  necessity for secrecy in our Order, it is the fact that Silence is in  itself a tremendous aid in the search for Occult powers. In dark-  ness and stillness the Archetypal forms are conceived and the  forces of nature germinated. If we study the effects of calm con-  centration we shall find that in silence, thoughts which are  above human consciousness clothe themselves with symbolism  and present things to our imagination, which cannot be told in  words. 

The more thought and concentration of purpose that pre-  cedes an action, the more effective and effectual it will be. Again  in talking on subjects such as these, there is always a terrible  danger of personal influence or obsession coming into action.  The Eagle does not learn to fly from the domestic fowl ‘nor does  the Lion use his strength like the horse’, and although know-  ledge is to be gained from every available source the Opinion  of others should receive the very smallest attention from the  true student of Life. 

Free yourselves from your environments. Believe nothing  without weighing and considering it for yourselves; what is true  for one of us, may be utterly false for another. The God who  will judge you at the day of reckoning is the God who is within  you now; the man or woman who would lead you this way or  that, will not be there then to take the responsibility off your  shoulders. 

‘The old beauty is no longer beautiful; the new truth is no  longer true,' is the eternal cry of a developing and really vitalised  life. Our civilisation has passed through the First Empire of  pagan sensualism; and the Second Empire of mistaken sacrifice,  of giving up our own consciousness, our own power of judging,  our own independence, our own courage. And the Third Empire  is awaiting those of us who can see — that not only in Olympus,  not only nailed to the Cross, — but in ourselves is God. For such  of us, the bridge between flesh and spirit is built; for such among  us hold the Keys of life and death. 

In this connection I may mention that the o°=o° of the  Grade of Neophyte has a deep significance as a symbol; a o means  nothing to the world — to the initiate in the form of a circle it  means all, and the aspiration of the Neophyte should be ‘In  myself I am nothing, in Thee I am all; Oh bring me to that self,  which is in Thee’.  FLYING ROLL NO. XIII 

Having so far considered some of the thoughts that the  practice of silence may bring you let us proceed to the subject of  brotherly love. 

We must of course take the word, as we take all higher teach-  ing, as a symbol, and translate it for ourselves into a higher  plane. — Let me begin by saying that any love for a person as an  individual is by no means a Hermetic virtue; it simply means  that the personalities are harmonious; we are born under certain  influences, and with certain attractions and repulsions, and, just  like the notes in the musical scale some of us agree, some dis-  agree. We cannot overcome these likes and dislikes; even if we  could, it would not be advisable to do so. If in Nature, a plant  were to persist in growing in soil unsuited to it, neither the  plant nor the soil would be benefited. The plant would dwindle,  and probably die, the soil would be impoverished to no good  end. 

Therefore brotherly love does not imply seeking, or remaining  in the society of those to whom we have an involuntary natural  repulsion. But it does mean this, that we should learn to look at  people’s actions from their point of view, that we should sym-  pathise with and make allowances for their temptations. I would  then define Hermetic or Brotherly Love as the capacity of under-  standing another's motives and sympathising with his weak-  nesses, and remember — that it is generally the unhappy who sin. 

A crime, a falsehood, a meanness often springs from a vague  terror of our fellows. We distrust them and ourselves. 

It is the down-trodden and the weak whom we have to fear;  and it is by offering them sympathy and doing what we can to  give them courage, that we can overcome evil. 

But in practising Hermetic Love, above all things conquer  that terrible sting of love — jealousy. The jealousy of the bene-  factor, the jealousy of the lover, or the friend, are alike hateful  and degrading passions. Jealousy is deeply rooted in human  nature nourished by custom, even elevated to a virtue under the  pretence of fidelity. 

To see human nature at its very worst you have only to listen  to the ravings and threats of a person who considers his mono-  poly of some other person’s affection is infringed. This kind of  maniacal passion is the outcome of the egotism a deux, which  has been so fostered by romance. 

But it is natural to wish to help and be necessary to those we  love, and when we find others just as necessary or helpful, to feel  bitterly that our ‘occupation’ is gone; but these regrets will be  impossible to us when we can live in the world realising from  day to day more fully that the highest and best principle within  us is the Divine Light which surrounds us, and which, in a more  or less manifested condition, is also in others. The vehicle may  be disagreeable to us, the personality of another may be anti-  pathetic, but latent light is there all the same, and it is that  which makes us all brothers. Each individual must arrive at the  consciousness of Light in his own way; and all we can do for  each other is to point out that the straight and narrow path is  within each of us. No man flies too high with his own wings;  but if we try to force another to attempt more than his strength  warrants, his inevitable fall will lie at our door. 

This is our duty towards our neighbours; our duty towards  God, is our duty towards ourselves; for God is identical with our  highest genius and is manifested in a strong, wise, will freed  from the rule of blind instinct. 

He is the Voice of Silence, 

The Preparer of the Pathway, 

The Rescuer unto the Light.  Flying RoU No. XXVII 

The Principia of Theurgia or the Higher Magic  By L.O. 

The obscurity reigning in the public writings of those who have  treated of Occult subjects has had the effect of veiling to a very  large extent, any clear conceptions, which might have otherwise  been apparent, respecting the methods of the sacred Science, and  it has occurred to me that it might be of service to such of our  members who are entering the Second Order if I put down some  ideas which it is well to have in mind upon approaching these  studies. 

To the merely intellectual eye, much of the more spiritual  instruction hereafter given out will, perhaps, appear mere wild  fantasy and be difficult to comprehend, and much more so to  put into practice, unless, indeed, the real significance of the  symbolism and teaching of the Outer Order has been to some  degree assimilated. 

The system before you is now only to be appreciated by a  refinement of faculty, to be engendered through the recognition  of certain principia which may be said to underlie all Occult  operations, and the practices consequent thereupon. 

These principia all logically proceed from one postulate, — viz.  the Unity of all things in the Divine Being, — a conception which  beautifully harmonises with the most venerable instincts of the  Soul : ‘In Him we, live, move and have our being ! ’ 

This divine basis of the Universe is omni-present, — endowing  total Nature with consciousness in varying modes : no particle  can be said to contain more or less of the Divinity than any  other, but the modes of expression differ according to the type.  Essential Divinity was called by Plato ‘the same’ and manifested  Nature ‘the other’ : Divinity is archetypal — Nature is anarchic.  As it is said ‘Between the Light and the Darkness the colours  vibrate’. 

The colours’ are due to the mingled proportions of the Ele-  ments which engender variety and form. The World of Forma-  tion is Yetzirah — the region compounded by the Six Sephiroth  of Microprosopus. 

Yetzirah is the Astral Light, which is especially the medium  wherein operate the Ethers of the Elements under the presidency  of the Planets: I use the expression Ether of the Elements in  order to convey the significance of the Hermetic conception of  the ‘Elements’. The Elements of the ancients (called respectively  Fire, Water, Air and Earth) are not at all the physical Elements  but the subtle Ethers underlying these, — the presence of which  is necessary before the gross Elements can be manifested. Hence  the Altar symbolism. 

Everything formed by Nature in the Yetziratic and Assiatic  Worlds is ensphered and thereby individualised : such intangible  and magnetic circuli are forces evolving form, form being static  force. Each individual or entity, — whether a stone, a planet or  a man, energises according to its nature, i.e. gives expression to  the archetype of its sphere, and this is the work of evolution. All  entities are vested in the Anima Mundi, directly or indirectly  according to vehiculum. In the higher kingdoms increased com-  plexity obtains, culminating in the human being, as it is said ‘Oh  Man thou subtle production!’ 

The Unity of the Divine One — ‘circumscribing the Heavens  with convex form’ — which is considered to underlie all mani-  festation is a necessary conception to the doctrines of Macrocosm  and Microcosm, — the Greater and Lesser World: that which  is a par t, of necessity partakes of the nature of the Whole, and  thus every entity is a Microcosm or Little World — reflecting the  Greater World or Macrocosm after a certain formula. Reflection  involves reversal and thus it is said ‘Kether is Malkuth after  another manner’. 

For Occult purposes the crown of manifested life is con-  sidered to be the production of spiritually perfect Man. Spiritual  perfection is the work of evolution, as physical perfection is that  of evolution. 

Once the projection into Malkuth is affected (for the second  Adam must first descend and be born of her) the re-ascent com-  mences : — with the ‘recession of the torrent’ comes the interior  unfoldment, while instincts of association, co-operation and  FLYING ROLL NO. XXVII 


community enlarges the interest of beings, — spreads conscious-  ness over a wider area, — and strikes a death-blow at the egotistic  life. 

Every thought evolved takes form: elementals coalesce with  such forms and thus impart thereto, as it were, life of their own.  The inherent force of any thought is proportionate to the inten-  sity of the volition which generated it. 

Most people are more or less at the mercy of their own crea-  tions having thereby gained a definite temperament, or charac-  ter. Every man is thus the sum total of his creation plus X, —  the forever unknown quantity; but as the creations of life  increase so the power of X may be said to diminish and for this  reason it was said ‘Enlarge not thy destiny ! ’ 

At the dissolution the Soul enters the region of its own Yet-  zirah, and unless during life it has learned to be positive to its  own astral nature, the unimpeded fantasy of excarnate life  would involve a fruition of good or evil to which its creator  would be subject. Such post-mortem experience is therefore  considered illusionary, and hence the work of the Occultist is  to render himself positive to his own astral nature by living as  much as possible on the creative plane, — his Briatic World, —  for, be it remembered, the Creator is also the Destroyer, and  thus the true dignity of the Soul is maintained when in alliance  with its own divine summit, — a condition involving a more or  less complete detachment. 

It is not necessary to study Occultism in order to become  good, — but rather to become wise. The means which you are  taught to employ are calculated to equilibrate the spiritual  nature and implement spiritual growth. 

The effect of spiritual growth is to extend the Consciousness  in the direction of divine and superhuman things and corres-  pondingly restrict the ‘Automatic Consciousness’ of animal  Appetites and desires. 

The methods handed down by the Golden Dawn tradition are  those of the divine Theurgy. 

Theurgia is the science of communion with planetary Spirits,  the powers composing the Hierarchies of Being and ‘Gods of  Light’.  Two conditions are necessary for practice. The first is absolute  purity and devotion to Truth. The second, the thoroughly  trained knowledge of correspondences, the correspondences, that  is to say, between the forces of the greater World, or Macro-  cosm, with those of the lesser World, or Microcosm, and the  respective interaction of these. 

The normal method of Occult development is a gradual retreat  within — first to the Yetziratic World, and, then beyond it. The  World of Formation which the student is now called upon to  traverse, is the Yetzirah of Assiah, — hence the Elemental and  Planetary forces are especially those with which he is brought  into contact. 

Man as the most completely evolved Microcosm of the Macro-  cosm synthesises in his own constitution the forces of the greater  World of which he is a part; every entity is thus related to him,  — and he to them. The World is, as it were, a vast animal, and  its parts respond, being moved by mutual sympathies: sym-  pathies obtain through approximation to type, antipathies when  the types are imperfect. 

Theurgia is operated through the harmonious combination of  the forces of sound, Colour, Number and Form, — the whole  attention being powerfully concentrated upon the plane of the  force the signature of which is expressed. 

The numbers from 1 to 10 constitute a complete progression:  these are primal powers and the roots alike of force and form.  Occult practice derived from the decimal numeration rests upon a  basis of mathematical accuracy, — mathematics being an exact  science. The number 3 is the first manifesting power, the number  10 is a return to Unity, or the commencement of a fresh series.  For this reason the forms of manifestation are septenary and  these are the roots of colours and of sounds. 

The Theurgist commands mundane natures by virtue of his  own divinity, but until apotheosis be achieved it is necessary in  certain higher operations to stimulate the Consciousness by iden-  tification with the divinity. 

The rule is ‘Appeal to the Divine and Superhuman presences,  and conjuration of those which are inferior’. The right to com-  mand is extended by subsequent progress.  FLYING ROLL NO. XXVII 

When in mundane affairs you wish to gain information about  a distant country, you do so either from those who have been  there, or by yourself proceeding thither, — so with Theurgic  operations, — you can either invoke the simulacrum of your  subject, or travel by projection. 

The intimate connection between forms and elemental forces  has to be learnt and appreciated. Think of a place and thou art  there already’ says the old Hermetic axiom, and it might have  added ‘whether you realise it or not’; — the Adept does ! 

The endeavour to picture to yourself persons and things seen  is an invocation of the simulacra and presently, with practice,  much plastic power of formation will be developed and the  tinge of personality overcome. Of any place or being to which  such thought direction is made the true conformation thereof  serves as the ideal and archetype upon which the formative  power builds and to which it tends to conform naturally, unless  impeded by preconceptions in the sphere of the mind. 

In ceremonial, let the drawing of a circle which, as you are  told, is the key to all the rest, be the formulation of a true magi-  cal vortex, — raising about the sphere of the mind an absolute  barrier to all extraneous impression, — thus enabling perfect  spontaneity : as you are told the Mystic Circumambulation sym-  bolises the dawning of Light. 

It will be seen upon consideration that every thought which  is creative and positive (as distinct from a passive and medium-  istic reflex) must contain, as it were, within itself the comple-  ment and completion thereof, — i.e. Intuition. In just the same  way as when along parallel wires an electric current is passed  down one only, simultaneously inducing a reverse current up  the other, — so the fruition of thought, which is perfect intuition,  complements the centrifugal action of intellectual energy. The  external mode of mental activity has engendered oblivion of the  fact, and so men fail to realise their own possibilities : but that  Invocation involves response is the testimony of psychic sensi-  bility. 

Thoughts which are expressed in some way, whether by  speech or symbol, are by so much the more powerful than those  unexpressed. Expression is the consecration of Will. The Pater-  nal Mind sowed symbols in the Soul’, — and regenerate fantasy  shall reveal them. 

Forces are entities; all entities are expressible by formula or  signature. The Sigilla of Occult forces are employed because  whatever has but a casual similitude to these forces directly  participates therein. 

Will is the grand agent of all Occult Work; its rule is all  potent over the nervous system. By Will the fleeting vision is  fixed upon the treacherous waves of the Astral Light, but, as it  is said, you cannot pursue the Path of the Arrow until you  understand the forces of the Bow. 

The use of bright colours engenders the recognition of sub-  sisting variety and stimulates that perception of the mind which  energises through imagination, or the operation of images. 

A picture which to the cultured eye beautifully portrays a  given subject, nevertheless appears to the savage a confused  patchwork of streaks, — so the extended perceptions of a citizen  of the Universe are not grasped by those whose thoughts dwell  within the sphere of the personal life. 

It is selfishness which impedes the radiation of Thought, and  attaches to body. This is scientifically true and irrespective of  sentiment: the selfishness which reaches beyond the necessi-  ties of the body is pure vulgarity. 

The road to the Summum Bonum lies therefore through Self-  Sacrifice, — the sacrifice of the Lower to the Higher, for behind  that Higher Self lies the concealed Form of the Ancient of Days,  the synthetical Being of Divine Humanity. 

These things are grasped by the Soul : the song of the Soul is  alone heard in the Adytum of the God-nourished silence. 

The force of association, or community, even in wordly  affairs is very great, but far more so when the ties which link  together take their rise in the profoundest recesses of Being. 

Having entered the Second Order, you come within the radius  of a psychic spiritual force, which, generated centuries ago, has  acquired a momentum of its own, and silently exerts a protec-  tive influence. The isolated student lacks this advantage. The  history and existence of this secret organisation is a monument  FLYING ROLL NO. XXVII 

to the energy put forth by our Golden Dawn Ancestors, Those  who are of a most excellent genius, cultivated the divine science,  while yet upon Earth.’ 

The legacy which they have bequeathed is perhaps some-  thing more than the actual knowledge preserved, great though  this be, for, consciously or unconsciously, the forces they have  put forward devolve upon us, and the very shades of the mighty  dead stimulate to further exertion.  Alchemy 


being 

Flying Roll No. VII 




Prefatory Note 


The following material is of extremely early date, being origin-  ally given as a lecture by Wynn Westcott in 1890, well before  the foundation of the Second Order. Although Westcott made  some interesting points, notably his correlation of the chemical  elements with the Qabalistic Tree of Life, he displayed no know-  ledge of the practice of alchemy as distinct from its theory. 

Nevertheless, at the period in question a number of Golden  Dawn initiates, among them the Rev. W. A. Ayton, were en-  gaged in practical alchemical research. A few years later, after  the foundation of the Second Order, a document known as Z2  was circulated and a section of this purported to apply the  formulae of the Golden Dawn Neophyte ritual to alchemical  operations. It is interesting to note that Aleister Crowley de-  nounced both this section of Z2 and that dealing with cere-  monial divination as complete rubbish; it is difficult to know on  what grounds Crowley based his opinion as his diaries fail to  disclose any attempt by him to put these sections into practice. 

After the death of Ayton and his co-workers no initiate of  the Order seems to have betrayed any interest in alchemy until  the ’thirties, when Israel Regardie published his Philosophers  Stone — a fairly orthodoxly Jungian interpretation of alchemical  writings. A little later the members of a schismatic Temple,  Hermanubis, began experimenting with alchemy on the lines of  Z2. An alchemical ritual of this type is reproduced in my Ritual  Magic in England. In recent years a certain Prater Albertus, who  runs an organisation called the Paracelsus Research Society in  Salt Lake City, has been engaged in reviving the alchemical  tradition in practical form. Prater Albertus, who from his pub-  lished writings on the Qabalah seems to be within the Golden  Dawn tradition, attaches particular importance to the works of  Basil Valentine. The former’s Handbook of Alchemy has led  many occultists into a complete retraction of the Jungian inter-  pretation to which they formerly adhered.  Flying Roll No. VII 

Alchemy  By S.A. 

Chemistry, the modern science of which investigates the con-  stitution of material substances, is the lineal descendent of  Mediaeval and Ancient Chemy. The syllable AL is the Arabic  indefinite article, like the Hebrew He, meaning ‘The’ chemistry  — the Higher Chemistry, treating of the essential nature of the  Elements, metals and minerals; while modern chemistry rejoices  rather in being a science of utilitarian and commercial uses. 

The earliest use of the word Alchemy is believed to be found  in the works of Julius Firmicus Maternus, the Astronomer,  who lived in the time of the Emperor Constantine. Firmicus  wrote that ‘he should be well skilled in Alchemy, who is born  when the Moon is in the House of Saturn’. So he was an  Astrologer as well; what house does he mean? the Day house  (Aquarius), or the Night house (Capricorn) of Saturn? Or does  he, like some modern Astrologers, allot one of these, Aquarius,  to Uranus? 

The Imperial Library of Paris is said to possess the oldest  Alchemic Volume known; it is by Zosimus of Panopolis, written  in Greek about 400 a.d. and entitled the Divine Art of Making  Gold and Silver. The next oldest tract upon Alchemy known to  exist is by Aeneas Gazius, written in Greek about 480 a.d. 

The Mediaeval authors often call Alchemy ‘Hermetic Art’,  implying an origin from Hermes Trismegistos of Egypt, the pre-  historic demi-god, or inspired teacher, to whom we owe the  Emerald Tablet. It it stated by one old Greek writer that the  Hermetic secrets were buried in the tomb of Hermes and were  preserved until the time of Alexander the Great who caused  his Tomb to be opened, to search for these secrets, and that he  found the documents, but that his wise men could not under-  stand them. Many portions of human wisdom have from time  to time died out of Human understanding. 

After the Fall of the Intellectual freedom of Alexandria,  scientific attainments were almost entirely restricted to the  Arabs, who made great progress in science — ; yet some monks  in Christian monasteries also studied these matter in retirement  and some have become famous as alchemists and magicians;  and further some of these rose to eminence also in the Church,  becoming Vicars, Abbots, and even Bishops. Those who suc-  ceeded most, wrote least, and hence are almost, if not quite,  unknown to us. 

An infinity of books have been written upon Alchemy, and  they are of all sorts, — good, bad and indifferent; learned and  superficial; wise and foolish — some are by good men, some by  great men, others are by fools, some are by knaves. This is be-  cause Alchemy has existed as a Science upon several planes; and  there have been true and successful students of Alchemy on  each plane; and there have been fraudulent professors and  knavish authors concerned with the Alchemy of the lower  planes. 

Some modern students have written upon Alchemy wisely,  and some unwisely; but the modern error has notably been in  going to extremes of opinion. Some modern authors have in-  sisted that all Alchemy was folly; some that all Alchemy was  Chemistry; and a third party, dominant at present, have con-  vinced themselves that all Alchemy was Religion. 

I am firmly convinced that each class of teacher is partly  wrong — let me take the middle path. 

The science of Alchemy has existed, has been studied and  taught upon Four planes. 

Upon Assiah, there has been the Ancient occult Chemistry,  the Chemistry of the Adept; who added to facility and know-  ledge of materials, the magical skill and Will Power of the  ability to act on the ‘Soul of things’ — their astral counterparts.  Here transmutation is a physical fact, and possibility. — This  was both practised and pretended, and real Treatises were  written. 

Upon Yetzirah, is psychic alchemy, the power of creation of  living forms. — This was practised, but rarely preached. 

Upon Briah is Mental Alchemy; — the creations of Art and  Genius, the ensouled music, picture and statue; — this was prac-  tised and not preached until modern times.  FLYING ROLL NO. VII 

Upon the Highest Plane, the Spiritual, the practice was almost  unknown except to a few entirely hidden Magi; but it was  written about by some good and true philosophers, who couched  their views on man’s origin and destiny, his descent from God,  and his possible re-ascent to God, in the language of the Material  Plane to avoid persecution and destruction, at the hands of the  priests of established churches. 

By the pretence of chemistry, they saved themselves from  penalties for heterodoxy : by the absence of Chemical apparatus,  they saved themselves from extortion and torture as Alchemists. 

As to Material Alchemy, the first mentioned, but few pro-  fessors confessed to success and most of them lost their lives  thereby. No man’s life would be safe, or even tolerable — even  today, who succeeded in transmutation, and confessed to it. I  am entirely convinced that Transmutation of the lower metals  to Gold and Silver is possible and that it has been often done;  but not by Chemistry only, but by correlating with physical  processes, the Will-action, and the power over the ‘Soul of  Nature’, and the ‘Soul of things’, which the purity of life, and  the training of the Adept can alone supply. 

The true Alchemist would be the last to publish his success  to the world — and if he did, he would probably thereby lose  his power. His elixirs and powders that succeeded but yesterday,  would be powerless today, — for Isis does not sanction any tam-  pering with the Virgin purity of Her shrine. Personal aggrandise-  ment, as an end, or as a result, would wfeck any success in  practical magical working; and the last student to succeed,  would be he who cast a look behind upon the lusts of the flesh,  pride of Life, and the ambition of the Devil. 

Let no man study Alchemy to enrich himself. Let no man  study Occultism to secure the gratification of passion; it is  the unpardonable Sin. Hence we may say that even Material  Alchemy is a high and gracious art, for success proves purity,  Adeptship and spiritual power; the Chemist alone, may be  successful in his limited sphere, whatever his character, and  however soiled be his ego — intellect alone sufficeth him. 

Pardon this digression, but alchemy has a moral and spiritual  aspect, although it seems to me that my dear friend Anna  Kingsford erred, when she saw Religion and morals in every  Alchemic process. The Alchemist professed the knowledge and  encouraged the pupil to search for three things above all : 

The Red Elixir to transform Base metals to Gold; 

The White Elixir to transform Base Metals to Silver; 

The Elixir Vitae to administer to Vegetable and animal; to  intensify the life, to prolong life, and to expand the life. 

Health and length of Life are much to be desired, for art is  long, I believe the first and second Elixirs were not sought so  much for their own powers, as because they were steps leading  to the Elixir Vitae — the art of prolonging life and opportunities  of the Adept, that he might lose less time in his progress to  a spiritually exalted goal — less than he would lose by living  more and shorter lives — with passive intervals. 

Surely there is an advantage in living years after ‘Adeptship  in the Inner* is gained : — rather than early death followed by  long periods of rest and then childhood. To the true student  who learns to teach other men now, individuals and, perhaps, in  higher lives — to guide nations; surely continuity is an advan-  tage ! 

Spiritual progress, which hastens to be done with man and  Earth is not (say the Easterns) the highest form of Buddhahood  or Enlightenment. The Buddha of compassion, who renounces  spiritual joys, to assist the grovellers upon earth, or near it, —  is a higher type. 

I believe then in the three chiefs of the Rosy Cross whose  earthly years of work count by hundreds; they are allegoric  and symbolic possibly in name and number of years, but they  express a truth, that progress in adeptship links some great Souls  to earth workers: and that such a goal for usefulness, is a  worthy aim and aspiration for every one who enters here, and  views the symbolic form of the Master C.R. 

If I am asked why the Alchemic Books are so full of the  Transmutation to Silver, and to Gold, I answer that these steps  being necessary precedents to the art of the Elixir Vitae, have  naturally had more attention and experiment, and more pro-  fessors than the third superior step, which is almost altogether  shrouded from the profane.  FLYING ROLL NO. VII 

I must supplement these remarks by saying that I believe  that many of the Alchemic treatises were really treatises written  in the light of the Chemistry of the Age, and record real  attempts at chemical processes in search of the secret of trans-  mutation into Gold, by people who were really the chemists of  the day, who did want real Gold, and who had no spiritual  intuitions, and who did nothing but fail in Transmutation. 

To return to physical chemistry and Alchemy on the plane  of Assiah. — Note — the curious, and not denied, statement that  certain Gold frames have been known to be struck by lightning  and discoloured by the Flash, and that this discoloration has  shown traces of Sulphur. — What of this incident? Either the  Sulphur was in the Gold, as ancient Alchemy taught ‘a Sulphur  was’; or the Sulphur was in the Lightning, which modern  Science says is Electricity and contains no Sulphur. But added  Sulphur is not found in other matters which contain none,  when they are lightning struck. 

The Hermetic doctrine is that all Matter is but one in its  essence, and is the lowest fall of the spirit, the most passive aspect  of the Lux. 

Spirit — Matter  Active — Passive  Motor — Moved 

From the one Eus, came two contraries, thence three principles,  and four elements; — on all planes of matter, the one base is  Hyle — of the Greek philosophers. Then arose from the Homo-  geneous — variation. The Heterogeneous arose by development.  Under Sephirotic impulse on the plane of Assiah, differentiation  spread, and forms and combinations were produced during ages  of time. During the ages of gradual concretion, and setting  together of atoms, the elementary substance of modern  chemistry, the Metals and the Matalloids, the halogens and the  earths, became definite types and permanent of constitution.  They became fixed in their molecular structure, and are now  in the Kali Yuga, so far in time from their origin; practically  Elements in the Modern sense of structure indissoluble to all  known material processes. I assert that to the Adept they  are still convertible and analysable, but even apart from Adept-  ship, some so called Elements will be even yet disintegrated  by modern science alone. But while science prides itself on its  progress, it is fatuous enough to demand implicit belief in its  attitude of authority day by day. Modern Science howls down  today the man who will tomorrow succeed in demonstrating  its error. Science is but little less a Bigot than has Religion  ever been. 

The Metals then, and our present Elements must have been  formed, defined, and 1 set in their present type by the work  of ages. By the slow processes of Nature, by heat, by light, by  electricity, by condensation, by pressure, have the metals grown  in the veins of stone. Sudden, and violent agencies no doubt  also produced an effect, perhaps some metals, have been only  produced by the convulsions, and not by the gradual processes  of Nature. 

Who knows but that the Gold found native and pure, as few  metals are found, was produced by the Lightning and the  Earthquake. Intense pressure and intense heat, would be likely  to make a new combination from existing ones. Gold is intense  in its weight — its specific gravity: intense pressure and high  fusion point, would be likely to produce such a body, pure,  homogeneous, heavy. 

The Alchemist taught that the well known Metals, now called  Elements, were not so — were not simple substances. The ‘Ele-  ments’ of the Alchemicist were states; states and processes. They  taught that each metal, say lead, consisted of a Metallic Root,  and certain other matter — sulphurs. The nature and quantity  of their sulphurs, determined the Metal. — By taking a low  metal, — coarse, common, easily altered metal, by purging it  from these sulphurs, stage by stage, they taught that each  metal might be produced in turn, until the last transmutation  produced Gold. I believe the theory is true, I believe the practice  is possible, by working in the astral, contemporaneously with  action on the physical basis. But if Gold could be so made,  Cui Bono? What good would that be? No sooner is Gold thus  made, as it were from nought — than its value ceases — it is the  rarity of Gold that makes it of commercial value — that makes it  buy bread and luxuries. If it be produced at will, it will be of  FLYING ROLL NO. VII  no more value than any other dust. 

As to the Alchemist, who, as adept, does succeed in making  transmutation, he will be so constituted that riches have no  temptation for him and pride no attraction. He will know too,  that wealth will be but ill spent, when gained, if squandered  upon those who will not help themselves: he will know that  individual progress, national progress, and world progress depend  not on doles which pauperise, but on the will and effort of  individual, nation, and world. 

The temptation to wish one could but transmute a little, just  to help some one friend, or neighbour, just to provide oneself  with some thing earnestly desired — for one’s good — is I believe  a folly, and would be an evil if attained. 

How few of us have not wished this tribute to our efforts? 

How few men of the world do not wish it? What proportion  of men who are wealthy, spend daily on themselves what is  best for them and no more, and give the remainder to the  friend, the neighbour, the deserving? Do you say — oh, I am  an initiate, I should do differently? My friend — with greater  opportunities, comes a great responsibility. I will not judge such,  nor you, but in my heart, I thank God I have not the power  of transmutation now. God knows, — and I know — how easy it is  to fall. 

But I constantly digress into the Spiritual, although what I  really came to say, is a word on the material and physical  aspect. I still defer these remarks, however, to quote two pas-  sages, one in prose narrating the sequence of the process of  Alchemic work: and the other a poem written in English,  translated from an old French prose account of Alchemic work,  in allegoric language and myth. The first quotation is Astro-  logical, and Astrology is inextricably mixed up with Alchemy.  The second is beautiful in its poetry, and will well repay con-  templation. 

The first quotation reads: — 

The Great Work must be begun when the Sun is in the 

Night house of Saturn : the Blackness appears in 

forty days when Sun is in the Day house of Saturn :  the Blackness deepens into the Night house of Jupiter  on reaching Aries a separation occurs. The Whiteness  of Luna develops when the Sun is in the house Cancer of Luna  The Sun begins his special form of change in Leo his  own house. 

Redness is produced in the day house of the  Red metal of Copper, Venus, this is Libra, next Scorpio  follows, and the Work reaches completion in Saggitarius  the day house of Jupiter. 

This is a good example of Allegoric description, which has  no doubt a physical basis, — and clearly refers to the Soul of  things, matters, seasons and processes on the astral plane of  evolution. 

The second quotation reads : — 

I 

Within the golden portal  Of the garden of the wise, 

Watching by the seven sprayed fountain, 

The Hesperian Dragon lies. 

Like the ever burning Branches  In the dream of holy seer; 

Like the types of Asia’s churches  Those glorious jets appear. 

Three times the magic waters  Must the Winged Dragon drain  Then his scales shall burst asunder  And his Heart be rent in twain. 

Forth shall flow an emanation  Forth shall spring a shape divine, 

And if Sol and Cynthia and thee  Shall the charmed Key be thine. 

II 

In the solemn groves of Wisdom  Where black pines their shadows fling  Near the haunted cell of Hermes, 

Three lovely flowrets spring :  FLYING ROLL NO. VII 

The Violet damask tinted  In scent all flowers above: 

The milk white vestal Lily  And the purple flower of Love. 

Red Sol a sign shall give thee  Where the Sapphire Violets gleam, 

Watered by the rills that wander  From the viewless golden stream : 

One Violet shalt thou gather — 

But ah — beware, beware! — 

The Lily and the Amaranth  Demand thy chiefest care. 

III 

With in the lake of crystal, 

Roseate as Sol’s first ray  With eyes of diamond lustre, 

A thousand fishes play  A net within that water  A net with web of gold  If cast where air bills glitter  One shining fish shall hold. 

IV 

Amid the oldest mountains  Whose tops are next the Sun, 

The everlasting rivers  Through glowing channels run, 

Those channels are of gold  And thence the countless treasures  Of the kings of earth are rolled. 

But far — far must he wander  O’er realms and seas unknown  Who seeks the Ancient Mountains  Where shines the Wondrous Stone . 1 

1 Le Dictionaire Mytho — Hermetique, states The Fountain found  within the Garden’, is the ‘Mercury of the Wise', which comes from  divers sources because it is the ‘Principle’ of the seven metals, and  is formed by the influence of the seven planets, although the Sun  alone is properly speaking the Father, and Luna, the Mother. The  You have already been taught two symbolic schemes for  allotting the metals to the Sephiroth — each is capable of defence  — for pointing out certain alliances and the alchemical rela-  tions of these Metals. I add here a scheme, of my own, for  allotting to the Decad ten non-metallic lighter elements recog-  nised by modern chemistry. 


Hydrogen 



Iodine 



Phosphorus 

O 


Sulphur 

o 


Binah = Nitrogen, always a Gas — very passive — neither sup-  ports life nor combustion. 

Fluorine = a Gas — very active, almost intangible. 

Chlorine = a Gas — yellow in colour like gold, acrid, caustic. 


Dragon who three times drinks, is the putrefaction which overcomes  the matter, and is so called from its black colour, and this Dragon  loses his scales, or skin, when the Grey colour succeeds the Black.  You will only succeed if Sol and Luna aid thee; by means of the  regimen of Fire you must bleach the Grey colour to the Whiteness  of the Moon (and then obtain the redness of Sol as the last stage).  By the ‘Fishes’, is meant bubbles in the heated crucible. ‘Lake’ often  means vase, retort, flask, alembic’. (Original Note.)  FLYING ROLL NO. VII 

Bromine = heavier, baser, red liquid. 

Iodine = a red copper and hermaphraditical Brass. 

Carbon is Tiphereth, is the most notable non-metal — it com-  bines with others, forming alliances with other elements of  immense number — all vegetable and animal substances are com-  pounds formed on Carbon as a Basis. 

Phosphorous and Sulphur, represent Yesod and Malkuth, both  solids, and complete the scale. 

The analogies are very curious, and can be greatly extended.  It may be possible also to rank the true metals along with the  Sephiroth in the Chemical Order of their actual purity and as  they the more nearly approach pure Basic Hyle, or the ‘one  matter’, in addition to the G.D. Forms. The Sephiroth are pro-  gressive Emanations, each less exalted than the former, and  they pass down plane after plane, and may be looked upon each  as more material than the last. And in Assiah there may be  scales alike of Metals, Metalloids, and other substances, in similar  ratios. If such were the case, the Alchemical theory of successive  steps of purification would in natural course transmute each  metal into the one above. The Lead into Copper, the Copper  into Silver, the Silver into Gold, the Gold into the Elixir Vitae,  the gold of Vegetable and Animal life. 

Alchemy taught that all metals consisted of the Mercury of  the Philosophers and of a Sulphur, which fixed it — made it  solid. 

The Merc. Phil, was not the Quicksilver of commerce, not  the Hydrogen of the modern Chemist — the one fluid metal. 

Our Mercury they called Hydrardgyram, — Water of silver —  fluid, silver-coloured. They thought it to be Silver in a state  of ‘low temperature fusion' — They also called it ‘Proteus' = of  diverse forms. The Alchemists found Gold to be extremely  heavy, so they experimented chiefly with those other metals  which were most heavy; — lead, quicksilver and copper, believ-  ing they must be nearest to Gold in order of steps of change,  or that each heavy metal needed fewer processes for conversion,  or less purification. 

They argued — for example — Lead nearly resembles Gold in  weight, therefore Lead consists almost entirely of Mercury Philo-  sophorum and Gold. If a body be found, which will so work  on the Lead, as to burn out of it all that is not Mercury Philos,  and then we fix that Mercury by a Sulphur, we should obtain  Gold as the result. 

Relative weights of equal bulks are about : — 

Gold 19  Mercury 14  Lead 11  Silver 10  Copper 9  Iron and Tin 7  Antimony 6  Arsenic 5 

Many of the ‘Elements’ so called from 1750 to 1800 have  been since broken up, by analysis; notably Potash and Soda,  which were shown to be compounds in 1807 — by Davey. The  Alchemist recognised three principal ways of making Gold.  First, by Separation; for many minerals contain some Gold.  Second, by Maturation, by processes designed to subtilise,  purify, and digest Mercury; which convert it into a heavier  body, and at last into Gold itself. 

They looked on Mercury as an Alloy of Gold and Something :  by processes of Fire, and by adding suitable material for com-  bustion; the impurity was to be burned off and pure Gold to  remain. 

Thirdly, by fusing with base metals, some of that peculiar  compound, the Stone of the Philosophers, a perfect transmutation  was to occur, the faeces would be burned off, and the Metallic  Root appear as Gold. 

For example of Alchemical argument, I have read ‘if we take  19 ounces of Lead and fuse it with a proper Agent, and so  dissipate 8 ounces we shall have 11 ounces remaining, and this  can be nothing but pure Gold, because Gold and Lead are as 19  to 11. Otherwise if the process be gradation, and we reduce  19 to 14 first, the result will be Mercury, but then the process  may be continued and the further reduction to 11 will equally  be Gold, as without the middle step’.  FLYING ROLL NO. VII 

From another point of view, they said ‘the Stone of the Philo-  sopher’s is a most subtle, fixed and concentrated fiery body  which when it is added to a molten metal does, as if by a mag-  netic virtue, unit itself to the Mercurial body of the metal,  vitalises and cleans off, all that is impure, and so there remains  a molten mass of pure Sol.' 

But as aforesaid, — I believe it is useless for any one to waste  time on purely chemical experiments. To perform Alchemical  processes, requires a simultaneous operation on the Astral plane  with that on the physical. Unless you are Adept enough to act  by Will power, as well as by heat and moisture; by life force,  as well as by electricity, there will be no adequate result. 

So far as I know, — I do not speak by order — power of trans-  mutation may arise, side by side with other magical attainments  — Labor omnia vincit. It is not conferred by any Grade — it is  occasionally rediscovered by the private student : it is never  actually taught in so many words. It may dawn on any one  of you, — or the magic event may occur when least expected !  Christian Occultism 


being 

Hitherto Unpublished Papers of the Cromlech  Temple 




Prefatory Note 


On the whole the Flying Rolls and other instructional material  produced by the schismatic fraternities derived from the Golden  Dawn after that organisation had broken up in internecine  disputes ( circa 1900) are of little interest. Notable exceptions  to the general mediocrity are the papers of the Cromlech Temple,  a side order to The Rosicrucian Order of the A.O. — the name  adopted after 1900 by those Temples loyal to MacGregor  Mathers. 

The membership of the Cromlech Temple consisted largely of  dedicated Anglican clergymen, who seem to have found the  Temple’s brand of Christian Occultism much to their liking, and  a Dean of Chester (who was also an initiate of the Stella Matu-  tina) was a prominent member. In spite of the Temple’s pre-  tensions to Anglo-Catholic orthodoxy it is clear from the papers  which follow that its Christianity was essentially Gnostic; the  truth of the doctrine of reincarnation, for example, was taken  for granted, in spite of its condemnation by a Council of the  Church as early as the fifth century. 

A certain confusion seems to have arisen between the Crom-  lech Temple and the Golden Dawn itself. Thus, in her article  on the Golden Dawn published in Number 40 of Man, Myth  and Magic, that distinguished Yeats scholar Kathleen Raine has  written : 

Magic was indeed only one aspect of the work of the Golden 

Dawn Lectures and papers were circulated expounding 

the Catholic doctrines of the Apostolic Succession, the seven  Sacraments, the Assumption and the Immaculate Conception  of the Blessed Virgin, or teaching the three grades of prayer.  None of these papers is included in Israel Regardie’s four  volume publication of the rituals; which gives in this respect,  a one-sided impression. 

All this is quite incorrect. The papers referred to, all of which  are included in the following section of this book, were those  of the Cromlech Temple, not those of the Golden Dawn — and,  while a majority of Cromlech Temple initiates were also initiates  of one or other of the fraternities derived from the Golden Dawn,  the Cromlech Temple was a completely independent organisa-  tion. Details of its origin and development may be found in  my Ritual Magic in England (Neville Spearman 1970).  Paper I 

Received 18.4.24 


To all my beloved companions of the Temple of the Cromlech,  Greeting. We have watched you all with a great love through-  out this time of pain and trouble and striving, and we commend  your patience, hard indeed to attain when all are looking forward  to the new life of service and advance. 

Recall then all our teachings; that death must precede birth,  old things must be broken up before the new things can be  manifested. And so in yourselves must the same process take  place, the breaking up of old ideals that the new ideals may  be born and grow, the breaking up of the will, wherein is the  self — that self, which though set to do the will of God, seeks  to do it in the way of the lower self rather than in the way  of the higher self, and long must it be ere the children of  the earth can see that such efforts can only come to naught.  Yet it is by the very failure of those efforts that they rise  to the higher life. Not willingly doth the Supreme (Blessed be  He) afflict His children, for in very love are all these failures  set as stepping stones to Himself, and the only way to the final  goal of Union with Him. 

When this is realised, the heart is purging from the cloying  of earth, and turned to a cup wherein to receive the wine of  His Love. And in that prepared and spiritualised heart of man,  all that comes, all that chances, may be as the varied substances  put into the Crucible, out of which is to come the Pure Gold. 

Ye have seen in our earlier teaching the World as a crucible  — in which the Alchemic processes were proceeding in regular  order. So now ye can look into the world of yourselves and see  the same processes going on in the heart of each of you, pain  and suffering, disappointment and mistakes all working to this  ultimate end, and all good, when ye can see it with your spiritual  eyes. 

And now the Gold begins to be manifest, that which will  in time turn all that is base to Gold. Yet think not that it will  be apparent at once. The Fire must still work to bring all to  perfection. Yet not now the fire of sorrow and suffering, but  the fire of love, and joy, and laughter known to those who are  the Sons of God. 

This year, that great symbol called the Fire of the World —  the Sun, but called by us in truer phrase — the Sun of Righteous-  ness, will arise with greater force than ever before since the  coming of the Master. Therefore shall this year be known as  ‘The Year of the Risen Sun’ to mark it out from all the rest.  And ye Companions of the Sun will if ye set your minds and  hearts to perceive it, receive the beams and the tenfold blessings  they bring. Let not material thoughts like cloud-veils dim your  sight. Look up and rise on the wings of Faith to that clearer  air above the miasma of earthly things, and so shall ye be  blessed indeed. 

And for those who have passed on to a higher stage of work,  never forget that they are still with you all, loving and working,  and better able now that all material hindrances have been  removed, to help and comfort you than ever before. 

Well have ye all done, bravely have ye wrought and striven,  and all your struggles and trials are known to us in ways that  will be more clear to you when ye have learnt more of our  teachings. ‘If one member suffer, all the members suffer with  it'. This is a scientific truth, explainable by our science, and  gradually will ye learn it, and marvel at the love which binds  us all together in bands that may not be broken. We bid you,  as so often before, to rejoice and evermore to rejoice. For the  great Master of all Masters is with us now in very word and  truth, more closely than before, as we are growing able to  receive His Light and Love. 

Shemesh  Paper II 

Easter Day 12.4.25 

To all my dear Children and Companions of the Cromlech  Temple — Greeting — and loving congratulations to you all —  who each one, in his or her separate way, has striven to follow  the command of the Master, and to rule and dominate that  lower self which is the only curtain that veils Him from our  sight. 

In the Year of the Risen Sun now past, all were enabled to  see more or less clearly those errors and imperfections, likes and  dislikes, all that belongs to the narrow selfhood, and seeing  more clearly in that Risen Sun, have desired to alter and change  that which was barring the way and stopping the progress to  the Higher Life. Hence, when the desire was born in the heart  by the action of the intuition, has the clearing and purging  process been begun in each. With some it has brought sorrow  and bitter tears, with other bodily illness, with others a breaking  up of outside circumstances, but with all there has been some-  what of the death that begins new life. 

Look back, then, each one of you, to anything in the past  year that has been akin to crucifixion, no matter how small,  and rejoice that you have, even to a small extent, been follow-  ing the Master and walking in His footsteps. For the divine  law will work in each one of you, and after your crucifixion  shall be a joyful resurrection, the greater the struggle and pain,  the greater will be your joy and your own resurrection. Search  your own hearts then, for the Holy Spirit will speak in each  one of you without fail and without error. Having then, O  my companions, been each one broken up and tested as ye  were able to bear it, we come to a time of fresh life-effort, and  the year shall be called ‘The Year of New Beginnings’, for the  seed of a new life has been sown in each of you. See to it that  it grow and bear fruit, for the Holy Spirit of God needs your  co-operation, your desire, your imagination, your will. And  remember, you who are attracted more to knowledge and  the cultivation of brain power, that if ye see not in this also  a development of character, a spiritual growth, it is empty and  worthless. The desire to know more than your neighbours, to  be more advanced, as it is said, is an evil thing, and will  inevitably stop you, and finally, if yielded to, will draw you  down, and you will come under the domination of an evil  lower self whose power it will be difficult to escape from. 

You are no teachers of each other, ye are fellow-students,  fellow workmen, each for the good of all, each to be encouraged  in his task, however humble, for all are working with the great  Master Craftsman Himself. 

We here do specially commend that little faithful Group  in the City of Cromlech who have loyally worked in the best  way to fulfil our behests, for all have been seeking unity with  each other, and have been trying to overcome those fine and  invisible, yet strong, barriers which the lower personality of  each makes between souls who are very much at one on astral  and spiritual planes. Verily brethren, this is the true advance, to  try to look through the eyes of another, to feel with, for this  is your first step in learning to Love. And when ye begin to  love ye have joy — they cannot be separated. 

So we send all our loving blessings, and may this Year of  New Beginnings hold for you the best of all new things; the  beginnings of Love and Joy in the heart of each one of you. 

ShMSh.  Some teachings as to Post Mortem Conditions  For the First Five only 


Some of you enquire mentally concerning the motives of the  ancient Egyptians in mummifying the dead. The question could  not then be answered — neither can it now be fully answered.  But ye may know and bear in mind that a certain iink usually  remains between the freed spirit after death and its earthly  surroundings. In the vast majority of cases the Spirit is not  objectively conscious of this connection. Yet it feels a certain  uneasiness at any sudden alteration of its former tenement. 

The practical lesson of this highly occult teaching is that  the survivors valuing the comfort of their departed friends should  not suddenly nor hastily change the surroundings in which  they lived, nor the things which they took pride in. For thereby  unwittingly they may cause great discomfort, and pain to the  spirit which is slowly, as it were, losing its hold on the things  of the earth and is by no means parted suddenly from them  when the breath leaves the body. Remember there are four  Elemental Kingdoms and what we call physical death refers  not to the Kingdoms of Air and Fire. 

For those spirits now going through what is sometimes termed  the cycle of Incarnations — the periods between two Incarnations  are by far the most real and important parts of their existence  — are in fact their true life. Those who teach that the Ego  after an incarnation sleeps in Devachan, entertained by unreal  illusions, or suffers in Avitchi — or wanders in Kama Loka — are  in error, seeing only part of the truth — still more so are they  who teach that the Soul’s final and eternal destiny is fixed at  the moment of death — for which there is no warrant in any  revelation. For the truth is that in what ye earth dwellers  term physical death the Ego returns to its full normal life,  wherein indeed there is sleep, and dream, and suffering, and joy,  yet these things are but part of its fullness. 

To understand somewhat of the relation of an incarnation  to the fuller and larger life — imagine a young lad who once  or twice a week goes to a gymnasium or a drill hall. While  there, the exercises he is engaged on take up the whole of his  thought and energy, he is concentrated on horizontal bars,  ladders and the like, and forgets everything else. Yet when  he changes his gymnastic dress and leaves the gymnasium he  resumes his real life, probably so much stronger and healthier  for the keen exercise — yet, it may be, with a strain or bruise  which will smart for days. 

As it is the microcosm of the world, so it is in the macro-  cosm of the larger life. In the gymnasium there are but the  pupils who are in the arena, and the instructors and such  parents and guardians as may accompany them, but outside, in  the more real life, are countless hosts of others, very many  whose childish training is long over, and who are now training  children themselves. Thus, in the discarnate life, the Ego meets  multitudes of other spirits — some unknown to and unconnected  with him, others who to him are in the position of parents and  friends or guardians — with these he walks hand in hand, in  loving converse, for the stress and striving of incarnation do  not exist there and rebellion against wisdom and authority is  unknown. 

Yet note that these things in themselves are not evil — they  form part of the gymnastic apparatus which ye call earthly life  — and are hurtful only when an exercise is improperly done.  Consider how the weight of a dumb-bell is a good thing — yet if  the pupil lets it fall on himself its weight becomes a source  of pain and trouble. As we have said, those going through the  cycle of Incarnation are as small children — and their friends and  guardians are close beside them. 

These are not children themselves. As parents, friends and  guardians on earth often accompany children to a gymnasium,  assisting, advising, and watching over them — albeit it may be  that the children lose sight of everything save the arena and its  apparatus — so do these spiritual Guardians stand near those  they watch over during Incarnation, albeit the strong develop-  ment and vitalisation of material symbols in the Aura prevents  the Ego from recognising (save fitfully and by vision or intuition)  his beloved friend and guide of the larger life. 

It is true that death is a very gradual process and that the  separation of the consciousness from the material body is not  accomplished all at once. But here then must we distinguish.  The consciousness of pain and of discomfort is in the living  body the resistance automatically established to that which  infringes its law of existence. Now conservation of the form  is the law of existence — whatever, then, tends to destroy the  form is contrary to its law, and the automatic action of brain  and nerve set up by Prana is termed pain. 

But with physical death the law is reversed — dissolution of  the form becomes law, and Prana is withdrawn, hence, though  there is no doubt for some time a consciousness of the Physical  Body — that consciousness desires its dissolution as much as in  earth life it desires its conservation. The decay of the body  is to the consciousness exactly as the sensation of its growing  strength and vigour is to the youth or maiden — and the cause  is the same viz. the fulfilment of law — sudden and abnormal  development of strength is often painful and has been known to  cause madness — because the law is slow development. So is  cremation often painful in the West, because the law is slow  decomposition. In the East it is different, for the law is much  more rapid decomposition and much less consciousness of the  body and its changes. In Egypt the case of mummification was  different and arising out of the special circumstances of a nation  of Adepts. Yet much pain was caused to the Astral thereby —  voluntarily undergone for specific objects. 

Burial at sea does not usually fulfil the law of the condition  of death — yet in some cases it may. Perhaps of all forms burial  in a cave — exposed to the air but protected by a stone from  birds and beasts of prey — is in the most exact conformity with  the laws of the condition — and thus was the Master buried,  yet in death, as in life, the most perfect conditions are rarely  attainable — expense and sanitary laws — the health and well  being of survivors, and numberless other conditions prevent this. 

A strong desire for one form of burial is mostly born of  the mistaken view of post mortem consciousness, and of the  non-recognition of the reversal of the law of the condition. If  thou canst realise this reversal to thyself as did the Saints and  Adepts who — as it were — practised death — thou wilt see more  clearly what thou really desirest. Only beware of one marked  danger. Those who practice this, very commonly get a delusive  intuition of the time and manner of their own death — very  few are allowed to know this — and those must be of an advance 

far higher than thine Beware that, though believe it not! 

For there be those who believing such delusive intuitions have  brought about their deaths before the purpose of God had  decreed them. 

This is a species of astral suicide and very painful are the  results thereof. Practice not much, then, this formula; only,  when thou thinkest of death and burial — realise that thou wilt  then desire gradual decomposition — as thou now desirest re-  gaining of health and strength and that the decomposition —  in the grave, the air, or the water, will not appear loathsome  as it does when contrary to law — but lovely because in con-  formity thereto. 

The Consciousness after death depends on the state of the  Astral body here. In some cases it is weak and weary from its  earthly pilgrimage here and requires a long sleep — in other  cases it has periods of probation to undergo — or of purgation  — but there are cases where the Astral enters at once on a career  of help to those on earth — and to those also on its own  astral plane. 

Those of the grade of our beloved Frater ShMSh and myself  are associated with many helpers on the astral — some of whom  worked with us in life — and after death with scarcely a break  continued to work on the astral plane — their relation to us  being only slightly changed. 


The Devotion of the Quipus 1  Second Grade 

It is well to recite this (at least the Key sentences) standing  with the Arms extended in the form of a Cross. But to avoid  fatigue — which is not desirable — stand with the back to a shelf 

1 The Quipus was a cord of seven strands which the initiates of  the Cromlech Temple wore around their right arms. (Editorial Note.)  of convenient height — or put two stout pegs in the wall to  support the arms — or put two loops of rope at a convenient  height — or any other support that is convenient. 

Do this occasionally only — the position itself — being that of  the Master in the act of Expiation for the whole Order which  he founded, is a most powerful symbol against evil or opposing  forces. 


Brethren for a long time now ye have worn the Sacred Quipus  of our Holy Order, yet the deep and profound teaching and  symbolism therefore have been hidden from you. It is time now  that ye should learn some of the more elementary lessons thereof,  that the Quipus may become to you a veritable guide, symbol  and synthesis of truth and not a mere incomprehensible fetish. 

Seven are its strands, and they are of different colours selected  (but not as ye might suppose arbitrarily) from the spectrum,  whereunto the rays of Our Lord the Sun are decomposed on  passing through the triangular prism which is the symbol of the  Fratrix through whom the pure white light must reach Frater  Shemesh who passeth it on in the form of Love to the Outer  Companions and thence to all the world. 

Many are the scales of colour and almost infinite is colour  symbology. That which is used in the lower grades of our  Order, and which has been partially revealed to you, is that  which is known as the Sacramental Scale, of which the mysteries  will now be somewhat further shown. 

Take the Quipus and lay it on the table before you. The  central thread directed towards you. Next to it on the left  hand the red, then the yellow, and then the blue, on the other  side the orange, green and purple. 

Now according to the Sacramental Scale the colours on the  left hand represent the Supernal, those on the right the terres-  trial. There are three that bear witness in Heaven, the Word and  the Holy Ghost and these Three are One. And there are Three  that bear record on Earth, the Spirit and the Water and the  Blood, and these three agree in One’. And note that the One  here is the White thread wherein all are included. The same  was also the symbolism of the seven branched candlestick, as  will be more fully shown later on. 

But consider now the Blue Strand, the Ray of Power, the  Father, Blue is also the colour of Water, but here of the 'Waters  which be above the Firmament’ viz. to our gross material senses,  the Blue Sky. Its position at the outside of the group shows  that here, by this gate, the Neophyte enters to the sanctuary  at his first initiation, i.e. the purification by water. Hence in  all Rituals is this purification by water the initial step, and thus  in the rites of the Christian Church, wherein the form of the  ancient mysteries is preserved, the first initiation is represented  by Baptism. 

In every form of the true mysteries it was taught that at  the first initiation the Great Name of God entered into and  united with the life of the Neophyte, forming a talisman in-  visible to every eye save that of the Adept, which saved him  in the hour of need, helped, taught and comforted him through  his life. Further teachings and other initiations taught him  how to increase the power of this Name, how to recover it if  lost, how to unite his own soul with it, and this last by lending  his own soul to the constant adoration of the Great Name, till  the Soul became absorbed therein. The utterance of the Soul ex-  pressing this is some form of the ejaculation ‘Hallowed be thy  Name’, and in using it the Neophyte must regard the Name  as the object of Supreme Worship in the innermost shrine of his  heart, by the true hallowing of which, in constant adoration  he shall attain unto his genius and become more than human. 

Such then is the teaching of the Blue Thread. Learn to con-  nect the following ideas : 

Spirit of the Blue Ray 

Spirit of Power. 

The Father 

The Water above the Firmament. 

The Blue Sky. 

The Purification by Water  The First Initiation. 

Baptism in the Christian Scheme. 

The Great Name of God thereby entering into the Neophyte.  His talisman unseen. 

The Path to union with his genius. 

The Hallowing and Adoration of the Great Name. 

The Petition of Ejaculation — 

‘Hallowed be Thy Name’. 

Consider next the Red Ray of the Quipus, the Ray of Love,  the Son. 

Red is the colour of earth, of Adamah, but here it is not the  dull red of material separateness and of sin, but the triumphal  red of heaven, the Royal Robe of the Monarch of the Kingdom  of Love which is the Kingdom of Heaven. 

When our Lord the Sun is transfigured in glory at his rising  or setting and maketh to himself a royal robe from the Aura  of the Earth the hue of it is red, the red of Love, with the  scintillating orange and amber of the Wisdom of the Spirit.  Thus when the Kingdom of Heaven is established in the heart  of a man, the earthly red clay of Adamah is transmuted to the  infinite Ocean of Divine Love, the lustrous red of Heaven, by  virtue of the Mystery of the Atonement. The red then typifieth  the Atonement, the establishment of the Kingdom of Love in  the Heart of Mortal Man. How then shall this Kingdom be  established? No man can of himself attain thereto. The Masters  and guides, unseen yet verily present, acting under the Master  of Masters must draw him. And these act upon the ordinary  man through the ministrations of the Higher Adepts who work  by the magical powers conferred on them. Hence the Supreme  Initiation is the note which marks the establishment of the  Kingdom. In the Christian Church this Supreme Initiation is  signified by the ordination of the Priesthood, symbolically pass-  ing down the magic gifts received from the mighty Master  of Masters, and hence is Holy Orders the Analogue of the Red  Ray in the Christian scheme. 

The command of the Master ‘Go ye, and teach all nations’  bids them exercise the Kingly function in bringing the world  to acknowledge His rule, thence is Red the Ray at once of  Love and of Kingly power. Hence also the Neophyte ejaculates  Thy Kingdom Come’. Learn then to connect the following ideas.  Spirit of the Red Ray. 

Spirit of Love. 

The Sun. 

The Fire, the prismatic Red, 

The Grand Initiation. 

Holy Orders in the Christian Church. 

The establishment of the Kingdom of Love. 

The ejaculation Thy Kingdom Come’. 

Now look to the yellow thread of the Quipus. The Ray of  Wisdom, the Holy Spirit. Yellow is the colour of Air, between  Earth and the Firmament of Heaven vibrateth the Air, and the  more inward and subtle mood thereof, the Ether, which con-  veyeth unto men the pulsations of Light, the pulsations of  sound, whereby the messengers of the power of the Father are  transmitted to the Divine Spark incarnate in man, to that com-  posite Being which uniteth the prismatic red Ray of Heavenly  Love with the dull red clay of Adamah, until, both being fused  together and heated to a loving glow in the Power of the Atone-  ment, they respond like a perfect instrument to the vibrations of  the Amber Light from the Central Spiritual Sun, the Light of  Wisdom guiding the Divine Love whose uniting rosy and golden  rays herald the rising of Adonai, of Mithra the Lord of Wide  Pastures in the radiant hues of the morning, which the ancient  mysteries symbolised among much else of the profoundest mys-  teries of earth under the form of a Rose, and a gleam of whose  marvellous teaching one of your own poets hath set forth in the  line — ‘God made himself an awful Rose of Dawn’. Awful indeed,  and when you know all the meanings of the Rose and the Dawn,  and can go forth and learn without mistake or error the Lesson  of the Morning, then shall you appreciate the full force of that  line, and of the teaching of the Mystery of the Ages. 

The Air or the Ether then, bringeth to man the message of  the will of the Father, perfectly performed in the Blue, hindered  and intercepted and limited in the Adamah, not through the aid,  as transmitters, of the the Great Initiates, or in the Christian  Church through the magic power of the priesthood. Not to all,  but to a few is this magic power given, but to all under that, the  Yellow Ray, the Air Spirits bring the mystery of the Father's  Will. 

Hence it is properly significant of the Second Initiation, which  is universal in the Ancient Mysteries and is but the completion  and crown of the first. In the Christian Church this is signified  by Confirmation which completes and crowns the work of Holy  Baptism. 

Consider now, how each man within himself hath all these,  for as in the macrocosm so it is in the microcosm. The Blue Ray  belongeth to the intellect which is of power and is the Godlike  directing force of the material man. The Red Ray belongeth to  the affections which inspire and move the exercise of Power and  the Yellow Ray proceeding from both, as the Holy Spirit pro-  ceeded from the Father and the Son, and vibrating between  them belongeth unto the Will animated by Love, to emulate the  angels who in Heaven do the will of the Father. Hence then  comes the ejaculation Thy will be done on Earth as it is in  Heaven’. It will be seen how these three prismatic rays bring us  into contact with the Heavenly Trinity — Pure and Transient  out of the White Ray they emerge and into the White Ray they  retire again. 

Rightly do we rank them, as we consider the threads in the  familiar order, Father, Son and Spirit. Yet rightly too do we lay  them in order. Blue, Yellow, Red, for the Yellow the Spirit, ever  vibrateth between the Power and the Love, carrying and execut-  ing the will, yet the Divine Love can only consummate the  Atonement. Learn then, to connect the following ideas : — 

Spirit of the Yellow Ray. 

The Holy Spirit the Paraclete. 

The Tongues of Fire at Pentecost wherein the Gold of the 

Spirit bore the Red of Love. 

The Amber Light of Dawn. 

The Completion of the First Initiation 

Confirmation in the Christian Church. The will of God 

thereby done. 

The Great Transmuting Medium.  Hence the Vehicle of the Atonement. 

The Ejaculation — ‘Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in 

Heaven’. 

Passing now over the White Thread as the synthesis of  the central point and consummation of the Devotion shall be  dealt with last consider next the Orange Thread. 

In the Veil this Orange colour signifies Intellectual Wisdom,  being compounded of their Divine functions. Wisdom judges  austerely and righteously, Love embraces, being blind to  offences. Love guided by Wisdom sees as God sees, and judging  lovingly forgives. It must be that offences come. While the lower  aspects of the Orange Ray present the snare of the Human intel-  lect, the higher aspects show the pardon of God. But on the part  of the person pardoned certain acts are necessary. First a token  of regret for the injury wrought. Second an acknowledgement  of the full extent of the injury, thirdly a willingness to repair it.  On such terms is the forgiveness of God offered to us, and on  such terms should we pardon our brother men, not with love  only, but with wisdom and love. Hence the Orange or Flame  colour was the robe of the priests in the ancient mysteries when  declaring the acception of the purified candidate, his pardon in  fact. Hence on the Day of Pentecost the commission was given  to the Apostles by the cloven tongues in allusion to the Creative  Word, and flame colour in allusion to the commission to pardon,  the commission of the Spirit of Wisdom and Love, or of Loving  Wisdom. Hence the ejaculation ‘Forgive us our trespasses as  we forgive them that trespass against us’. And on account of  the condition in which this pardon is granted the Christian  Church has united this power and this ejaculation with Penance,  in which word are summed up the three acts above noted as  necessary to make the pardon effectual. Mistake not Brethren  and let no one mislead you here, the Christian Church follows  the teachings of the ancient mysteries, and though the Priest has  a certain magical power, it is in respect of Penance very slight,  and he who claims more is acting contrary to the teaching of  his Church. The Pardon comes from the Father through the  Son, the Master of Masters. The condition to make it effectual  must be produced by the penitent in himself, and consists of the  above noted three-fold Penance. The function of the Priests is but  to direct the penitent how to produce such condition of penance  in himself, and, being sure that it is produced, to comfort him  with the assurance that the Master pardons him. There are  Protestant sects whose ministers take upon themselves to make  enquiry into the hearts of their members and to pronounce  Absolutions such as the wildest exaggeration of Priestly Author-  ity has hardly attained to, but of these we do not speak, they are  of man’s invention, and shall fail accordingly. 

Learn then to connect the following ideas : 

Spirit of the Orange Ray. 

Orange cords of the Veil. 

The tongues of Fire of Pentecost, Yellow and Red. 

The Wisdom guided by Love. 

Seeing as God Sees. 

All pardoning and all wise. 

Pardon on condition of penance. 

Threefold penance in the Christian Church. 

The ejaculation : ‘Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them 

that trespass against us’. 

Consider next the Green Thread formed by the union of the  Blue of Power with the Yellow which is the Wisdom of the  Spirit, the Yellow which is the symbol of Air or Ether vibrating  between Earth and Heaven and carrying the messages of the  Father to man on Earth. Messages thus carried are teachings,  and thence in the Mystery of the Veil you were told that Green  was the colour of Doctrine and of Testimony, for it beareth wit-  ness. The message being brought to man is a witness of the  Power that sends it, and hence again is the green robe of vege-  tation wherein the Earth is clad in spring, a witness of the life-  giving power proceeding from the Blue sky and borne upon the  Golden Light. 

In this life of the Earth generation, maturity, decay, and  renovation proceed without effort, without separateness, with-  out sin. This is the great teaching of the perfect innocence of the  processes of Nature, the standing condemnation of the false and  morbid asceticism invented by man, which professing to lead to  superior goodness more often actually results in sorcery and  Black Magic. In all great Occult Schools of the World hath pro-  vision been made for this great and most essential teaching. And  hence in those races which have most clearly followed the  occult symbology of colour, Green is to this day the colour of  marriage. In the Christian Church marriage is expressly stated  to be for a remedy against sin, and is elevated to the dignity of  a sacrament, as being a figure of the Mystic Union between  Christ and His Church. To the Green Thread then and to the  Sacrament of Marriage most fitly belongs the ejaculation ‘Lead  us not into Temptation'. 

Tried we must be, when we are fit, yet we would not rush to  meet the testing unprepared and unfit. The time will come to all  of us when we shall be called to pass to the ascetic life, yet it is  only the highest and purest of mortals who are called to this  test. Of the College from whom these teachings emanate not all  have yet been called upon to face it, many have rashly demanded  to do so before the time, and almost without exception have  fallen and failed and grievously delayed their progress. Pray  then that ye be not exposed to trial until fit to bear it. Seek no  trial rashly trusting in your own strength, lean on the Masters  and be ready to face all trials when called on by them. The  Christian Church which has mainly the correct symbology of  colours still rightly uses green at all seasons where abstract  teaching rather than commemoration is ordained. Learn then  to connect the following ideas : — 

The Green Thread. 

The Spirit of Doctrine and Testimony. 

The Message of the Father borne by the Spirit of the Air. 

The Fertility of the Earth. 

Sinless generation. 

The Christian Sacrament of Matrimony. 

The Ejaculation ‘Lead us not into temptation’. 

The Green colour used in the Christian Church.  Look now at the Purple Thread. In the curtains that hang  behind our Altar, as in the curtains of the Tabernacle in the  wilderness, this is the great mediatorial colour which unites the  Red of Earthly Love with the Blue of the Power of the Father,  typical, therefore, of the incarnation and of that Death of the  Son which was the gate of a new life to all mortals who follow  His footsteps. This Death, and new Life also, was taught to the  Initiates in the Mysteries of the Old World and is now opened  to the knowledge (but not the comprehension) of all. 

Because it is the colour of the Incarnation and of all the suffer-  ing and the Death belonging thereto, Purple is appropriately  used as the colour of mourning, of fasting, and humiliation in  the Christian Church. This Church, watching and following all  the life of her children from the cradle to the grave, blesses their  last moments according to the holy custom of the Apostles in  the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. 

Here rightly do we ejaculate — ‘Deliver us from evil’, or more  properly ‘from the Evil One’. Thus the parting soul is speeded  and guided on its journey through the Valley of the Shadow of  Death, till, in the language of the Alchemist, from the blood  of the Black Dragon ariseth the Green Lion soon to be trans-  muted, by the Power of the King and of the Bride, to the Pure  and Living Gold. 

Learn then to connect the following ideas : 

The Purple Thread. 

The Mediatorial Colour. 

The Purple Robe thrown in mockery over Christ. 

The colour of Mourning and of Death. 

The Christian Sacrament of Unction. 

The Ejaculation ‘Deliver us from the Evil One’. 

Death the Gate of Life. 

Observe now that as the first three colours brought us in  contact with the Divine Three Persons, so do these last three  show us their work on Earth, being called secondary colours, and  note also that they are secondary in the blending of pigments  and not in the blending of Rays, for if you superimpose the  Yellow Ray on the Blue it maketh not Green, showing that the  Earthly nature, typified by the pigments of Earth, must be  properly prepared and harmonised in order to obtain the opera-  tion of the Divine Spirits of the Holy Rays thereon. 

All these colours lead up to and concentrate in the central  White Thread, the Great Three in one of Purity Sublime. It is  impossible here to enter into its complete symbolism, for it is the  synthesis and key of all. 

In the Christian Church it is typified by the Holy Eucharist  and it naturally leads to the central Ejaculatory Prayer ‘Give us  this day our daily bread’. Bread here meaning everything necess-  ary for bodily as well as Spiritual Health and Life. 

Such, Brethren, are the Elementary Meanings of the Seven  Strands of the Quipus, and of the Seven Sacraments of the Chris-  tian Church according to the Sacramental Scale. They have their  relation also to the Seven Lower Sephiroth on the Qabalistic  Tree of Life, and the Qabalistic Sign of the Cross, as it was in use  among the Hebrews of Old, concludes the Prayer of the Master. 

This symbolism of colour was in use among the Incas of Peru  and in the Temples of Mexico, and by its aid, even now, if you  obtain a correct representation of Temple or Shrine you may  learn much of their mysteries. 

Ye should then constantly, or as often as may be, place the  Quipus before you and go over the Summary of the ideas as  herein before expressed, placing a finger meanwhile on each  thread, and finishing each meditation by repeating the Ejacula-  tion aloud, speaking as it were in the breath, monotonously  slowly and dwelling with distinct outbreathing upon the vowels. 

When all the ideas have become so knit in the mind that any  one naturally, and without effort, recalls the others, it is no  longer necessary to use the Quipus always, a series of coloured  beads on a string, touching each one as you repeat its appropri-  ate ejaculation, is commonly used in the Order and serves well;  some use a model of a Rose of Seven Petals, which may be made  of silk or coloured paper. 

Above all things in this exercise, as in everything occult, we  must earnestly beseech you to cultivate the greatest possible  exactness. Every word should be accurately learned, every sym-  bol accurately drawn, every colour brilliant and pure. It is a  favourite device of the Adversary to hinder the Student by sug-  gesting that it is sufficient to get only the sense or the general  idea, that is the Spirit that matters. Observe that this is the  spirit which denyeth the Incarnation, for the material form en-  closeth the Divine Spirit and the Two (not the one alone) are  One Christ. 

In all occult matters, then Brethren, let all your learning be  exact, allow not a single mistake. So will you progress and be  conscious of your progress, not otherwise. We who address you  have trod the path ye are now treading. We have seen our com-  rades fall and fail from the very faults of which we warn you.  Under the Shadow of the Wings of I H V H rest ye ever. 

Farewell. 

Shemesh.  Second Grade 


The Eagle 

Lecture on the Introductory Knowledge of the Second Grade. 

The element of this grade is Air. 

The Kerubic Sign is the Eagle, and it is under the patronage  of St. John the Beloved Disciple of the Master. In the Gospel of  St. John, therefore, may be found much of the learning appro-  priate thereto. 

The special number is that of the Hebrew letter Shin, or 21. 2  Seek ye then in the 21st Chapter of St. John’s Gospel and ye shall  learn how the Master shows Himself to His Disciples, and  thereby also ye shall learn how the Master shows Himself to  each man who has purified his heart to receive Him. 

And here also ye shall learn to interpret many things in our  ritual, otherwise dark and incomprehensible. A few of the  secrets of this interpretation we will unfold. Others will be told  you later and some may be divined by your intuition. Consider  first to whom He was shown. There were together Simon Peter,  and Thomas called Didymus, Nathaniel of Cana in Galilee and  the sons of Zebedee and two other of his Disciples’. 

Observe that there were seven, answering to the Seven Prin-  ciples cf Man, and the other Seven whereof ye have been taught.  Observe also that of these seven, five only are named, the two  others are hidden. As in our ritual there are Five Companions,  Priests of the Order, with whom two Invisible, yet present,  Masters make up the Seven. 

Observe also that they are named from the lowest upwards,  and that Simon Peter therefore represents Sthula Sharira, the  lowest and most material, as is shown by his name meaning a  Stone, or the Syriac Cephas, also meaning a stone, but of a  different character. A stone being the emblem of all that is dead 

2 This is not the Qabalistic number of the letter Shin (which is  300), but that of the Tarot trump corresponding to the Path of Shin  on the Qabalistic Tree of Life. (Editorial Note.)  and inanimate — yet in another sense it is the Stone of the Wise  — the Rock whereon the Church of the Master is built, and it  is further the Flint of the Mysterium Magnum of Paracelsus  wherein lyeth fire, and hence it corresponds also with our Frater  Shemesh, whose symbol denoteth fire and heat, and the red of  whose stole shows the fire of Love, the first Key to the Mysteries.  Meditate on these things, Brethren, and on these correspond-  ences. Equally appropriate are the names of the other Disciples  and the correspondences therewith, but of these we speak not  now. Love is the first Key, therefore we express this at present. 

Observe also, that all Seven were together, and learn from  this that only when all the Seven Principles in each man are in  thorough accord can the Master be manifested to him. Only  when a group of occult students are working harmoniously to-  gether can that group advance, and hence until such an har-  monious group is at least potentially formed the higher messages  of the Master cannot be delivered. Now to such a group ‘Simon  Peter said I go fishing’. The material body, the Sthula Sharira,  desired the Ichthus the Christ — whose meaning has been shown  you in this grade. And not until such a desire is present in a such  body is such a manifestation possible. 

Again it is Love which suggests the search for the Ichthus.  The Stone of the Wise thus operates the change whereby in full-  ness of time the Divine Light shall dawn. 

But immediately the Word goes forth from the material Love,  all the Principles unite to carry it out. ‘They say unto Him we  also go with Thee'. Hence in the initiation of this Second Grade  it is Frater Shemesh who craves admission in the name of the  rest. 

Observe now further what they do. ‘They went forth and  entered into a Ship immediately’. This ship as ye have been  taught is symbolic of the Golden Ark and means the same. In  the same way did Noah enter into the Ark, in the same way was  the infant Moses laid in the Ark, and both emerged to higher and  nobler life. Thus too does the Life principle enter into the Womb  and emerge to complete human life, and in the same great sym-  bol lies hidden all the mystery of regeneration. 

This Universe is but the first step. Note that Love in the  material body must take the iniative, then all uniting must enter  into the Golden Ark which is the mystery of the Covenant of  God with Man. 

And thus the seed is shown, the process of Generation of a  New Life commenced, but not as yet is the fruition. Forty days  was Noah in the Ark amid the waste of waters. Moses passed a  long period of seclusion and study before his mission was  announced. The child in the Womb is matured into human form  and life through a period of darkness and of silence. The seed  lies dark and silent in the earth before its time of germination  comes. 

It was night when the Seven entered into the Ship ‘and that  night they caught nothing’. Notice now especially the manner  in which this first manifestation of the Master is made and the  time. It was ‘when the morning was come’ in the light of the  Dawn, and when our Lord of the Sun was risen on the Earth —  the Seven were still in the ship — that is the new life had not yet  attained to separate incarnate existence — the new body was not  yet born. And the Master ‘stood on the shore’ — He was per-  fectly incarnate — He had descended into matter. The body of the  New Association in which hereafter He was to be manifested  was yet in embryo — still in the Ship or in the womb — surroun-  ded by the Waters — unborn. And they knew him not — yet He  spoke to them. 

Learn from this that before ye can know the Master He will  speak to you as He speaks constantly to everyone. Sometimes  by the Beth Kol, sometimes by the thought-flash, sometimes  through the voice of a material human being. Watch therefore  and be ready to listen for His voice though Himself ye may not  know. 

‘So he said to them “Children have ye any meat?”’ They  were seeking material food — in parable also they were the per-  fect man — the seven principles in harmony seeking the Ichtus,  the Christ — and they had not found what they sought. 

The Voice of the Master now gives them directions how to  seek. ‘Cast the net on the right side of the ship’. Many are the  meanings involved in this direction which will gradually be  unfolded to you. Meantime note that the Ichthus, the Christ  giveth no benefit to mortal men till enclosed, limited or brought  within their sphere by their own actions and that the nature of  this action must be dictated by the Master, those who profess  to serve the Master by doing so in their own way cannot take  the Ichthus to themselves. They toil all night and take nothing. 

Observe too that the casters of the net would stand with  their faces to the prow which was pointed to shore and facing  the Master who stood on the shore — the right side of the ship  would therefore be their right and the action of obedience in  casting would be the second sign of this grade, which therefore  also signified ‘obedience’. 

Thus far then, Brethren, ye see that before ye can recognise  the Master three things are needed. 

First, harmony of all the principles, whence ariseth the  prompting of love to desire the Ichthus, the Christ, the Spiritual  food. 

Second, patience, whereby after Love has sown the seed, and  the Seven Principles have retired into the darkness of night and  the ark during the period of incubation, the seed is matured. 

Third, obedience, whereby although ye may not yourselves  recognise the Master yet ye believe and cheerfully perform the  behest of the Voice ye hear. 

Strive then to follow out this process accurately in your-  selves, if ye would see and speak with the Master face to face.  Note then, that he who recognises the Master is the Disciple  whom the Master loved. That is according to common speech, in  each individual man is his higher self. And to no other doth He  declare it — except to Simon Peter. Not to the intellect, not to  the emotions, but to the material corporal body on this Earth  plane, to the pure Spiritual Love which is its correspondence on  the higher plane. That disciple said ‘It is the Lord’. 

So to the initiate man, when the process of his regeneration  is about to take place, the Higher Self will suddenly reveal to  the lower material body that the voice from the shore, the  material voice which has given good and wise counsel whose  source was not perceived before, is the Voice of the Master. 

Now observe the action of the body when this great intuitive  knowledge is given, ‘When Simon Peter heard that it was the  Lord he girt his fishers coat unto him’. 

Therefore is it in this second Grade of the Companionship  that ye, who have as a group recognised the Master by confess-  ing the Faith of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, do gird to  you symbolically the Fishers Coat, thereby asserting that ye will  follow St. Peter in asserting boldly before men without equivo-  cation or reservation the faith of Christ. 

He also cast himself into the sea — the waters of putrefaction  — the lustral water of Regeneration — the holy water of Bap-  tism, showing that the shtula sharira, the material flesh and  blood, first emergeth from the ark which is the Womb of the  new birth. Despise not then, Brethren, the body, for it shall see  the Lord, when it is purified and all the principles shall worship  Him, but the material body first. 

The other disciples however came in a little ship. Whence ye  are to learn that during this material life the supersensual prin-  ciples of man, all, that is, which lie beyond the body or house of  flesh are not yet born into outward objective life, but can lie, so  to speak, in the womb. Yet as the child in the womb can be  influenced, modified and developed so is it possible to work,  change, transmute and purify in the mental, moral and spiritual  nature. 

For understand that Peter stood with the Lord on the shore,  and the others were still coming towards land in their boat, in  obedience to the Master's Voice. Hence ye may learn how to  purify the inner man, the imagination, the thought, the desire,  by appropriate ceremonies. And all the ceremonies of this grade  are based on the true understanding of this great ceremony,  when the Master Himself, the first Dictys, initiated the first  supreme group. 

Now whereas the Group had been in the Boat, now did the  group come to land, or in other words, all the principles were  able to function on the material plane and the incarnation be-  came completely perfect. 

So then when by Harmony, Patience and Obedience, ye  recognise the Master, the Voice of the Higher Self by Divine  Intuition reveals the Mystery to the material body, and the  material body thereupon emerging in the new Birth purifies  itself in the Lustral water of Creation. 

Then by the following of the other principles into incarnation  may the Christ within be made manifest and the true Adeptus  brought forth. There are mysteries in connection with the dis-  tance of the ship from land (200 cubits) and the number of  fishes (153) in the net which shall be unfolded in the further  ceremonies and teachings of this grade, as also will the nature  of the communications made after the disciples were on the  shore, signifying the teaching given by the Master to him who  has purified his heart sufficiently to receive them. These things  however belong to further and higher teachings. 

Having learnt, then, how the Master shows himself to each  man and how each may expect to receive communications, it  remaineth to show you the practical working thereof. And know  that as there are hierarchies of angels charged with the office of  ministering to humanity, and below these again many elemental  spirits of mixed nature, partly good and partly evil, all of which  may be controlled and put into subjection by man. So hereafter  ye shall be taught their names and nature and how they may  be summoned and made to appear so that ye shall be able to call  those most fit for the work on which you are all engaged and  compel their assistance. At present however ye must learn to  use a simple and elementary formula, that ye may become  accustomed to the commanding of the ministering Spirits and  may learn their efficiency. 

Let us suppose that the disciple hath discovered in his material  body some thing which is unharmonious — some breach of the  law, some imperfection he desires to cure. Thus shall he proceed.  First let him carefully seek in the realm of thought or imagina-  tion for the seed of the evil. Perchance it may be over indulgence  in meat or drink, or it may be uncontrollable violence or irrit-  ability of temper. Impurity of thought or deed, or carelessness,  idleness or self-indulgence. Whatever it may be, let him raise  his thoughts out of himself. Look down on himself as a stranger,  and see himself persecuted by an evil spirit. Let him imagine the  personality of this spirit, clothing it with all its filthy hateful-  ness in God's sight — and extenuating nothing. Let him con-  template the image so raised and reflect that he, the Divine  Man, made in the image of God, does in his thought world,  whereof he is Sultan and Supreme, caress and hug to his bosom a  filthy swine, by the influence of his own weakness and permits it  to trouble and possess him. 

He must give some time to the realisation of an outward form  for the trouble he desires to purge from his body, for it is the  vagueness and intangibility which gives these foul spirits their  power over men. Like the cuttle fish they surround themselves  with a dark cloud of their own secretion. But the Adept must  force them to at least visibility to the clairvoyant, that they may  be dealt with and repelled. 

Now must the material body like Simon Peter seek the Master  of Masters, casting himself into the sea, and thus must he do it. 

First, choose a time when not assailed by temptation, when  calm and resolute (otherwise the ceremony will bind up the evil  thing in thine own aura where it will torment thee). 

Second, retire to a place where thou canst be absolutely secure  from interruption. If thou hast an occult room or oratory it is  better, but any secluded place will serve. It imitates the isolation  of the disciples entering the ship or Ark. 

Third, cast from thy mind all thought of worldly anxiety or  passion, all irritability, all love and hate or annoyance, and en-  deavour to harmonise all thy principles. 

Fourth, realise that if the night seem long and the answer be  delayed, thou wilt exercise patience till the dawn. 

Fifth, resolve an absolute obedience to the Divine Will in all  things. 

Note: though this takes long to describe it is the work of a  few moments only to properly pose the mind. If from a disturbed  mental state the harmonious pose and calmness be hard to get,  it is better to put off the operation for the time is inappropriate. 

Sixth, stand in the centre of the room facing East, make the  sign of the Cross from brow to breast and from left shoulder to  right, with the right hand saying ‘In the name of the Father and  of the Son and of the Holy Spirit', clasp thy hands and say  Amen. 

Seventh, trace with the right hand in the Air before thee a  Cross keeping the hand extended, call on the name of the Lord  Jesus. Pronouncing the Most Holy Name as it were whispered in  the breath, and lingering on the syllables, bowing the head as  you do so. 

Eighth, keeping the hand extended turn to the South and do  likewise. 

Ninth, the same to the West. 

Tenth, the same to the North. 

Eleventh, bring the hand round again to the East so as to com-  plete the circle. 

Twelfth, standing in the midst of the circle so formed, picture  to thyself that a great ring of Shining Ones is formed around  thee, and so facing the East, clasp the hands, raise the eyes to a  point slightly above the head and say ‘Lord Jesus, now verily on  this earth, who hast conquered all forces of matter, add thy force  to mine that this evil thing may be expelled, and let the  Guardian ring of Holy Angels protect me now and evermore’. 

Thirteenth, close the eyes and breathe as deeply as possible  three or four times in the fourfold rhythm, then, holding the  breath, pronounce mentally the name of the Lord Jesus three  times and raise mentally as clearly as thou canst the picture of  the Guardian Circle of the Shining Ones under the Presidency of  the Master of Masters, and of the hideous personification of that  which thou desirest to expel shut without the circle and still  striving to enter. 

Fourteenth, close with the sign of the Cross as in the begin-  ning. 

Fifteenth, in turning away from the East be careful to turn to  the right hand by the South, the path of the Sun. 

Note — it is well thou shouldst know the operation of this  ceremony though its full meaning can only be told later. In fact  thou dost put forth and project from thyself a certain ray of  power of which the nature is to attract from the Astral Light 3 a  similar force and the concurrence of the two formeth a vortex  attracting and compelling the Guardian Spirits of a high and  pure nature. 

3 ‘Astral’ is used here in Eliphas Levi’s sense of all planes above  the physical, not the Theosophical sense. (Editorial Note.)  But seeing thou knowest not yet their nature and disposition  and mightest ignorantly call on those prejudicial to thy work in  hand, or actually evil in operation, so must thou as yet entrust  this whole matter to the Master of Masters. 

If the spirit thou desirest to cast out assail thee at any special  place or time, there and then shalt thou face the East and tracing  the Cross in the Air shall pronounce the Master’s Name and  recall the protective circle. 

Know that the initial force is taken from thyself and marvel  not though after the ceremony thou feel tired — thou has formed  an Astral fence. Lie down then and rest if need be in calm  reliance on Divine Protection. 

Expect not that immediate and perfect success will crown thy  efforts. The Astral forces of evil will beat against thy fence and  may break it down, for they are strong and thou art weak as yet. 

But learn perseverance and, so often as the evil thing finds  admittance, as soon as may be repeat — recover the proper pose  of mind and repeat the ceremony. Striving to put forth more  force and to repair the broken fence. At each attempt thy powers  will increase and the powers of evil be depleted. 

But give heed that thou work not the ceremony for any but  thyself at present, for thou art not yet strong enough and  mightest do mischief to thyself and to that other also. 

There be further ceremonies of great importance and power  belonging to this grade. Such are the consecration of the Golden  Ark, and the Mystic devotion of the Quipus. Also the investing  of the newly initiated brethren with the insignia pertaining  thereto.  Eagle M.S. and the Purpose and Goal of Development 


The Ceremony given at the end of the Eagle M.S. is merely a  carefully designed and elaborate formula for the same end as  every Christian’s daily acts of prayer and penance. The differ-  ence in degree if the former be performed with earnestness and  Faith, is very great — the difference in character and intention,  if the latter be genuine and not mere formal repetition — is nil. 

Our experience is that when a Companion of Our Order hav-  ing attained the Second Grade has once performed the Ceremony  in the Eagle M.S. with power and effect — his daily prayers — his  confessions — his penances — thereafter all bear the glow of reflec-  tion from that Ceremony and are immeasurably increased in  faith and earnestness — in other words he becomes a more real  and devout Christian. 

To establish closer and more personal relations with the Lord  Jesus, the Master of Masters, is, and ever must be, the ultimate  object of all the teachings of Our Order. Many are admitted to  the First Grade who know Him not — and follow Him not. If  they diligently keep our rules and follow our teachings their pre-  judices must break down — their ignorance is dissolved — insen-  sibly they are led to the Master’s feet. 

They who know Him by the teachings of their pastors and  masters — and their parents — who have never doubted — but  never realised Him, are brought to know Him. Every bit of teach-  ing we give is derived from Him — the powers we teach our dis-  ciples to use are bestowed by Him according to His promise.  Only the doubting, the hesitating, the timid, fail to realise how  completely Our Order emanates from Him and leads to Him.  Closer and personal relation with Him is indeed our object and  there is no other. Let all disciples cast off doubt — tread boldly  in the way we have trodden and we will lead them to Him  even as Philip led Nathaniel.  Teachings on the Church 

Apostolic Succession 


There is most undoubtedly an Apostolic Succession by the lay-  ing on of hands in all Three Branches of the Holy Catholic  Church — viz. the Roman, the Greek and the Anglican. The  Exoteric doctrine and the historic evidence with regard to the  Anglican Church is well set forth in a work by Arthur Haddan  on the Apostolic Succession. 

The Esoteric, and for the Adept really conclusive, evidence  is furnished by sensitives and clairvoyants and by those who  have the power to read and to see on the astral plane. Let any  such who are under no delusion of prejudice compare the Holy  Sacrament as consecrated in any of the three true Branches of  the Master’s Church with the parody of that Divine Rite as per-  formed in Presbyterian or Protestant Meeting-Houses. Yet in the  latter the intention is usually extremely reverent; the faith often  fervent — the partakers sometimes of higher ethical character  and greater devotion than in the true Church. 

Were it possible for men by their own will and effort to invoke  the Holy Spirit doubtless these would do it. And doubtless also  many priests whose lives are evil, and who have no faith, could  never of themselves invoke that Holy Spirit. Whence, then, can  come that Power? Only from the Master Himself — according to  His promise — and by His own appointed means. 

The Assumption 

The 14th of August is the eve of the Feast of the Assumption  of Our Blessed Lady. Natural therefore is it that Her influence  at that season emanating like the scent of the Mystical Rose  should penetrate through the serried ranks of the Companions  or Our Holy Order vowed to the Quest of the Ruby at the Heart  of the Rose — and should come to thee who hast so lately been  added to the ranks of those bound on that Holy Quest. 

The Immaculate Conception 

The Immaculate Conception of Our Blessed Lady thou hast  done well to ask about. The whole teachings as originally given  to Our Order are contained in a very ancient M.S.S. known  among us as the Book of the Negative Existence. More than 600  years ago this Book was for very sufficient reasons withdrawn  from the knowledge of the lower Grades of the Order, and is  now in its entirety only to be studied by Companions who have  attained to a great advance. Yet as with others of our great  teachings is it permissible that certain elementary portions may  be given out in such form as may be readily comprehended when  any student hath sufficiently advanced to ask concerning them. 

Accordingly I ShMSh have now received from the Custodian  of our Ancient Wisdom certain excerpts from this book — which  in its entirety I have never seen — and have been commanded to  adapt these to the mode of thought and the comprehension of  the modern student. 

It is in Our Order an opinion — yea and much more than an  opinion, for it is held by our most advanced Brethren as an  absolute certainty and confirmed by those workers who are  beyond the Veil — that Our Blessed Lady was verily and indeed  born without the taint of original sin and was so also conceived  in the Womb of her Mother. 

Yet we seek not to impose this great truth upon any — the  Master is very tender to the ignorance, the prejudice, and the  foolishness of His children and we would fain follow Him in His  tenderness. As regards the Assumption of Our Blessed Lady —  remember that she typifies and sets forth for us the Root of the  Negative Powers. The force of the Negative and receptive, which  is indeed the very germ of Faith, and has been known in all ages  of the world, and is the necessity thereof before any manifesta-  tion of the Master could be — even in the soul of a man. Thus did  the great Initiate of the elder world write ‘Be still then and know  that I am God’. In modern language the idea might be more  accurately rendered ‘Let thy whole being become Negative and  thou wilt know Me’. 

Hence before the Word could become flesh it was necessary  that there should be a perfect manifestation or incarnation of  the Negative and that this Negativity should be absolute — and  hence the Immaculate Conception — the Virgin Birth of the  Master. This, and the perpetual virginity of Our Blessed Lady  are not theories or myths superstitions or corruptions, but the  absolutely essential concomitants of His Divinity. But in passing  out of Manifestation into the Spiritual Plane, the sequence is  otherwise — for here the Positive — the Master — first enters — and  when He hath prepared a plane there entereth also the Negative  which shall be the entrance or first receptacle for them that  follow Him. 

For indeed entering to His Own Kingdom He needeth no  Negative receptacle as He did when He descended to earth. But  we who follow Him entering by His Grace a Kingdom He has  won for us do need such Negativity. Hence when He called Our  Blessed Lady to Himself it was first as it were, the more positive  side of Her Negativity — namely Her pure and sinless soul, that  ascended to the Throne of Grace, and thereafter her ever-Virgin  Body, which saw not corruption, was taken up in order that in  the presence of the All Supreme there might be the positive  Mediator, the Master — and the Negative recipient the welcomer  — who guideth souls to Him. 

Hence much to blame are they who say that in the Cultus of  Our Blessed Lady we detract from the honour due to the Master.  For She was necessary to His Birth on earth but detracted not  from His Glory. Great is the Mystery of these things. 

Some Notes on the Church and Church Teachings 

The Master left no room foi opinion. When He founded His  Church He impressed thereon a definite form — His immediate  followers from His instructions filled up the details, and the  Rulers of the Church in all ages so far as they have been faithful  have been guided by Him — and thus His Church hath grown  and is alive today. ‘Other foundation can no man lay than that  which is laid.' Thus every society — which hath rebelled against  the Church and the Rulers thereof is cut off, even if built on the  foundation of the Church it is but wood — hay — stubble — that  is built thereon — and it is condemned, but observe only if neces-  sary — the Society — the men and women composing the same are  oftimes young souls learning elementary lessons — thou mayest  freely do justice to all noble qualities each individual may have,  but no more consort with them in their worship than thou  wouldst go into an infant school to learn to read with children  of eight years old. 

The Three Great Branches of the Catholic Church contain  among them all the truths taught by the Master. Their errors are  in their schisms — in their separation and their opinion of each  other — from any of them thou canst learn much. 

A Presbyterian as such is in great error — yet in spite thereof  he may have much that is pure and holy to teach yet always  with danger — for because he is a Presbyterian he is below thy-  self and the causes that make him or keep him so are points of  error and thou mayest perchance be unable to sift the false from  the true. Why read such where lifetime would not suffice to  read the writings of the Saints? 

The Master of Masters hath so planned that all that is abso-  lutely needed of His teachings are recorded literally by certain  of His followers in what are known as the Four Gospels — but  seeing that to human comprehension these can neither be  grappled with nor understood — He has further revealed to cer-  tain special teachers appointed to guide His flock certain glosses  and interpretations of His teachings whereby they may be  brought down to the physical brains and translated into rules  of physical conduct for certain sections of Mankind. But observe  that these of their very nature are limited — only the Master’s  own words being universal. Therefore is closeness of touch with  Him the solution of all difficulty. 

Thus to take one instance — the great Initiate whom we term  St. Paul was specially inspired and specially trained to speak  forth the Master’s teaching and expound it to his own time and  the countries and races committed to him. To him was given to  lay down rules for the new-born and growing Church which are  still valid, and therefore has that Church by Divine guidance  incorporated the Epistles of St. Paul into the infallible and  divinely inspired Canon of the Scripture. Yet they who set the  words of St. Paul which are infallibly true considered in their  connection and circumstances on a par with the words of the  Master, which are infallible without limitation for all time and  for every place, do greatly err. 

Consider now the Master’s own words ‘Other sheep I have  which are not of this fold’ — them also I must bring. ‘Feed my  sheep’ ‘We forbade him because he followeth not with us — for-  bid him not’. ‘Feed my sheep’. Brother in these words of His the  Master speaks to these (this message was sent to a priest, a mem-  ber of a Temple). 

Now look back and see how thou thyself hast drawn night  unto Him. It was by one of the most perfect expressions of His  Divine Spirit. The formularies of the Catholic Church. This was  the step that lay before thee and thou didst mount thereon and  find the Lord. 

Highly privileged wert thou for there is no other road where-  by so rapidly or so nearly approach to Him may be won. This  step is a White Stone — but if thou shouldst make a fetich there-  of as the Moslems do of the Caaba and say there is no other way  — thou wouldst greatly err. For herein do men often confound  what is useful discipline and of immense value to those who are  at the stage to profit thereby with the absolute essential of the  Master’s teaching and the New Revelation. 

These limitations are easy — therefore dear to the human  hearts of human teachers — very easy it is to say ‘My way is the  only way — walk ye in it’. Very hard it is to see the way that  lies before another and to aid him to walk in the path that the  Master has traced before him — much easier to force him if it  may be — to walk in thy path. Much easier — but not the Master’s  method. ‘Forbid him not, because he walketh not with you’. 

Now what said the Master is the highest duty ? ‘Be not afraid,  only believe’, over and over again reiterated, and what is belief or  faith? ‘The evidence of things not seen.’ They, then, who put  all their trust in what they can see and touch and handle and  examine — the agnostics — the rationalists and the like, these are  they who offend the Master, and any touch of faith that can be  given to them is a service to Him. But they who strive to believe  — who are straining their eyes into the darkness to obtain the  evidence of things not seen — all these, though they see falsely  and imperfectly, yet are they on the road to the knowledge of  the Master. Hence have all the mystic and supernatural religions  the germs of truth more or less developed and all are energising  upward. All materialising, denying, doubting, religions (whereof  are most of those which termed themselves ‘Reformed’) tending  away from the Master. 

Thou shouldst call nothing common or unclean. That man or  woman who seeks a good or fancied good be it what it may —  even if it be merely sensual lust (which to him or her appears  the best thing) is, all unknown to him or herself, seeking Him,  the Master — the soul is young, the ideal is low and primitive,  nevertheless it is an ideal — by degrees will higher ideals be sub-  stituted for low ones — ‘Feed my lambs’ the Master said, not drive  them into your own favourite pastures. 

Nothing is common or unclean — the sacrifice He asks of thee  is the sacrifice of thy prejudices, thy limitations, in order that  thou mayest feed His Sheep, above all His Lambs. 

Well canst thou guide members of the Catholic Church in  Catholic ways. This is easy and demands no sacrifice. Thou art  asked to see His hand everywhere — to recognise that faiths thou  callest heathen may have a knowledge of Him. That there are  grains of Truth everywhere — that thou art called to be a  shepherd.  Hermetic Wisdom and  Mystical Prayer 


Being 

Further Cromlech Temple  Papers 




Three Grades of Prayer 


Know, Oh Companions, that there be Three Grades of Prayer,  appropriate to the Neophyte, the Initiate, and the Adept. The  nature of these I will unfold as far as may be. Seek in your own  hearts for that which ye can pray with all your mind and soul  and strength, and strive not to use a grade higher than that  which ye can put forth your whole strength in, thinking thereby  to please God the Vast and Mighty One — for ye shall not so  please Him. But rather try to develop yourselves so that ye may  attain to a higher Grade, and pray naturally the prayer thereof.  Herein I take no account of the mass of mankind who have not  yet learned to pray at all with concentrated force and intensity  on every plane of being at once. 

The neophyte prays for what he desireth — either for himself  or others — and he prays with confidence, because he is a mem-  ber of the Great Master, an integral part of that Divine Body  wherein dwelleth the Divine Spirit — and he receiveth that  which he prays for. The Initiate trusteth that the Lord of All  knoweth his necessities before he asketh, and his chief prayer is  ‘Lord make me pure — make me Holy as Thou art, and bring me  to Thy Eternal Glory’. 

Yet the more advanced Initiate prayeth also the Neophyte's  prayer therewith, for he knoweth the power thereof and he  prayeth for Wisdom to use aright the power of prayer. 

Yet notice that these prayers are self regarding — they are  prayers of separateness — even at the highest, when for others.  The Neophyte, moreover, cannot pray with his whole soul to  be made pure and holy, for as yet he only partially desires it. He  putteth force upon himself to pray this prayer, yet in his inmost  soul he knoweth that it is his own prayer in the same sense that a  prayer for the health or life of one near and dear to him is. 

The chief prayer of the Adept is ‘Lord let me be an instrument  in thine hands for good or for evil as it pleaseth Thee, for all that  Thou desirest is good' — use me O Lord to fulfil Thy purposes, and  teach me as part of Thyself, to yield myself at once to Thy Will.’ 

For ye know that the Master needeth not only all whom the  world calls good and holy — but those whom the world calls evil  are a part of His body and move with His Will — the outer and  uninitiated unconsciously — the Adept consciously and will-  ingly. The Pharisees and Scribes despised Mary Magdalene — the  woman who was a sinner, yet was she at that very time develop-  ing towards the highest Adeptship to which she afterwards  attained, and why? ‘Because she loved much.’ She yielded her-  self willingly through her love to be a vessel — whether to honour  or dishonour, in Her Master’s hands. 

Few can attain to this height but one lesson ye can learn of  infinite importance in this Fire Tatwa. Any person so ye see, may  for aught you know be on the path of Adeptship, and in love  yielding himself to the Master's Will, though seeming evil to  you — as Mary Magdalene seemed to the Pharisees — therefore  condemn not and ye shall not be condemned.  Various Teaching on Church for Second Grade only 


Some notes on the Sun Order and the Church. 

The first foundation of our Order was long pre-Christian — but  seeing that our highest Adepts always maintained (as did the  Hebrew seers and Prophets — many of whom were also members  of Our Order) an intercourse with the spirit world. 

Our Order recognised only those faiths which had acted on a  direct Divine Revelation. Such a revelation was, as all Christians  admit, given to the Hebrews. It was also given to some before  the Hebrews, as Enoch and Noah. Further it was given to the  Egyptians, since Moses was learned in all their wisdom — which  would not have been the case had their Revelation been false.  And the same may be said of other faiths, whose revelation,  though in them it degenerated and became corrupt, yet at first  was pure. 

In all these faiths there were members of our Order, and it was  known to us and is recorded in our ancient Archives that in all  of them was the prophecy of the coming of the Incarnate Word  in Human Flesh. 

To this, therefore, we ever looked forward, and when the  Master came, Our Order all over the world knew and recognised  Him, that is our Higher Adepts did so, and the knowledge was  communicated to every Temple throughout the World — there  then being some thousands. 

The chief of the whole Order — whose title is never revealed  to the lower grades — did homage and laid down his office at the  feet of the Master — who became the actual Living Head. Thus  every word of the Master became and remained for ever an  infallible and unalterable part of our teachings. 

When a society was formed to promulgate those teachings  many of the most eminent and advanced of our Order assisted  therein. By reason of our Organisation — its secrecy, its detach-  ment from all material considerations and by the preservation  of our ancient M.S.S. we believe that we have been able to pre-  serve all the pure doctrines of the Catholic Church and to know  and reject those which have been introduced by corruption, or  for material or political ends, most of which have already been  discarded by the true Catholic Church in its Three Great  Branches. 

Our Order then — meaning thereby the governing and teach-  ing body, is absolutely therein, as all its members are actually  members of the Holy Catholic Church. Yet we do not refuse to  teach Neophytes of any other faith. Only they cannot advance  to higher grades unless they be Christians and members of one  of the Branches of the Catholic Church. 

When the Master came, the question was definitely raised by  what title should He be referred to in our Rituals — and should  the existing system of Initiation be changed. After careful con-  sideration it was resolved to make no change. One strong reason  being the desire to emphasise the fact that His coming was in  fact revealed to all the great revealed Religions on Earth — as was  shown in the Homage of the Three Holy Kings — Magi — or Wise  Men. 

To neglect, as some have neglected, all the history of the  prophecies of His coming and to commence Christian doctrine  with the Birth of Christ is to disregard the Master’s own teach-  ing and 1 the place of that Supreme event in the World’s history.  To confine these prophecies, as some others have done, to the  seers of the Hebrew Faith is to disregard the evidence of history  and the Master’s own teachings and both these errors give great  occasion to those who impugn the justice of the Father in leav-  ing the greater part of mankind in intentional darkness and  ignorance. 

It is certain that some of the immediate followers of the  Master were parties to this decision. Indeed some think that the  Master Himself was consulted — but of this there is no evidence.  Yet are we fully persuaded that the course resolved on was the  only one consistent with His teachings — and with the doctrines  of His Incarnation; it was further said that when in time to come  Neophytes should ask ‘What mean ye by these ceremonies?’ the  explanation given would bring them to a clearer understanding  of the Father’s dealings with the world and the purpose of the  coming of the Master.  Dost thou not know that there are many titles belonging to  the pre-Christian systems in constant use in the Liturgies of the  Church as applied to Christ — and still more to Our Blessed Lady,  who is frequently invoked with the very titles of the Greek  Aphrodite? The images and symbols used are also drawn, almost  always, from some pre-Christian system — and in every case the  occult reason is to connect the coming of the Master with the  preparations made for His coming in all Nations of the World.  He who came ‘not to destroy but to fulfil’. 

How canst thou greet the Master as the Sun of Righteousness  and Our Lady as the Star of the Sea — if thou thinkest it is a  transgression of Scripture? Know that the whole of our teach-  ings as applied to that Branch of Our Order whereto thou  belongest is founded first, on the very words and acts of Christ —  the Master — second, on the Words of His Apostles — third, on  the earliest Fathers of the Church — fourth, on the Decrees of  General Councils as setting forth the voice of the Living Church  — fifth, on the Decrees of certain other Councils setting forth  the voice of the Church as applied to certain of Her Branches —  sixth, on Catholic Tradition — and in the whole of our teachings  there is nothing contrary thereto. 

Now in the messages and replies to queries these principles  are applied to particular cases — and herein is much instruction  — for wheresoever thou, or any Companion of Our Order, seest  or fanciest any divergence from the true teaching of the Master  and His Church — then thou mayest be sure thou hast misunder-  stood either our teaching or the authorities whereon thou  restest — and thy duty as a Companion of the Order is at once  to set forth such fancied divergence — and thereby wouldst thou  receive full explanation. And know, that for this purpose, are  continually labouring a group of learned theologians, all Com-  panions of the Order of the second and higher Grades — many  of whom are priests devoted to the service of the Master and  His Church — who gave their labours ungrudgingly with no  thought of fee or reward to bring wandering souls and those in  difficulty to a more perfect knowledge of Him. 

And now when we say that in no iota do any teachings of  ours differ from the teaching of Christ and His Church, we say it  with a full conviction of the seriousness of the statement. But let  all who profess the Catholic Faith beware lest they reject the  commandment of God that they may keep their own tradition.  On Divine Names  Second Grade. General Circulation. 

Supreme over all that is, is the Most Holy and Undivided  Trinity in Unity known partially through Divine Revelation by  some of the sons of men; known completely by none — nor  indeed knowable, wholly unknown to some. 

Known unto all men in part, at all events, is the Visible Uni-  verse of things. This being finite is knowable by finite man . . .  the only bounds of his knowledge being his own intellectual  capacity. 

Besides the Supreme Eternal and Ineffable Three in One, and  the Material Universe, there exist vast multitudes of beings in-  visible, imperceptible to the bodily senses, usually imperfectly  known, and barely, if at all, comprehended, yet having a vast  and most important effect on the Material Universe. Of these  beings, from the human standpoint, some are good, some evil,  some a mixture of both, some are higher and some lower, than  mankind. We say ‘from the standpoint of humanity’ because all  are created by the Supreme God, none can do aught save what  is permitted by Him, therefore none can be in essence aught but  good, yet, seeing that there are some of these beings whose effect  upon humanity is to persuade men to act contrary to those laws  which the Supreme God hath imposed on men, and thus bring  about their own destruction, so unto men they are evil and must  be shunned and resisted accordingly. 

More of this mystery will be shown later. Now these beings  are partially and imperfectly recognised in every religious sys-  tem in the world. Thus in modern Christianity, Archangels,  Angels and Devils are universally acknowledged. The more  advanced Christians recognise also glorified Saints and know  some of the names of Angels and of Demons. In the Bible are also  the beings alluded to as the Four Beasts, the Four and Twenty  Elders, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers, and the  Hebrew Qabalah frequently recognised by quotation in the New  Testament, adds considerably to the list, recognising the Domi-  nant Spirits of the Elements and the sub-human Kingdoms of the  Qliphoth. 

In the Brahministic and Buddhistic systems these beings —  or rather such of them as are superhuman, are termed Devas, and  their kingdom Devachan — where the souls of the first wait and  rest — this is the same state as the waiting Church of the Christ-  ians, though, as it were, a different section of the plane. Of this  more hereafter. 

When men lose the knowledge of and belief in the Supreme  God — they worship these beings — and, truly, it is no sin in  those who worship the highest that they know. But to those who  know the Infinite Supreme, to worship any of His creatures is a  deadly sin — and for a Companion of the Sun Order to worship  any such beings may entail expulsion from the Order and  further penalties. 

The Ancient Greeks had lost the knowledge of the Supreme  Gods and worshipped mainly the Dominant Spirits of the  Elements, of whose nature powers and attributes they knew  much. They also worshipped the planetary Spirits. 

The Phoenicians had in their later period lost, not only the  knowledge of the Supreme God, but also that of the Angels or  Devas; they had some imperfect knowledge of the Spirits of the  Elements and Nature Spirits, but the real objects of their wor-  ship were the subhuman Qlippoth, and their cult was a species  of Devil worship, this prevailed also among the Philistines of  the coasts of Canaan. 

The purest of all the nations of antiquity after the sacred  tribe of the Jews were the Persians and the Ancient Egyptians  and, more recently, the Incas of Peru and the (so-called) Druids  of the North. All of these knew and worshipped the Supreme  God. They also knew, and revered, and studied the nature and  attributes of those beings whom He has created and through  whom He works. 

To study the nature and attributes of these beings is as  lawful and as meritorious as to study any other of the works  of God. Even as Astronomy, or Botany, or Chemistry are  termed sciences, so is this truly termed the sacred science — for  if we truly know the nature of Devas, or Angelic hosts, we  know the link between man and God. Yet the study is fraught  with grave dangers, for among these beings there are many  who crave worship — who would set themselves up to be Gods  and would deceive men. Against such, the Christian who truly  believes in the Master of Masters who is Jesus Christ the  Incarnate Word, the Co-Eternal Co-Equal Son of the All-  Father — has a perfect protection. 

Therefore this teaching is withheld till considerable progress  be made — see O Companion that thou reveal nothing of this —  for the temptation to the Worship of Created Things is strongly  subtle to some minds. 

You may compare this branch of the sacred science to the  study of bacteriology. Not to the unexperienced medical student  is this study with its enormous possibilities, its vast results, its  danger in inexperienced hands committed — but to him who  has learned care, who knows all the dangers and how they may  be avoided, who works calmly, methodically, taking no need-  less risk but fearing no danger. The powers he wields and  investigates may bless or ban mankind, for the bacteria, like  the spiritual beings we now write of, are necessary to our  existence — yet may destroy millions of men in an hour. 

In Persia two opposing forces are recognised as incessantly  contending — Ahura Mazda and Ahriman. In later times the  knowledge of the Supreme God became dim in ancient Iran  and the contending forces alone were recognised. The heretical  Gnostics, especially those of Samaria, imported this idea into  Europe — and it infected the Christian Church through the Mani-  chaeans — thence reappearing at intervals among the Albigenses,  Lollards, Hussites and Calvinists. Yet in origin the idea was the  same as that expressed by a Master Initiate of old; There  was War in Heaven Michael, and his Angels fighting the Devil  and his angels’. Yet Ahura Mazda is not precisely Saint Michael,  but rather the synthesis of the Four Archangels. 

The name is retained in our rituals because there is no other  name that precisely represents what is meant. But observe, O  Companion of the Sun Order, that Ahura Mazda is a created  being even as thou art, and is thy fellow servant. Worship  then God only. Yet shalt thou ask the blessing and illumination  of Ahura Mazda even as thou mightest of any wise and Holy  man from this Earth. 

Furthermore, note that Mithra representeth all the beneficial  powers of Fire. He is the Chief and Ruler of the Spirits of Fire,  who as regards humanity are good — Many are his names — yet  that of Mithra best expresses his attributes. He it is, who, guided  by the Holy Spirit, stirs the zeal and energy of the souls of  men. Hence, when the Holy Spirit descended at Pentecost He  came in the special symbol of Mithra — the Tongues of Flame —  Mithra too, it is, who stirs the germinant heat of the Earth,  bringing forth life and vegetation in the spring. Yet he too  is a created being — lower indeed than Ahura Mazda. Worship  then God only. 

Yet the benediction of Mithra thou shalt ask for — for unto  thee he is the means whereby thou shalt receive the Holy Spirit.  Thus, O Companion, shalt thou read our Rituals. Change not the  names there set down for they have a meaning thou canst not  yet know. 

The salutation of Iran with which the Ritual of Initiation  commences, i.e. 

The Inspiration of the Supreme! 

The Illumination of Mazda ! 

The Benediction of Mithra! 

is no essential part of the ceremony, but rather is a hymn  or anthem in the Christian Ritual. Yet it containeth deep know-  ledge to be unfolded later. Therefore should it by no means be  omitted. 

If thou desirest, O Companion, ask any questions upon this  teaching. Let no part be dark unto the6. Those who guide the  Order deem it a privilege, and a service meet for the Lord of  Hosts, to answer all questions relating to the teaching of the  Order. Woe only to those who will not ask but yet condemn  that which they understand not.  Four States of Ordinary Prayer  Permission only. Feb. 1924 

Writers on Raja Yoga, which is the Eastern equivalent of the  At-One-ment, or perfect Union with the Divine, after giving  elaborate instructions as to means and exercises, conclude by  saying that the alternative method of devotion for those who  can practice it, is far simpler and easier. This is the method of  prayer as taught by the great mystic writers of the West, and  advocated in our Order. Prayer does not attain to this union —  but it is essential for bringing the soul into the Mystic State  wherein this Union may take place. 

We must, therefore, in the first place, carefully distinguish  between ordinary prayer, as it is called, and the Mystic State. 

Now, if we take the world in which we live as a magnified  image of the human personality, we shall find some very useful  analogies. The solid globe may be figured as man’s corporeal  body, and the Atmosphere as the Aura. The living creatures  of the earth, then correspond to man’s conscious life. Those  that are, so to say, bound to the earth, the animals, answer to  his material consciousness. 

The birds which live in the air are his immaterial thoughts,  which pass to and fro in his Aura, perching on the Earth —  therefore affecting his material body, but not limited or bound  thereto. His prayers are therefore appropriately represented by  birds. Now birds rise in the air by the efforts of their own  wings — but they cannot rise beyond the air, or even to its  extreme limits. This then is the analogue of what is termed  ‘Ordinary Prayer’. 

It is made by man’s own efforts. But here observe that, though  a man’s own effort is needed, his effort is not the force by which  he rises — that is the force of Divine Grace which he is permitted  to call into action by his own efforts. Even as an engine driver  does not supply the force that drives the engine, neither can  the engine move without his efforts, but when he pulls the  lever the force of the steam is set in action. Now conceive —  when the bird has risen as high at it can, a Divine hand takes  it and lifts it to higher levels. Hence forth the bird can do  nothing, it can but lie perfectly passive and trusting in the hand  that carries it upward. This is the mystic state, wherein at length  Union is attained — but such Union is the free gift of God, and  due to no effort of the man, nor even in any sense earned by  him. 

The consideration of this state we must defer for the present,  and consider the ordinary prayer which fits the soul to receive  the Supreme Grace. Resuming our analogy of the bird — we  know that different birds have different powers of rising above  the earth plane — from the heavy and clumsy birds who can  only rise a short distance, and that for a very little time, to the  eagle who soars almost out of sight and whose mighty wings  seem tireless. 

These differences, by the great mystical writers, have been  grouped into four called ‘The four states of Ordinary Prayer’.  This is the classification of St. Theresa of Jesus — (whom, as being  a Member of Our Order of very high grade, though writing for  outsiders and for the uninitiated, we shall mostly follow). 

These four states we shall name as follows: 1. Vocal prayer.  2. Meditation. 3. The prayer of affection. 4. The prayer of simple  regard, or simplicity. These being the nearest English equivalent  to the terms used by St. Theresa. The first two of these are well  known and need very little comment. 

Vocal prayer may be either the repetition of a set form of  words — as prescribed by the Master in the ‘Lord’s Prayer’ and  countless others — or maybe an extemporary voicing of our own  needs. The former being adapted for the collective prayer of a  number — the latter for private and solitary devotion. 

Vocal prayer has been called ‘Spoken Meditation', and medi-  tation has been called ‘silent prayer’. Excellent models of both  abound in books of devotion, and the Catholic Church of the  Roman Obedience makes a special point of teaching meditation. 

From the Occult point of view the repetition of a definite  formula aloud may act as a mantra and produce certain effects  in the body favourable to prayer — also the practice of medita-  tion, by obliging the brain to remain fixed on certain definite  trains of thought, may avail to steady the Aura. But these  physical effects are not the primary intention. To be regarded  definitely as states of prayer, the attention must be alive, the  brain and the will must concur with the physical act, otherwise  it becomes mechanical and automatic. The third and fourth  states therefore should exist, even though unconsciously, in  order that the first two may be effectual. We shall therefore  proceed at once to examine these. 

Recurring for the moment to the image of the bird, we may  say that the first two forms of ordinary prayer may be com-  pared to a wild bird flying low in short flight, say from branch  to branch in affective prayer — but where the will and the inten-  tion go not with the act, it is like the common barndoor fowl,  having wings indeed, but unable to do more than flap helplessly  on the ground. 

Assuming that the student has attained some success in the  practice of meditation, he will understand that it involves  reasoning. In these qualities St. Theresa was deficient. She says  herself ‘God never endowed me with the gift of making reflec-  tions with the understanding — or with that of using the imagin-  ation to any good purpose. My imagination is so sluggish that  even if I would think of or picture to myself Our Lord’s  Humanity, I never could do it’. 

As, then, we pass from the meditation to the Prayer of Affec-  tion we leave reason and imagination behind. 

Now although we class numbers two and three as different  states, it must not be thought that there is any fixed line be-  tween them. One melts into the other. Reason, memory, imagina-  tion gradually decrease — Love increases. 

Consider a man who has a woman comrade. His reason pre-  sents to him the causes for their friendship. Similarity of ideas,  of pursuits, of sports — her intellect, her constancy, her sweet  disposition — a thousand reasons. 

Memory calls up instances — imagination intensifies them. But  if he falls in love with her, all these gradually fade into insigni-  ficance. He thinks of her continually, but it is always with the  same object, with little or no variety. He is content to contem-  plate her mentally and seeks not the reason why. The reasons  which swayed him before now only appear as justifications of  himself, to himself, for an admitted state of mind, then grow  fainter and fainter and vanish. It has been well said, that a man  who can say he loves a woman does not begin to love her —  so with simple souls having only a few ideas — only to be  nearer to God is happiness to them, and the prayer of affection  is consequently easier to them than to the more developed and  intellectual. 

St. Theresa reproved certain great preachers who had got so  into the habit of expanding and expounding a subject that they  acted in the same way during prayer. She says they continue  preaching, but to themselves. 

The true prayer of affection is that of Her of Magdala, of  whom St. Francis de Sales says ‘Behold her I beseech thee, Theo-  timus, she sighs not, he stirs not, she prays not ... and this  Divine Love, jealous of the love sleep and repose of this well-  beloved, chides Martha for wanting to awaken her’. (Treatise  on the Love of God.) 

Another example may be that of a mother watching over  the cradle of her child. She thinks of that child lovingly for  hours together, if interrupted she resumes the contemplation —  and this without arguments she never reasons why she loves  that child — the thought would be absurd. 

We have said that intellectual natures find greater difficulty  in reaching the prayer of affection than do simple ones. Loving  natures are naturally attracted towards exercises wherein acts  of love predominate over acts of understanding. Women,  generally speaking, have more capacity for very simple forms  of mental prayer than men. Men in celibate life, who have no  experience of the human passion of love, find greater difficulty  than others in reaching the third stage of ordinary prayer. Well  said the Master ‘If a man love not his mother whom he hath  seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?’ 

For all those who are in this state and have taken the vows  of celibacy, the very difficulty constitutes the exercise whereby  the necessary strengthening of their souls is to be accomplished  — and by hypothesis, their souls are strong enough to face and  overcome the difficulty. But for others there is no doubt that  the knowledge of human love is the best preparation for the  knowledge of the Divine Love — as was said of her of Magdala  \ . . for she loved much’. It is well therefore that they who would  attain thus far should cultivate and intensify in themselves  the power of loving. 

The third state is produced sometimes with consolation — but  very often with suffering, and with what St. Theresa terms  aridity, when the soul is unable to meditate, and the inaction  is extremely painful. This aridity will be more fully explained,  and the means of combating it described later on. But in the  meantime the student should realise that it is a universal ex-  perience, and should be very careful not to be discouraged. 

Real prayer and meditation are for most people compari-  tively easy — but when we quit this degree it is no path of roses,  as we may be inclined to anticipate — there are many crosses.  Father de Caussade says truly There is nothing more sublime  than contemplation as we find it in the books — there is nothing  more beautiful or grander than the prayer of affection, or the  prayer of simplicity — in theory, but in practice there is nothing  more humiliating or more crucifying. Hence it is a worthy  offering to the Lord of Light, a costly gift — like the Magdalen’s  vase — for which He will fully reward us’. 

We are apt to say ‘If God approved of my praying thus,  He would give me proof of His approval by consolations. I am  simply wasting my time’. To which St. Ignatius replies — ‘Oh  poor in faith and weak in love wilt thou then depart from God,  because to try thy love He seems for a moment to hide Himself?’  If the student then expects periods of aridity, he will not be  disturbed thereby, he will know they are inevitable and will  pass. Moreover, that the more completely he reaches the prayer  of simplicity, the more he can render himself passive, the less  will these painful interludes be, — and further — if he be assailed  by doubts and difficulties, as all the Saints have been at times  on reaching this state, he must recognise that this is a sure sign  that he has not fully arrived at the State of the prayer of  affection. For its essence is that it transcends reason. 

Reason is left behind, as I have already explained. But doubts  spring from reason which must still be present. He must en-  deavour therefore to attain more completely to the state desired.  I have mentioned the difficulties experienced by different types  of persons in attaining this state, and the analogy pointed out  by the Master Himself of human love. All the experience re-  corded points to this as being a most valuable, and in many  cases essential, stepping stone, especially for those who, one  account of the activity of their minds and the development of  the reasoning faculties, find their progress impeded by doubts,  difficulties, and times of painful aridity. St. Mary of Magdala  has left in on record that the practice of the body in perfect  self-forgetting human love for another person, by some sort of  reciprocal action trains the soul to the power of experiencing  a perfect love for the Master, who said ‘In as much as ye have  done it unto one of the least of these, ye have done it unto me’. 

Meaning thereby that He accepts even an intensity of devo-  tion shown to a fellow human being sent by Him, as though  it were shown to Himself — as she showed it — in His Incarnate  Human Body. Take the example of a woman meditating on the  man she loves — to all the rest of the world he may be mean,  contemptible, eminently undesirable, but what cares she? To  her he is her hero — she no more questions or reasons why she  loves him or weighs his good points, his virtues, than she does  those of her child. 

Now if such a woman can experience this human love, and  take it as an example, a model — she will reach the state of  affective prayer (or the prayer of affection) quickly and readily —  she will be able at once to dispose of all doubts and difficulties;  times of aridity will have little terror, little pain for her — all  will be simple and easy — she will pass into the third state, and  rest secure in the infinite love of the Saviour, conscious always  of His Divine Presence — and from thence glide easily into the  fourth state of the prayer of simplicity or simple contempla-  tion. 

There be some who would affirm this state, by reason of  its quiet and silence, is a state of inertia. As well say that  the painter whose brush travels silently over his canvas is less  actively employed than the blacksmith who deafens us with the  clamour of his blows. 

In passing upward through the four states of prayer to medi-  tation we drop the external bodily action, that, namely, of  repeating a certain formula of words — but we still retain reason,  memory, imagination. In passing to the third stage we gradually  part with these also, and in their place we develop the sentient  or emotion of love. Passing to { the fourth state — that of the  prayer of simplicity — we drop also all active emotion, and re-  main in passive contemplation of God. But seeing that we our-  selves do this — that it is we who place ourselves in the presence  of God, it is not the mystic state as yet. This state gives great  vitality to the will, but it is a vitality not at once perceived. 

Imagine a meadow under the direct rays of the sun. All the  hidden forces of nature do their work slowly, and in silence.  As one great Adept has said — ‘all those millions of molecules  of sap circulate like a crowd of workmen engaged in building a  city. So with the prayer of simplicity — the soul is like a field  exposed to the rays of the Central Spiritual Sun.’ We shall see  the Adept, after reaching the mystic state, recurs to vocal prayer,  but in a wholly new manner, for he now knows the meaning  and occult force of ‘The Word’, and can formulate for himself  how from the Transforming Union, or Spiritual Marriage, the  Thought of God is conceived, and how through the Prayer of  Quiet and through Contemplation, as in the darkness of the  womb, it is matured, till at length the Word is made flesh in  vocal prayer, and thus the process is reversed : God coming down  to Earth and manifesting Himself. 

In conclusion of this first paper, I append some brief rules  which may be of some help to the student. 

Ia. Produce a retired place free from interruption as far as  possible. 

b. Calm and equilibrate the mind, banish all thoughts of  worldly matters. Try to realise that ‘Your Father knoweth  what things ye have need of before ye ask Him.’ 

c. Kneel down and say the Lord’s prayer very reverently,  trying to realise the full force of every repetition. It is well  to couple this with the ideas of the devotion of the Quipus. 

d. Stand facing the East, and say the Ave Maria, striving to  picture to yourself Our Blessed Lady before you, and a dim  vision of the Saviour behind, whom you approach through Her.  Ila. Now sit in a comfortable and symmetric attitude, and let  the vision gradually glide into a meditation, say on the first  of the Joyful Mysteries — the Annunciation. 

b. Picture to yourself the scene — Our Lady engaged in prayer  — the gradual sensation of an Angelic presence — the thrill of  colours in the air — the formation of the Angelic appearance —  the Words of the Salutation — Our Lady’s reply ‘Be it unto me  according to thy word’. 

c. Consider the Faith, Humility and Obedience manifested by  Her. 

d. Apply these to yourself. 

e. Resolve to imitate Her and to follow Her footsteps as far as  humanly possible. 

Ilia. Try to hold this vision and accentuate the impression  of the form of the Master, and the Magdalene at His feet. 

b. In thought centre yourself with Magdalene, Say mentally  ‘We love Him because He first loved us”. Seem to hear Him  say : ‘. . . For she loved much’. 

c. Let all faculties of reason etc. gradually sink away. This  will follow naturally in most cases if the feeling of love be gra-  dually intensified. These faculties are not banished or violently  expelled, but with regard to them the sensation is as of falling  asleep, till only love is left — and this is love for the Creator,  and all that He hath created. As a man who loves a woman will  treasure all that comes from her, whether in itself desirable  or beautiful, or the reverse, and will love a soiled glove or a torn  fragment of lace that she has worn — so the soul in this state  loves not only the image of the Master, but all that comes from  Him with great intensity. 

IVa. For some time it will be well for the beginner to pause  there. For the preceding stage to be of benefit should be main-  tained for some time, say ten minutes to a quarter of an hour  at least. (The great mystical writers advise longer, but their  times were less restless than ours.) It will however be found  naturally after some practice, that the active emotion of love  is of itself giving way to a passive happiness of contemplation  only. In human love this is exemplified by the joy the lover  takes in merely being in the presence of the beloved, not speak-  ing, not moving, content simply to exist, bathed in the atmo-  sphere that is so dear. Finally, we reiterate here the advice  given by all the great mystical writers — not to force the soul  at this stage to uncongenial acts. 

First, for those acts for which the soul has no inclination,  never to force ourselves to produce them. 

Secondly for those to which we have during prayer an  inclination or facility — to yield to this inclination. Therefore if  during the prayer of simplicity we have a strong inclination  to offer a petition to God — let us do so, notwithstanding that  we have resolved to banish all active thought. 

Thirdly, as laid down by St. Francis de Sales and by Father  Balthasar Alvares — outside the time of prayer to profit by all  opportunities of arousing the will, and thus training it, as it  were, for the prayer itself. And here, says St. Gertrude, in a  private letter, quoting from St. Mary Magdalen, ‘They who are  permitted to enjoy human corporeal love have great advantage  fo£ they have something wherewith they may compare this  Divine contemplation, and whereby they may excite the will  thereto’. And this must and will suffice for the present. 

They who shall well practice this Devotion shall at least be  ready, if it shall please God, as I have no doubt it will do, to  take them of His infinite grace into the Mystic State. 


Hereto I ShMSh add a note of my own. In modern life an  aeroplane is a more perfect example than a bird, for the man  rises, not sails, not by his own effort but by the force generated  by his engine, which is like the Grace of God, but his own  effort is needed to pull the lever and the machine is given thus  into his control. The two lower grades may be compared to  flights through the lower atmosphere comparatively easy and safe  among all the familiar sights and sounds of the earth. Then soar-  ing higher, the man passes through the clouds, typical of the  doubts, difficulties, troubles, aridity etc. 

At the entrance of the third State — after which he reaches  the calm and silence of the upper air, and soars as high as the  atmosphere will support him. After this, whatever lever he pulls,  whatever power he applies, he can go no higher unless God  take him.  An Exegetical Note Upon the Flying Rolls 


In all there were thirty-six Flying Rolls circulating among the  Adepti Minor es of the pre-1900 Golden Dawn. 

Flying Roll I was partly concerned with administrative details  (how to contact the headquarters of the Order etc.) and these  would be of little interest to the present-day reader. The re-  mainder of this Flying Roll is printed in Part I of this book. 

Flying Roll II Included in Part I of this book. 

Flying Roll III (On Procedure) Purely administrative, and  therefore not included in this book. 

Flying Roll IV (Spirit Vision.) Included in Part II of this book. 

Flying Roll V (Thoughts on Imagination) Included in Part I  of this book. Originally issued on November 30th 1893. 

Flying Roll VI (A Supplement to Flying Roll II) Included in  Part I of this book. 

Flying Roll VII (Alchemy) Forms Part VII of this book. 

Flying Roll VIII (On Tracing a Pentagram by Geometry) I  have not thought this purely mathematical piece of instruction  worthy of reproduction. It was written by Dr. Pullen-Berry  (Frater Anima Pura Sit). 

Flying Roll IX (Right and Left) Included by Regardie, under  the title The Diagrams, in Golden Dawn, Volume I, pages 161-2.  This Flying Roll was originally issued on March 26th 1893. 

Flying Roll X (Self-Sacrifice) Included in Part IV of this book. 

Flying Roll XI (Clairvoyance) Included in Part II of this book,  and originally issued March 30th 1893. 

Flying Roll XII (Telesmatic Images) Published by Regardie,  in somewhat disjointed form, as part of Volume IV of his  Golden Dawn. The first paragraph of the Flying Roll is also the  first paragraph of page 61, Volume IV, Golden Dawn. The  remainder of the Flying Roll is to be found on pages 62-3 of  the same book under the title The Vibratory Mode of Pronounc-  ing Divine Names. 

Flying Roll XIII (Secrecy and Hermetic Lore) Included in Part  VI of this book.  Flying Roll XIV (Talismans and Flashing Tablets) Printed  by Regardie on pages 51-6 of Golden Dawn Volume IV. Re-  gardie’s version is not quite complete and omits a supplementary  note by Sapere Aude (Wynn Westcott). The note, which is to  the word AL on Regardie’s page 56, line 20, should read as  follows: 'e.g. for Fire, put Shin first, then three Fiery Signs,  then AL. So far for elementary ones. For Planetary ones you may  add AL to the Planet’s letter or to the Planet and its Houses — the  letters of them; and the Planet and Triplicity, use the hexagram  made six times. For Zodiacal ones add AL to the letters of the  sign and use pentagram five times. When you use the three  letters of three Signs of a triplicity for elemental working you  should put as the initial letter that of the Sign principally in-  voked as most useful to you’. 

This Flying Roll was originally issued on January 15 th 1893. 

Flying Roll XV (Man and God) Included in Part IV of this  book. 

Flying Roll XVI (History of the Rosicrucian Order) Included  in Part III of this book; originally given as a lecture on August  17th 1893. 

Flying Roll XVII (The Seven Sides of the Vault) Like the  preceding Flying Roll this was originally given as a lecture by  Westcott on August 17th 1893. It can be found on pages 280-6  of Volume II of Regardie’s Golden Dawn. 

Flying Roll XVIII (Progress in the Order) This Flying Roll  was written in June 1893. There is a certain confusion as to its  authorship. Some copies attribute it to Annie Horniman (For-  titer et Recte) others to Elaine Simpson (Fidelis), who later  became the mistress of Aleister Crowley. 

Flying Roll XIX (Aims and Means of Adeptship) Included in  Part III of this book. 

Flying Roll XX (Constitution of Man) Originally given as a  lecture by Mathers on September 23rd 1893 and included in  Part V of this book. 

Flying Roll XXI (Know Thyself) Originally given as a lecture  by Mathers’ wife on September 24th 1893 and included in Part  V of this book.  Flying Roll XXII (Free Will) I have been unable to trace a  copy of this Flying Roll. 

Flying Roll XXIII (Visions by V.N.R.) This account of visions  experienced by Mathers’ wife is printed on pages 43-6 of Volume  IV of Regardie’s Gol den Dawn. 

Flying Roll XXIV I have been unable to trace a copy. I am  told that it dealt with Horary Figures in astrology. 

Flying Roll XXV (Clairvoyance) This, written by J. W. Brodie-  Innes, is included in Part II of this book. 

Flying Roll XXVI (A supplement to XII) Included in Part  II of this book. 

Flying Roll XXVII (Theurgia) This Flying Roll, written by  P. W. Bullock (Levavi Oculos) is included in Part VI of this book. 

Flying Roll XXVIII (On Robes) I have been unable to trace  a copy. 

Flying Roll XXIX (On Lieutenants) I have been unable to  trace a copy; I understand that it was purely concerned with  administrative matters. 

Flying Roll XXX (Clairvoyance and Hierophant Signs) In-  cluded in Part II of this book. 

Flying Roll XXXI (Ethiopic Letters) I have been unable to  trace a copy, but I am told that it dealt with the numerical  value to be given to the letters of the Coptic alphabet for  Qabalistic purposes. If so, the information can be obtained from  Crowley’s 777. 

Flying Roll XXXII (Theban Letters) Once again, I have been  unable to trace a copy, but I am told that it dealt with the  letters of the Enochian alphabet, sometimes (wrongly) referred  to as the Theban alphabet. If so, it was probably identical with  the table given by Regardie on Page 299 Volume IV, Golden  Dawn. 

Flying Roll XXXIII (Visions of Squares in the Enochian  Tablets) Seven visions are described, of which four may be  found in Part II of this book. The remaining three visions may  be found on pages 318-22, volume IV, Golden Dawn. Regardie’s  first vision is also the first vision of the Flying Roll — it is by  Vigilate. Regardie’s second vision is the sixth vision of the  Flying Roll (by Sfiemeber) and his third vision is the Flying  Roll’s seventh (it is by Resurgatn), Dr. Berridge. 

Flying Roll XXXV (Notes on the Exordium of the Z Ritual)  Printed on pages 150-1 of Golden Dawn, Volume III. 

Flying Roll XXXVI (Skyring and Astral Projection) Printed  on pages 29-42 of Golden Dawn, Volume IV, under the title Of  Skyring and Travelling in the Spirit Vision. The earliest copy  I have seen is dated October 1897.  Enochian Magic and the Enochian Language 

This subject is one of great complexity and it is possible for  me to give only a brief outline of the system in this short  appendix. 

While some occultists have claimed that Enochian Magic  was known in fifteenth century Florence, and others have gone  so far as to state that it originated in the mythical drowned  continent of Atlantis, there is no hard evidence of its existence  before the last quarter of the sixteenth century. In any case,  whether or not the system is of any real antiquity, there is no  doubt that in the form we have it available to us it is derived  from the crystal-gazing activities of the Elizabethan occultists,  John Dee and Edward Kelley. These two claimed to have re-  ceived from ‘Angels’, seen in the magic crystal by Kelley, who  acted as skryer, the following material: 

(a) Nineteen invocations, known as Keys, or Calls, in an  unknown language called Enochian, or Angelic. 

(b) Translations of these same Calls. 

(c) An Enochian alphabet of twenty-one letters. 

(d) Over one hundred large squares, each divided into smaller  squares (usually 2401 in number) containing letters. 

(e) Instructions for using these squares. 

(f) Much miscellaneous occult teaching. 

As far as the Enochian language is concerned it suffices to  repeat what was said by the early Chiefs of the Golden Dawn,  by Aleister Crowley, and by Israel Regardie — that it is a real  language, with definite traces of grammar and syntax, and not  a mere gibberish. 1 

1 For those who regard the statements of such occultists with a  certain amount of scepticism it is worth stating that a professional  philologist has recently done some work on Enochian and has con-  firmed their essential correctness. It should also be borne in mind  that the language is sufficiently complete to enable translation from  English into Enochian: Aleister Crowley did this with the invoca-  tions of the grimoire known as the Lesser Key of Solomon.  Most of the occult teaching received were extremely obscure;  the following extract from a message received on May 23rd  1587 is typical: 

1 am the daughter of Fortitude, and ravished every hour, from  my youth. For behold, I am Understanding, and Science dwelleth  in me; the heavens oppress me, they covet and desire me with  infinite appetite: few or none that are earthly have embraced  me, for I am shadowed with the Circle of the Stone, and covered  with the morning Clouds. My feet are swifter than the winds,  and my hands are sweeter than the morning dew. My garments  are from the beginning, and my dwelling place is in myself. The  Lion knoweth not where I walk, neither do the beasts of the  field understand me. I am deflowered and yet a virgin : I sanctify  and am not sanctified. Happy is he that embraceth me : for in  the night season I am sweet, and in the day full of pleasure.  My company is a harmony of many Cymbals, and my lips  sweeter than health itself. I am a harlot for such as ravish me,  and a virgin with such as know me not — 2 

Of the squares received five are of much greater importance  than the remainder. They are, firstly, the ‘Great Eastern Quad-  rangle of Air’, secondly, the ‘Great Western Quadrangle of  Water’ thirdly, the ‘Great Northern Quadrangle of Earth’,  fourthly, the ‘Great Southern Quadrangle of Fire’, and, lastly;  the ‘Tablet of Union’, sometimes referred to as the ‘Quadrangle  of Spirit’. Each of the four Quadrangles of the Elements is divided  into one hundred and fifty-six squares while the ‘Tablet of  Union’ is divided into twenty squares from which, by methods  too complex to be explained here, are derived certain Divine  and Angelic names. Furthermore each Tablet is sub-divided into  four other Tablets attributed to the Elements — so in the Nor-  thern Quadrangle are contained Tablets attributed to Earth of 

2 In fact I do not think this statement quite so obscure as it might  appear to be at first sight. The ‘speaker’ is clearly Binah, Under-  standing, the third Sephirah of the Qabalistic Tree of Life, and the  Science to which ‘she’ refers is the Gnosis, Knowledge, Daath, the  invisible eleventh Sephirah. In Crowleyan terms the ‘speaker’ may  be identified with Nuit, the Egyptian Star-Goddess, «or perhaps with  Nuit’s reflection in Babalon, the Bride of the Beast.  Earth, Fire of Earth, Water of Earth and Air of Earth. 

From each of the six hundred and forty-four lettered sub-  sidiary squares of the five Tablets are derived the same number  of truncated pyramids. On the apex of each pyramid is the  letter of the square and each side of the pyramid is attributed  to either an Element, or a Sign of the Zodiac, or a planet. In  addition the cards of the Tarot pack and the symbols of geo-  mancy are also attributed to the sides of the pyramids. Such  pyramids are reproduced in Flying Roll XXXIII, and are to be  found in Part II of this book. With each pyramid is associated  a Sphynx, a composite form built up in accordance with the  attributions of the four sides of the pyramid. 

The Keys or Calls — the strange invocations received by Dee  and Kelley — are designed to be used with various parts of the  squares received. Thus the third, seventh, eighth and ninth Keys  are used in connection with the Tablet of Air (Eastern Quad-  rangle); the third used in the invocation of Air itself and the  other three Keys with, respectively. Water of Air, Earth of Air,  and Fire of Air.  A Stella Matutina Flying Roll 


After the split in the original Order the appearance of various  schismatic Orders (see Introduction) there was a considerable  amount of unintelligent tampering with the Flying Rolls. This  was particularly noticeable in the fraternity known as the  Stella Matutina. 

The Stella Matutina also produced several supplementary Fly-  ing Rolls. I have examined several of these and I am of the  opinion that they are of little value save for one on the Tarot  trumps, written by Dr. Felkin’s wife, Soror Quaestor Lucis, and  one on the use of the Vault, written by Dr. Felkin himself. Both  these late documents are included in Regardie’s Golden Dawn. 

The Chiefs of the Stella Matutina were responsible for re-  writing many of the Flying Rolls. In my opinion their versions  of this material are not only quite different from the originals  but markedly inferior. As a specimen I reproduce herewith the  Stella Matutina version of Flying Roll XXV — a very different  piece of work to the original included in Part II of this book. 

‘Consider the relationship of Man as Microcosm to the Uni-  verse as Macrocosm. The former is a reflection in miniature of  the latter, in the same way that in a field a dewdrop might  present a tiny image of trees, fields, mountains etc. 

‘Thus everything is pictured in each man’s Sphere of Sen-  sation, or akashic envelope. If he is conscious of the picture as  reflected he will be possessed of all knowledge. Initiation makes  such knowledge possible and available. 

‘Seeing that the brain and sensorium are physical, it is neces-  sary at first to use physical means to produce the sensitivity re-  quired to perceive images consciously. 

‘The readiest way is the use of symbols. These produce visions  in the physical brain and make it more sensitive. A large number  of well-known symbols have a definite relationship to certain  portions of the Sphere of Sensation, the corresponding regions  of the Cosmos, and the related regions of the physical brain. 

‘The experimenter must thoroughly know the attributions  and meanings of the symbol employed, as this knowledge pro-  duces an immediate concentration of thought, vital energy, nerve  force, and actual physical blood in the part of the brain related  to the chosen symbol. 

‘For example, if the Tejas Tattwa be taken, the knowledge  that it belongs to fire will at once charge with nerve force and  blood all the brain centres relating to fire. It will involuntarily  recall the various Divine and Spirit Names learned beforehand;  the vibration of these Names will increase the effect. The force  will be further increased by gazing fixedly at the symbol and  holding the appropriate magical implement, which is also a  symbol of the same tract of the physical brain. Eventually every  other brain cell is muted and inhibited, and the whole con-  sciousness concentrated on the function of Fire. Thus the  physical brain becomes sensitive, translucent, and able to per-  ceive the Macrocosmic Fire as reflected in the Sphere of Sensa-  tion. 

‘The sensation is as if one had stepped out of a door into a  new world. At first it seems as if everything one sees is just  the product of one’s own imagination. However, experience  shows that ‘the next country’ has its own inviolable natural  laws, just as the physical world has. One cannot make it and  unmake it at will. The same actions produce the same results —  one is a spectator, not a creator. The conviction dawns on the  experimenter that he is perceiving a new and extended range  of phenomena — the Astral. 

‘Taking every symbol whereof you know the meaning, the  abstract idea associated with the symbol comes first (as Fire  or Water in the abstract), then comes a pose of mind cognate  or sympathetic thereto, a desire of that particular element — not  keen but perceptible. Then, gradually, comes the feeling of the  physical effect of that element. Attention is slowly withdrawn  from all surrounding sights and sounds. A grey mist or steam  surrounds everything and from this the form of the symbol is  projected — this is due to the withdrawal of blood and nerve force  from other centres of the brain and their consequent inhibition. 

‘The consciousness then seems to pass through the symbol to  realms beyond it: probably visions and pictures from other  planes come on to the hypersensitive brain centres. The sensa-  tion is as if looking at a series of moving pictures, and although  there are beings with whom one can converse and animals one  can dominate, there is no more solidity than in a cinema film.  In time, however, the sensitivity of the brain increases, and one  gains the power of actually going to the scenes of the visions  and seeing them as three dimensional — indeed, one actually  becomes capable of doing things in the vision and producing  effects upon it. This is what is technically known as ‘Travelling  in the Spirit Vision’ and whether it is more than an extension  of the power of seeing the moving pictures on the Sphere of  Sensation (the akashic envelope) is difficult to determine. The  stages of Travelling in the Spirit Vision are as follows: — 

(1) To become conscious of a figure walking amidst the  scenery of an unfamiliar country. 

(2) To realise that it is one’s own figure. 

(3) To look through the eyes of the figure. 

(4) To feel with the figure's sensations. 

(5) To gain the ability to consciously direct its operations, to  control its inhibitions, and to get it to visit unfamiliar  people and places. 

‘It is as though consciousness was extruded from one’s own  body and taken over a body either created for the purpose or  invoked out of the astral sphere. It seems probably that as the  Sphere of Sensation reflects everything on the physical plane  it contains a reflection of the material body of the percipient.  If this is so it would follow that the body could be made to  travel within the Sphere of Sensation and visit all things re-  flected therein. 

‘The perception of the Astral Plane is peculiarly liable to  delusion arising from defects in the sensorium or physical brain  — an object seen through a faulty glass is distorted. As the brain  can be rendered sensitive is any particular direction by symbol,  so these errors can be corrected by symbol. The various qualities  in each man’s mature nature are symbolised by the planets,  hence planetary symbols can be used to correct such errors.  ‘The visions experienced may be merely compounded from  memory. In this case build up, in brilliant white light, in front  of any image suspected of being compounded from memory,  the Hebrew letter Tau, symbol of the Qabalistic Path of Saturn,  the ‘Great One of the Night of Time’, whose sober influence  causes memory pictures to disappear. Similarly the Hebrew letter  Beth (for Mercury), formulated in the same way, dissipates the  products of lying in intellectual illusion. The Hebrew letter  Daleth (for Venus) is used for intellectual vanity; the Hebrew  letter Gimel (for the Moon) is used for wavering mind; the  Hebrew letter Resh (for the Sun) is used for delusions caused by  intellectual haughtiness; the Hebrew letter Kaph (for Jupiter)  is used against imagination, and the Hebrew letter Peh (for  Mars) is used against revenge and hatred’.  The Fugitive Flying Rolls 


In a postscript to his Preface to The Magicians of the Golden Daum  Ellic Howe describes the last-minute discovery of a cache of Golden  Dawn documents that included the parchment Rolls of the Inner and  Outer Orders and the official address book, all of which provided him  with invaluable biographical information. Three years after the  publication of his book Mr Howe introduced me to the custodian of  these documents, who, in due course, permitted me to use further  material from them for some of the Appendices in my own study, The  Golden Daum: Twilight of the Magicians. What neither Ellic Howe nor  myself had realized, however, was that this second ‘Private Collection’  contained far more than we had at first seen or suspected, for its  custodian had no idea that either of us would be interested in anything  but the dry bones of the Order’s history. 

When he learned that my own interests extended to the rituals and  teaching of the Golden Dawn, the custodian showed me some two  dozen bound volumes of miscellaneous rituals, essays, and records of  magical working, in the autographs of Ayton, Westcott, Florence Farr,  and other members of the Inner Order. Among them was a fat octavo  labelled ‘Flying Rolls etc! which I borrowed— largely for the sake of the  etcl a blanket covering revised (and unrecorded) rituals of the Neophyte  and Zelator grades, records of the workings of the Sphere Group, and  the Minute Book of the Ahathoor Temple in Paris. Out of curiosity  I decided to compare the Flying Rolls with the printed texts in Astral  Projection, Magic and Alchemy, and found that they included all the  missing Rolls that Mr King had been unable to trace, together with  variant texts of the early, and rather dull, Flying Rolls. 

Some were in the hand of Westcott, others were transcriptions by  Percy Bullock, but the majority had been diligently copied in 1898 by  FraterTenax Propositi. This was the motto of Colonel Sir Henry Edward  Colvile, who became a member of Isis-Urania Temple in November  1896, on the same day as his wife, progressed rapidly and entered the  Second Order on 5 December 1897 (Lady Colvile entered the Second  Order seven months later than her husband). Sir Henry was a diligent  student, not only copying the Flying Rolls but making notes on his  work in Florence Farr’s Sphere Group. His associates in that group —  Mrs Rand, Colonel Webber, Blackden, and Palmer-Thomas— later  followed A. E. Waite at the time of the schism of 1903 (although Florence  herself did not), and it seems probable that Sir Henry also supported  Waite, although there are no records of his activities in the Order after  1901. 

Whether or not Sir Henry Colvile followed Waite, his papers certainly  did, and Waite catalogued them, bound them and preserved them for  occult posterity. Now that after eighty years they have finally come  to light, it seems fitting to me, if only for the sake of completeness,  that the missing texts should be published. I have my own opinion  as to their literary merit, but this I shall reserve to myself, presenting  the texts as they were written and passing no judgement upon their  intrinsic, magical worth— for I am no magician, and this is a question  I must leave to others to decide. 


Flying Roll No. XXII 

Issued by N.O.M. 8 October 1893, being Essay sby V. H. E Quaestor Lucis on: 

(1) Free Will and the Theory of Separateness 

(2) River of Life 

(No official G.D Authority) 

While Oriental Theosophy postulates the unity of all Life in its basic  source, it makes the attainment of conscious union between the lower  of intellectual aspect of mind with the Soul or Higher Manas dependent  on the effort of the former, or in other words of the striving of the  personality. 

Again in the Hermetic School, of which Dr Hartmann is an  independent interpreter, the freedom of each person to decide whether  to climb the Mount of Initiation or to remain on the lower plane of  intellectual rational life is strongly insisted on. 

The position of these schools would apparently be that Primordial  Being differentiates itself into Units or atoms, each of which contains  the potentialities of its original. Free Will being attributed to original  Being, it follows that each unit or atom possesses Free Will in potentia.  Finding himself in incarnate condition, living in the sense-mediated  planes of self-consciousness, it may strive or decide not to strive to attain  union with its Higher Principles, or to bring the illumination of these  higher aspects of its being, into functioning conjointly with the rational  intellectual plane of normal life. 

This can only be effected, according to these schools, by the outer  or personal degree of life reaching up and striving to come into contact  with the inner principles. 

This is apparently one of those veils which oriental and ancient  systems considered to be necessary till the student dared himself to  tear them asunder, but its retention in the sense of the teaching of  transcendental philosophy ceases to be reasonable. It is in contradiction  also with those portions of Theosophic teaching which condemn ‘the  illusion of personal existance’ and the ‘Heresy of Separateness! It is also  untenable in the face of Mr Maitland’s theosophic teachings with the  reference to the centrifugal current in man, which returns from the  circumference of Being as centripetal, thus inferring that re-ascent is  the sequential effect in continuity of descent, that evolution is self  inherent in involution, that unfolding is implicit in involving. 

To teach that conjunction with the higher principles of consciousness  may be effected by the will of the lower personality, is to attribute a  vitality to the personality which Theosophy itself contravenes in its  teachings as to the illusion of personal existence, and to lose sight of  the fact that man is not the former but the formed, that personality  is but the external manifestation of the one self determinating power. 

To teach that each atom or unit, differentiated from original Being  possesses Free Will, is to imply that they are separated from Original  Being and possess existence in themselves; or to fall into the ‘heresy  of separateness’ and to forget the identity of the unit and the Universal  of the self-reference which is implicit in experience and demonstrates  the permanent relation, ever present, which links the unit with the  fountain source. To imply that the lower aspects of mind have separated  off from those which are left and dwell in the higher planes, till  conjunction or reintegration has been effected by the lower, is to lose  sight of the fact that, while aspects of consciousness may [be]  distinguished, they cannot be separated without destroying the unity  of Being. 

To imply that instinctual rational man may develop his own Will  power, that he may make his own condition of life, is to arrogate to  the external personality the prerogative of disposing of that one self  determinating power which manifests through him, of which he is the  instrument or media, the expression the unfoldment. 

The original plan of the Great Architect cannot be altered by the  external manifestation thereof. The successive unfolding of the inner  aspects of man’s consciousness must be subject to the Law of the One  Determiner, which alone knows itself from centre to circumference,  a ground and a fulfilment. 

The action of the one determinating Power on the plane of nature  illustrates its mode or process. It shows results achieved by a continual,  gradual, consecutive unfolding from within. The Sun builds up vegetable  forms of life from the seed, beginning with the root, stem, bud, blossom,  fruit. The uniformity of law manifesting in the correlated modes in  different planes is a generally accepted axiom in occultism, so, by analogy,  must our internal state be successively unfolded from within by the  rays of our Spiritual Sun or Centre of Life. So also must the recognition  of the permanent relation with our Ground of Being or Fountain Source  return Man’s will to its Central Source. 

If for effort of the Personality we substitute the desire to have ever  present recognition within us of the reception of all power from the  central Source of Being, the desire to be able permanently to associate  our lives, in thought, as an external manifestation of the One  Determinating Power, and thus relate our actions to the original Source  of Being, that will probably be more likely to contribute towards  unfoldment from within. 

Some Considerations on the Sepher Yetzirah  Transcendental Philosophy shows that the unit is permanently related  with its Source or Fountain of Being. Experience, when analysed, is  found to bear relation or self reference between the permanent element  of Being, which is ever present, which wells up in thought and forms  the ground of cogitation on the one hand with the actual ‘I’ on the  other. Thought is a relation and the subject identity recedes ever behind  the regarding mind. Hence events may be said to be in time and  knowledge out of time. The phenomenal world is then related in  experience by the Thinker to the subjective reality. 

It is this ‘relating’ present in thought, the self reference implied in  experience, which ever unites the Unit with its ground or source —  its permanent element, and this would appear in the Path, on the Tree  of Life by the D or reflection which unites the Microprosopus with  the Macroprosopus, its source it would also appear to be symbolized  by the River of Life ‘Nahar’ which unflows from the Supernal Eden  or Spiritual Being or Microprosopus or Being manifested in Time.  But the permanent relation between the unit or T and its subjective  ground must probably have an occult natural aspect as well as the  metaphysical one I have illustrated. In other words there must be a  force behind thought of which what we cognise as thought is the  manifestation anditmustbethat force which constitutes the real relation  between the Unit and the Universal. That permanent relation, that  Force manifested as thought I believe is the River of Life bearing within  it and unfolding the four elements of Being; Spirit, Soul, Mind, Instinct. 

That emanation of Life or Spirit, the Sephira, the Sepher Yetzirah  says extends through all things. Through God’s power and existence  every element has its power and source from a higher Force and all  things have their common origin from the Holy Spirit. So God is at  once both the matter and the form of the Universe, yet He is not only  the form, for nothing can or does exist out of Himself. 

The suggestion arises whether we can form any concrete conception  of that Emanating Force— the ‘River of Life’ which permanently relates  the T with its source, as well as the metaphysical relation described  and which we cognise as thought. Will not the conception of the  centrifugal force in which the centripetal is inherent and inseparable,  assist us, carrying as it does that unfolding is implicit in involving, that  evolution and development is the sequential effect in continuity of  involution. 

The circuit of electricity will help us further, issuing as positive until  its reaches the negative pole, when it returns on itself to its source.  In this indeed we have an illustration of a positive Universal Ground  or Brain, as it is well known that electricity is not created de novo by  the dynamo. It is generated or emanates from an underlying?] source  of which the Earth is but one reservoir or condenser. Edison’s  experiments, the similar research of Greenwich Observatory, show the  magnetic storms of Earth which coincide with and are correlated with  the Sun spots, thus showing the lives of our coal miners to depend  on the state of the Sun. It is well known that magnetism is an effect  of electricity. The passing of a current of electricity through a bar of  iron converts it into a magnet. The presence of a current in one wire  ‘induces’ a current in any wire near it. 

The action of the Sun on the Earth above referred to is under the  same law. The presence of electricity in our Earth, itself entails its polarity,  its positive and negative poles — consequently its attracting and repelling  force or its centrifugal and centripetal currents. The Aurora Borealis  of our Earth and the Solar Corona or photosphere are probably similar  effects with regard to these orbs. So what the magnetic field or radiation  is to a magnet, which though not seen visually is illustrated by iron  filings spread on a piece of paper and held over a magnet— What these  spheres are to a magnet, the Earth and Sun, most probably our aura  is to us. This aura Madame Blavatsky described as a magnetic aura,  a psychic effluvium partaking both of the mind and of the body. It  is Electro-vital and Electro-mental. 

Have we not in these examples illustrations of the force pervading  the Universe, coexisting in the unit and in the whole, inter relating  all into one Unity, manifesting in each in accord with one universal  and all-pervading law. 

We have here, I think, the illustration of the one determinating force,  the River of Life, manifesting Unity and its media, and cognised by  these units as thought. 

In this connection a further reflection suggests itself for consideration  with regard to the Sepher Yetzirah. While the four planes of Being may  be viewed a distinguishable, they must be inseparable, as the unity of  Being cannot be divided, and, as the Sepher Yetzirah itself says, the  Elements of Being each have their source in a higher form and all from  the Spirit which is both Form and Substance and in which are all things.  In accord with the Law of Uniformity, these Elements must coexist  in Unity, as well as in the Universal, in the microcosm as well as in  the macrocosm. It is probable therefore that we may consider the Four  Worlds as the planes through which the unit descends from its Fountain  Source to its present circumferential state and by which descent it obtains  a vehicle in each element or relation in each place. 

Is not the Wheel of Life in the door of the Vault a key to this question?  showing, as it does, all four elements coexisting in the Unit. But this  cannot be considered as an integration of four living creatures, each  separate and having to be integrated into Unity, in as much as the  Unity of Being could never be divided up and separated without  entailing annihilation and chaos. If these four Elements are viewed  as Spirit, Soul, Mind, Instinct, it is evident that these do not co-exist  in each unit. The problem suggested is or may possibly be to attain  conscious functioning of each of the elements of Being in relation with  its place or World. 

These descending states in the ultimation of the Unit find their parallel  in the process of thought. Every thought has an objective aspect, as  well as its subjective aspect, and one may say, like the unit of being,  thought emanates from original Being, is produced from the  unmanifested in Atziluth, takes shape in Briah, form in Yetzirah and  ultimates in Assiah, in which consideration we return to the two aspects  of the River of Life, we referred to at the beginning of this paper, viz.  the metaphysical and the occult. 

What constitutes the difference between that part of the River of  Life which takes shape in Briah, and incarnates as volition, and that  which emanates through us as thought, remaining disincarnate, and  what becomes of that River of Thought which takes disincarnate form  and is ultimated through us? 

We ourselves must have been produced from the unmanifest in  Atziluth, taken soul and shape in Briah, mind and form in Yetzirah,  a concrete shell and instinct in Assiah. 'fet we remain permanently  attached to our own source, by a River of Life or electricity, which  conveys to us in reflection and intuition what we cognise as thought  from our original source. Is this the continuation of the River of Life  which produces us? Does that River still flow through us its self-  deluminated vehicles, and manifest as thought? Then is not our  personality an objective representation of the attributes present in that  River of Life? Or a reflection in form of the type on the sense mediated  plane of that which involved itself by determination and is now  unfolding to our consciousness, as the centrifugal current returns on  itself as centripetal? 

The conception of the Duality of Will, good and evil, must have  arisen presumably from the appearance of there being a conflict between  the ‘River of Life’ flowing through man and the impediments or  obstructions raised on the circumference by the atom cells or lives used  in the construction of the outer shell or organism and which were drawn  from the animal vegetable and mineral states. But these are only  manifestations of the One Universal Life, equally with the Primum  Mobile of Man, and the relation or reaction between these lives or  states of consciousness and the consciousness of the Entity using them  must in reality be a relation of harmony though in appearance there  may be conflict, and it must not be forgotten that the Primum Mobile  or Entity using these lives on its circumference is in reality the one  River of Life, and let me now again suggest the question of what becomes  of the Thought thus ultimated? and which we find to be manifested  as the River of Life.  The relation between the cells or lives used by the Unit in the  integration of its form or its body and the Primum Mobile which has  integrated that body, has its parallel in the Greater Universe in the  relation of the Unit or outer Manifestation to the Universal, then  determination whose body they form. The ultimation of each unit  is undoubtedly in accord with the archetypal plan, of which we are  parts, manifested objectively, yet there is all appearance of revolt, of  conflict between the unity, occupying the schools of Atheism,  Materialism, Evolution and their Determination. 

The conflict between these units of manifestation and their  Determination is probably as real as that between the Wills and Lives,  making up the shell or organism and its constructor or controller or  Primum Mobile. It is [unclear: ‘it with the SunJ but that makes no  sense. RG] the same ‘River of Life’ acting in the next or more external  plane, that of the shells or matter. Let it be remembered that it is the  interaction between the ‘Unit of Life’ or Primum Mobile in Man and  the other units and particularisation of the Universe that begets the  manifold of experience, which is the function of the unit to relate and  unify. 


Hying Roll No. XXIV 

Part of a Lecture on Horary Astrology delivered in 1892 to the Adepti in  college assembled, by V. H. Frater Resurgam. 

Verified Horary Figure by Nemo Question — Will querited [i£. the subject  of a query] die of his present illness? 

Hearing by letter that my maternal uncle, an octogenarian was  seriously ill from pneumonia, I drew a figure for the moment of intuition  to do so, which was while reading the communication. His illness had  commenced about February 7th and he was now confined to bed. 

The student can easily cast the figure for ll h 45 m a.m. February 26th  1887 London W. RA of M 22 h 25-6 s and 332°21'24" in arc. X 0.17  culminating T 1 . S 4°45 ascending; © in X 7°32'47", 2> in T 1 16°23',  5 in X 23°19.', ? in X 27°54', 3 in X 20°32. in V 5°48, retrograde,  h in S 15°54' retrograde, U in — 11°46' retrograde, W in V 25°10'.  Declination © 8°43' S. D 2°47'19" N. 5 2°29' S. $ 1°56' S. 3 4°31'  S. If 12°9' S. h 22°25' N. ¥ 3°59' S. W 17°25' N. The Moon’s North  node was in SI 27.35 Pars Fortuna was in Si 13°32. The Moon’s motion  in longitude was 11°49'56" in the 24 hours.  As the querited was the fourth of my maternal uncles and aunts, my  mother being the youngest of the family, I took the 10th House of  the figure for herself and the 12th (or 3rd from the 10th) for her eldest  brother or sister, the 2nd for the 2nd, the 4th for the 3rd and the 6th  for the 4th, the querited, and correspondingly the 1st (or 8th from  the 6th) for his 8th or House of Death. There £ ruled querited’s 1st  House and D his 8th, the aspect being D 25°.51. V , separating from  the quindecile (24°) and applying to his semisextile. The past aspects  being good but very weak showed his past state of health, which had  been very fair considering his age, but not robust— the applying aspect  being good and stronger than his preceding, £ moreover being dignified  by triplicity, term and decanate and also receiving Luna by House, sure  recovery from illness was shown, but at the same time not absolute  restoration to health. Had the significant been applying to a A or even  a *, I should have predicted not only complete recovery from his acute  attack, but also a continuance of a vigorious old age. Had the case  been chronic I should have predicted a partial restoration of health  at the time indicated, In this instance however, acute pneumonia being  a self limited disease, I predicted a complete recovery from the pulmonary  attack itself and an escape from death, but not restoration to’vigorous  health. Nevertheless the severity and danger of the illness was shown  by Cauda in querited’s 4th House, by h lord of his 4th posited in close  □ to 2) ruler of his 8th posited in his 6th and slow in motion. As  2) the applying significator, was in a movable sign and a succedent  house, each degree signified a week; therefore as wanted 4°9' of the  complete semisextile, I judged that querited would be convalescent in  4 weeks and 1 day, or March 27th. On March 29th he walked out  in his garden for the first time and fully recovered from the pneumonia.  Observations (1) This shows the necessity of selecting the exact house  corresponding to querited and not generalising. Had I taken his 12th  house of the figure as signifying maternal uncles and aunts in general  (being his 3rd from the 10th, and the 7th (or 8th from 12th) for querited’s  death, the aspects of the Lords thereof would have been ? 105° h exactly,  and applying to Q, showing present fair health and danger to life in  8 weeks, which was not the case (Future 1.106). 

(2) It made no difference to the selection of the 6th house of the  figure as the querited’s 1st, that two elder brothers (the 1st and 3rd  of the family) were deceased. They has to be taken into consideration  in the calculation of his appropriate house, just the same as it they  had been living. 277 



APPENDIX D 


(3) Had I taken the 8th house of the figure as signifying querited’s  death, the aspect would have been <J 115.22 h, applying- to 108°,  signifying recovery in 7'/3 weeks which was also not the case (Future 

1.107) . 

(4) The D was in latitude 3°58' S and <J in 0°50' S, adding the sum  of these to the degrees and minutes required to form the perfect  semisextile, and converting the total amount so obtained into time,  would have prolonged the time of the event by 4°48' or nearly five  weeks; yet recovery occurred only two days after the exact time predicted  (Future 1.60). 

(5) The D was 13° distant from the cusp of the house in which he  was posited, yet this made no difference whatever in the calculation  of time (Future 1.60). 

(6) The D applied to par. decl. $ being 1°43'4" distant; yet no danger  to life occurred at the corresponding time (Future 1.109). 

(7) As the question was concerning the querited only, Scorpio, the  sign of his 1st hour described him, a corpulent, strong, able body,  somewhat broad and square face, short necked, a squat well-trussed  fellow (Lilly p. 63). But the ascendant of the figure does not describe  myself, because though the querent, the question was not concerning  myself (Future, 1.171). 

(8) H is strongly dignified in Scorpio; but the sign is not its diurnal  home. Were it so, the aspect would have been D 175°23' H separating  from 8 , implying past danger to life and applying to the quadrasextile  (150°) Signifying some illness in about 251/3 weeks, neither of which  significations were in accordance with facts (Future 1.29.30). 

(9) As <J ruled both the querited’s 1st and 6th Houses no judgement  could be formed from the Lord of the 6th, otherwise it would have  entered in the calculation, though in a question of the duration of life,  I consider the 8th House coeteri paribus, the most important (Future 

1.108) . 

(10) In this figure <J was in the 10th, subradius and applying to  combustion, also h Lord of the 7th, was in his detriment and retrograde  both being therefore ‘unfortunate! Nevertheless I did not ‘end in the  discredit of the artist’ but the reverse, neither was I unable to ‘scarce  give a solid judgement’ (Future 1.109-1). 

[Note by F. K. The significance of such notes as ‘Future 1.108’ is not known  to me. Presumably as a result of textual corruptions, RA and ST as given  are incompatible.]  Flying Roll No. XXVIII 

On the value of Magic Implements and Insignia in methods of Divination.  By DD.C.F. and N.O.M. 

As far as the Adeptus Minor is concerned, the successful practice of  Divination, whether Astrology, Geomancy, or Tarot depends upon  the training of intuition. The rules of Astrology, the dots of Geomancy  and the law of the opening of the Key are the guides which lead the  intuition and limit its function to definite aims and ends. 

All processes of Divination require a concentration of mind and of  the vital and astral forces of the operator upon the subject matter, this  being so, it is of vital importance to success that the mind does not  wander, the body be at rest and peace. No opposing forces intervene.  That the personal and social attitude be cast aside. These things being  so, it is of great value to furnish the physical with symbols of protection  and power, and the astral form with the astral counterpart of their  insignia and implements. 

For by such means are the lower Elementals forced to abandon their  attacks and they being absent, the opportunity is presented for the  access of Superior Powers. For it is the Higher Self which receives  prompting from Higher Powers at those times when the Lower Self  is set aside, and when the interference of Elementary and Qlipothic  forces is provided against. 

Do not attempt Divination when angry, when anxious and worried,  when ill, when fearful, for under all these circumstances the tendency  to obsession is great. 

As an Adeptus Minor, Divine when calm, peaceful, healthy and  courageous. To supplement your power, use the means provided by  your Adeptship: the white robe, emblem of Purity. The yellow sash  of 5=6 rank. The Rose-Cross, that comprehensive symbol, so well able  to afford mystic protection and which itself affirms the support of the  knowledge and the virtues of the keys of Wisdom you have already  attained. Hold, or have at hand, the magic sword of Mars and Geburah  to hinder the attacks of opposing forces acting with hostile intent, and  of errant forces crossing your path. It will also increase the power of  your resolves. The Lotus Wand should be in frequent use, because it  gives precision to your working and supplies a ready means of appeal  to any special force, zodiacal or planetary, by hour or present position;  or elementary by triplicity.  The four Elemental Implements should be all laid on the table before  you for immediate use as required: the whole four must be present to  preserve a certain Balance and Harmony in the sphere of your aura,  and yet it is desirable to take up and hold with concentrated idea any  one of them when trying to form an estimate of the strength of the  corresponding force in any detail of your work: or you may hold one  of them to secure physical or astral power and intensity of that character  or again to preserve your own natural equilibrium. For example, in  the act of judging an astrologic Figure. Suppose you find the ascendant  in Aries and Mars is found in Virgo. To ascertain more accurately their  effects in the case, take the Lotus Wand in the Right hand and use the  left for the Elemental Implements. Hold by the scarlet band of T,  consider, take up the Fire Wand, consider, then shift the grasp to VP  and lay down the Fire Wand and take up the Pentacle for that earthy  sign. 

Again, suppose the end of the matter to be in S and the © in b .  Take the Lotus Wand first by one sign band and then by the other,  taking up with the left, the Cup and Pentacle in succession. Or if h  be in — in Q to the D hold the Wand by the emerald band and take  the air dagger in the left hand, if you wish to consider what mischief  the square of h does to D . The same method will apply to a Geomantic  Consideration, and the Lotus Wand is here especially suitable, for  Geomantic Working is markedly Zodiacal rather than Planetary. 

If a Divination must be done when you are in trouble, use the sword  to give strength in working and fortitude: holding it in the right hand  and wand or implement in the left hand. In a Tarot judgement the  same mode of working conduces to accuracy of result. In Geomancy  also you may hold the sword in the left hand, while making the dot  with the right hand. The actual presence of your mystical motto,  painted upon your magical weapon has its special use of ‘identifying  the Power of the weapon with your own force 

You should not imprint your own motto upon a telesm or flashing  tablet given by you to another member. But you may add it to such  a design intended by you, for your own wearing or use. This caution  does not apply to a Telesm drawn and energised by you for presentation  to the Chiefs for purposes of examination or for tests of your ability:  in such case you may preferably write your motto on the reverse side  of the Talisman or Design. 

[Note by F.K. Some copies of this document give it the title ‘On Robes!]  Flying Roll No. XXIX 

Notice to all Members of the Second Order. By G. H. Frater D.D.C.F. 7=4,  Chief Adept. 

On their attainment of the Grade of Theoricus Adeptus Minor I  appoint the four following members of the Second Order, viz. V.H.  Fra. Levavi Oculos, V.H. Soror Sapientia Sapienti dono data, V.H.  Fra. Resurgam, V.H. Soror Fbrtiter et Recte, to assist the G.H. Frater  Non Omnis Moriar, Chief Adept in Charge in Britannia Magna cum  Hibernia et Coloniis suis, in ruling and management of the Second  Order, as his immediate Lieutenants and under his immediate orders.  And upon these Four, as a badge of their office I have conferred the  symbols of HORUS, ISIS, AROUERIS and NEPHTHYS as a  distinctive mark of the authority of each, a higher ranking superior  to all other members of the Second Order until further notice; and  to show to which particular one of them appeal is to be made by other  members in case of difficulty. 

And the decisions of these Four are to be subject to the approval  and ratification of the G.H. Fra. Non Omnis Moriar. 

To the V.H. Fra. L.O. I have given the symbol of HORUS showing  that appeal is to be made in all grave matters coming under the  dominion of Horus . . . such as Disagreement. All things pertaining  to wrath, misunderstanding and irritation between members.  Enforcement of the authority of the Chief of the Order. All frankly  suggested plans requiring energy in their carrying out. Also the  administration of advice to inferior members of the Second Order on  all matters requiring decisive action. 

To V.H. Soror S.S.D.D. I have given the symbol of HICE, ISIS showing  that unto her appeal is to be made in all grave matters coming under  the dominion of Isis . . . such as the maintenance of peace and harmony  between members. Instruction in doubtful application of occult  correspondences. Decision in cases of vacillation and doubting of mind  of inferior members, and decisions in matters affecting the harmony  existing between different methods of occult working. 

To V.H. Fra. Resurgam I have given the symbol of AROUERIS,  showing that unto him appeal is to be made in all grave matters coming  under the Dominion of Aroueris . . . such as all cases of doubt and  difficulty in the application of rules for divination. Matters requiring  subtlety and tact, and all decisions regarding the formulation of ideas.  To V.H. Soror F et R I have given the symbol of NEPHTHYS showing  that unto her appeal is to be made in all grave matters coming under  the dominion of Nephthys . . . such as all cases of difficulty in the  application of given rules to material correspondences. Difficulties in  the ordering of studies of inferior members. All questions regarding  difficulty in the selection of Forces to work, under or with, for a fixed  end. All cases of doubt or difficulty requiring a right application of  rules already given. 

These four members aforesaid to be coequal in authority under the  super-intendence of the ‘Chief Adept in Charge’ and in all matters  of difficulty their decisions being submitted to him for ratification. And  if (which is not frequently probable) a case shall fall under more than  one of their heads, it is to be submitted equally to the judgement of  those two or more Theorici Adepti aforesaid under whose office it is  classed. And I trust that members of inferior rank will not abuse the  faculty of appeal herein accorded, by constantly harassing the members  aforesaid concerning trivial and unimportant subjects. 

(signed) Deo Duce, Comite Ferro 7=4 

[Note by EK. ‘Resurgam’ was, as stated, earlier, Dr Berridge; ‘Sapientia  . . was Florence Farr; ‘Levavi Oculos’ was P. Bullock; and 'Fortiter et Recte'  was Annie Horniman.] 


Flying Roll No. XXXI 

Correspondence between the Enochian and Ethiopic Alphabets, by V.N.R.  and V.H. Ad.Maj. 

In the Book of the Concourse of the Forces it is stated that the letters  of the Enochian Alphabet are of the nature of sigils and can therefore  be better employed for magical purposes than our ordinary Roman  characters, and we find proof of their force and correctness as to  correspondence in the skrying of the squares of the Enochian Tablets.  One or more of these letters being placed on the particular square  employed in a vision, instead of the Roman letter will aid the skyring  power by compelling the force of concentration on to the one square  in question and on no other. 

For however great may be the power of Clairvoyance, the student  will find himself obtaining erroneous results should he not carry his  correspondences to the last detail. Therefore it is wise to use the particular  sigil of the square, as well as the general one of the Tablet, and naturally  as well the ruling Names (Deity, Angelic and otherwise) with the correct  pronunciation and vibration thereof, the colours Sic &c. 

The descent of the Book of the ‘Concourse of the Forces’ from the  Egyptian Wisdom is undoubted, for we find that the very key note  of the scheme of these tablets is the esoteric meaning of the Great  Egyptian Symbols of the Pyramid and the Sphinx. The probability  is then that this Tablet language has its origin in the Egyptian and  its close resemblance to the Ethiopic (which is generally supposed to  be derived from Egyptian) is very marked as the Table on page 000  will show. 

Certainly, certain of these letters have a resemblance only when  inverted or transposed, but this is not surprising when we consider  the nature of hiero-glyphics, which can be read from right to left or  vice versa and downward or in groups, and that a letter may also be  turned in several directions. 

The Ethiopic is composed (according to Gesenius’ Heblrew]  Gram! mar]) of 26 letters all consonantal (as are most Semitic languages)  the vowels being expressed by little curves or dashes seven in number,  for instance EJ , ti (here the curve or dash is at the right side and further  it is half way up. In the second case the curve is at the top.) 

In the Tablets, when written in the Roman character the vowels are  sometimes omitted. It is for this reason that we have been told to  pronouce certain vowels after certain consonants, e.g. If B in an Angel  name precedes another consonant, as in SOBHA thou mayest  pronounce it SOBAYHAH (Book of the Angelic Calls). 

[There follows a table of Ethiopic and Enochian characters for  comparative purposes, with a guide to pronunciation, and a table of  the Ethiopic alphabet giving all the diacritical marks. R.G.] 

Flying Roll No. XXXII 

Theban Letters. Issued by N.O.M. 

In the Flying Roll which explains the Yetziratic formation of an image  of Adonai ha-Aretz it will be noted that the name is written upon the  girdle in Theban characters. Many members having asked for this  alphabet, I now issue this roll to furnish the required knowledge.  [Here follows a table of Theban letters, as found in Barrett’s The Magus,  on the plate facing p. 64 of Book II] 


’ It 


'vrwinrifciy'? 

C D E F fr H I KLM 


WTVkJ, 

N O P Q r § tvx y z 

These letters are recorded by Peter of Abano, also called Petrus di Appone  who derived from Honorius the Theban. This Honorius is said by many  to have been a Pope. There have been four Popes named Honorius,  but neither [sic] of them was called Theban! Peter of Abano flourished  circa A.D. 1300. This Alphabet is found in Cornelius Agrippa’s Works  and in Barrett’s Magus. 

[Note by F.K. The so-called Theban letters were also printed, along with  other ‘magical alphabets’, as an appendix to Mathers’ edition of The Key of  Solomon.] 


Flying Roll No. Ill 

1. If you are leaving home, or will be away, or if there be any reason  why these messages should not be sent to you— you must inform  the member from whom you receive messages. 

2. Messages are to be returned to N.O.M. whenever they cannot be  sent to the proper member; and a note is to be added, stating the  reason why this is necessary. 

3. A time for keeping each message will be written upon each:- any  member who causes unnecessary delay will incur the risk of being  omitted from the next circulation. 

4. Each member must sign the form and add data of receipt and  CO » 


APPENDIX D 


sending on, under a similar penalty on failure to do this duty which  is required for the common good. 

N.O.M. 

5. Do not keep anywhere, the address of the office, written out, or  only written in Hebrew. 

Flying Roll No. VIII 

A Geometrical Way to Draw a Pentagram 

Let AB be any line of the length required for the distance between  the points of Earth and Fire. Bisect AB in O and from O draw OH 

H 



perpendicular to AB. Cut off OC to equal AB. 

Join B with C and produce the line BC to F making FC to equal  OA. From centre B, with radius BF, draw the circle FDK, cutting OH  at D. D is then the ‘Spirit’ angle of the Pentagram. With the centres  B and D draw circles with a radius equal to AB, and they cut each  other at E which will be the Water angle. In a similar way [i.e. by drawing  circle of radius AB from centre A] find G the Air angle. Join A,  , D, E, and G in the usual way. 

R. A. Gilbert  Among Westcott’s papers is a manuscript ‘Catalogue of Flying Rolls’  which lists not only the dates of issue but also the prices charged to  members for copying. It is of further interest in that it gives the original  titles of those Flying Rolls whose content was later changed. 


Flying Rolls, Catalogue 



Issued on 


1 Warnings 

Nov. 7, [18] 92 

2/6 

2 Purity and Will 

Nov. 24 

2/6 

3 Instructions 

Nov. 24 

2/6 

4 Spirit Vision, S.S.D.D. and F. 

Nov. 28 

2/6 


[Later re-numbered 6. The  authors were Florence Farr and  Annie Horniman.] 


5 Imagination by Resurgam 

Dec. 11 

4/- 

[i.e. Dr Berridge] 

6 SRMD Note on 2 


4/- 

[i.e. Mathers’ Note. Later  re-numbered 4.] 

7 Material Alchymy 

Dec. 27 

6/8 

8 [Enoch Suggestions: erased] 

Feb. 25, [18] 93 

1/- 

Geometric Pentagram  [Altered to ‘95’ when the content  was altered.] 

9 Right and Left 

Mar. 27 

1/6 

10 Self Sacrifice 

Apr. 8 

6/- 

11 Clairvoyance 

Apr. 9 

5/- 

12 Telesm[atic] Images and Adonai 

May 27 

5/- 

13 Secrecy and Hermetic (Love) 

June 1 

3/6 

14 Talismans and Flashing Tablets 

June 15 

3/6 

15 Man and God 

July 26 

4/-  16 Fama Fraternitatis 

Aug. 24 

3/6 

17 Vault Sides 

Aug. 29 

3/- 

18 Progress 

Aug. 30 

2A 

19 Aims and Means 

Sept. 15 

4/6 

20 Elementary View of Man 

Sept. 23 

2/3 

21 Know Thyself 

Sept. 26 

4/6 

22 Quaestor on Free Will 

Oct. 8 

3/9 

[i.e. Quaestor Lucis = Oswald 



Murray] 



23 [Regulations for Exams. Oct. 16: 


2/3 

erased] Tatwa Visions 



24 Horary Figure by Resurg[am] 

Jan. 12, [18] 94 

1/6 

[i.e. Dr Berridge] 



25 [Notice re Stamping Letters, 


3A 


27/1/94: erased] S.S. on  Clairvoyance [Le. Sub Spe =  J.W. Brodie-Innes] 


26 Re Planets to Tatwas —  a Supplementto XII 

27 Bullock on Theurgia June 1894 3/- 

28 Use of Implements in Divination Nov. 3, 1894  — N.O.M. & D.D.C.F. [i.e. Non 

Omnis Moriar = Westcott, and  Deo Duce Comite Ferro = 

Mathers.] 

29 Order by D.D.C.F. as to 4  Lieutenants — declared June 18, 

*94 issued Nov. 8 

30 Tatwas and Skrying &. 

Hierophant’s making 0=0 signs 

32 [Originally numbered 31] 1/- 

Theban Letters 

34 [Originally numbered 32] An  Exorcism by S.S. [i.e. Sub Spe] 



APPENDIX E 


33 [New Regulations: erased] 5/6 

Enoch Visions 

31 Ethiopic Letters 2/6 

35 Notes on the Z Exordiums 1/- 

Number 36 is not included as this was not issued until late in 1897,  by which time Westcott had resigned from office in the Order. 

*The revised prices are given in brackets. 

R. A. Gilbert  $10.95 



The present-day revival of Western esotericism has its roots in  occult traditions dating back to antiquity. The esoteric teachings  of these fraternal orders were closely guarded and often passed on  by word of mouth. During the early 1900s, many of the teachings  were preserved in the writings of prominent members of the  Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and other occult fraternities 

that followed it. 

Author Francis King examines the lives and work of these authors  — among them S. L. MacGregor Mathers, Francis Yates, 

W. Wynn Westcott, and J. W. Brodie-Innes. Included are  instructional documents, never before published, that were  circulated amongst Golden Dawn members. These documents,  known as the Flying Rolls, reveal secrets of psychic perception,  astral travel, ritual magic, and various alchemical processes. 

This edition, which includes all the Flying Rolls not published in  Israel Regardie’s Golden Dawn, will be of great interest and use to  those with experience of practical occult techniques and those who  are making their first experiments in esoteric practice. It is also  essential reading for anyone interested in the historical  development of Western occultism. 

Francis King is a well-known author with a particular interest  in alternative culture. He has written several books on esoteric  traditions, both Eastern and Western, including most recently  TANTRA FOR WESTERNERS ( Destiny Books, 1986). 



DESTINY BOOKS 

One Park Street  Rochester, Vermont 


ISBN 0-89281-164-1 