
    1




        4




I

    fiLIPHAS LfiVI’S
TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC

           i




                       \

                 De LAURENCE, SCOTT & CO.’S
American Edition Now Ready

Transcendental Magic
            Its Doctrine and Ritual
                               By ELIPHAS LEVI
                            Author of “The Mysteries of Magic”

    A COMPLETE TRANSLATION FROM THE FRENCH ORIGINAL
                     By ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE
Including all the famous original engravings and a life-size portrait of ISliphas
Levi, the first ever published in the United States. Guaranteed by Dr. L. W. de
Laurence to be an exact reproduction of the noted 1896 London Edition, which
has always sold for $5.50 prepaid, with this exception, that this, our 1910 Amer¬
ican Edition, is absolutely accurate, according to translation from the French
original, free from typographical errors, printed on finest book paper, with best
binding, gold stamp, and sells for only $3.75 prepaid, whereas the 1896 London
Edition sells for $5.50. These features serve to distinguish all the de Laurence,
Scott & Co.’s publications, which are manufactured under the censorious eye of Dr.
L. W. de Laurence, who is looked upon as being an expert in the manufacture of
high class publications, which he insists must be sold at the lowest possible price.
   High priced Editions of this hook have been sold by English publishers and American book-sellers,
who have forced the buyer to pay from $5.25 to $5.50 a copy for this noted book and until
Dr. L. W. de Laurence personally bore the great expense of composition, of engraving, of elect retyping,
plate making and book-binding to produce our American Edition the buyer was forced to pay an
exorbitant price for the cheaply made, bound London edition, before he could possess one of these
books which every advanced student of Magic and Occultism knows is one of the most complete now
in print on this subject.

       AMERICAN BOOKSELLERS’ PRICE, $5.25 AND
                   $5.50 PREPAID
   No book-seller can sell you this book for less than $5.25 and many charge $5.50 for it because
they cannot afford the great cost of publishing an edition, which costs several thousand dollars; so
they must first pay the English publishers their price for it, then import it and pay a high duty charge
to the government.    Dr. de Laurence’s sole object in publishing an American Edition is to put a stop
to this and sell it at a lower cost to the many advanced students who wanted one of these noted
volumes.

                      A BOOK FOR THE STUDENT
    Just write to any dealer and ask his price if you doubt this statement and if they sell you this
volume for less than $5.25 prepaid, they are selling one of our edition.       This is a book for the
student, it needs no recommendation.     Read the list of contents, then study the index and you will
see just what this work contains.
    This is positively guaranteed to be the best Edition extant, as it is printed from new type and
published under the critical eye and Editorship of Dr. de Laurence, who is known the world over as an
author and publisher of exceptional ability who spares no expense to produce a perfect book for the
student.
    This book is in a class by itself, and is personally recommended by Dr. de Laurence, to all who
 really wish a strictly high class work.   We, of course, know that other dealers will not be pleased
 because we have dared to cut the price on this noted book, but as we are concerned only in looking
 after the interest of our thousands of friends and students we cannot afford to let the mercenary
interests of a few book-sellers, who cannot afford to publish an American Edition and who are not
in a position to compete with our publishing and book-selling departments, influence us in matters of
this kind.
     However, many dealers are buying this book of us now instead of importing it and paying duty, as
they get a better book and find our retail price lower than the English publishers’ wholesale price.
 Our price, $3.75 prepaid, carefully boxed, positively no less.   Money returned if not satisfactory.


                            De LAURENCE, SCOTT & CO.
                                       35€ Dearborn St., CHICAGO, ILL., U.S.A.


THE ONLY PORTRAIT OF ELIPHAS LEVI EVER PUBLISHED
             IN THE UNITED STATES.


Copyright, 1910, by tie Laurence, Scott & Co,   Publishing Department,

              C /TVVvL^^vv.'f*"        ix   .   ,Jtr vt   #
                                                           fi
                                                                  ■*




V'


     TRANSCENDENTAL
          MAGIC
     ITS DOCTRINE AND RITUAL

                                  BY

                  fiLIPHAS LfiVI ^                        f -
                                                              .
           AUTHOR OF “THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC’




               A COMPLETE TRANSLATION OF

     “DOGME ET RITUEL DE LA HAUTE MAGIE”
               WITH A BIOGRAPHICAL PREFACE


                                  BY

          ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE
        AUTHOR OF “DEVIL WORSHIP IN FRANCE,” ETC., ETC.




     INCLUDING ALL THE ORIGINAL ENGRAVINGS AND
              A PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR




                           CHICAGO

              de LAURENCE, SCOTT & CO.
                             1910

                                   ‘JL-

      COPYRIGHT 1910

de LAURENCE, SCOTT & CO.




                                       v




         /k   ***\   O   n   ft   f)

                             /



                                                            fa
          BIOGRAPHICAL PREFACE


Eliphas Levi Zahed is a pseudonym which was adopted in
his occult writings by Alphonse Louis Constant, and it is
said to be the Hebrew equivalent of that name. The
 author of the Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie was
born in humble circumstances about the year 1810, being
the son of a shoemaker. Giving evidence of unusual in¬
telligence at an early age, the priest of his parish con¬
ceived a kindly interest for the obscure boy, and got him
on the foundation of Saint Sulpice, where he was educated
without charge, and with a view to the priesthood. He
seems to have passed through the course of study at that
seminary in a way which did not disappoint the expecta¬
tions raised concerning him. In addition to Greek and
Latin, he is believed to have acquired considerable knowl¬
edge of Hebrew, though it would be an error to suppose that
any of his published works exhibit special linguistic attain¬
ments. He entered on his clerical novitiate, took minor or¬
ders, and in due course became a deacon, being thus bound
by a vow of perpetual celibacy. Shortly after this step, he
was suddenly expelled from Saint Sulpice for holding opin¬
ions contrary to the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church.
The existing accounts of this expulsion are hazy, and in¬
corporate unlikely elements, as, for example, that he was
sent by his ecclesiastical superiors to take duty in country
places, where he preached with great eloquence what, how¬
ever, was doctrinally unsound; but I believe that there is
no precedent for the preaching of deacons in the Latin
Church. Pending the appearance of the biography which
has been for some years promised in France, we have few
available materials for a life of the “Abbe” Constant.

VI                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


In any case, he was cast back upon the world, with the
limitations of priestly engagements, while the priestly career
was closed to him—and what he did, or how he contrived
to support himself, is unknown. By the year 1839 he had
made some literary friendships, including that of Alphonse
Esquiros, the forgotten author of a fantastic romance, en¬
titled “The Magician”;* and Esquiros introduced him to
Ganneau, a distracted prophet of the period, who had
adopted the dress of a woman, abode in a garret, and there
preached a species of political illuminism, which was ap¬
parently concerned with the restoration of la vraie legitimite.
He was, in fact, a second incarnation of Louis XVII.—
“come back to earth for the fulfilment of a work of re¬
generation.”! Constant and Esquiros, who had visited him
for the purpose of scoffing, were carried away by his elo¬
quence, and became his disciples. Some element of so¬
cialism must have combined with the illuminism of the
visionary, and this appears to have borne fruit in the brain
of Constant, taking shape ultimately in a book or pamphlet,
entitled ‘ ‘ The Gospel of Liberty, ’ ’ to which a transient im¬
portance was attached, foolishly enough, by the imprison¬
ment of the author for a term of six months. There is some
reason to suppose that Esquiros had a hand in the pro¬
duction, and also in the penalty. His incarceration over,
Constant came forth undaunted, still cleaving to his
prophet, and undertook a kind of apostolic mission into

  * M. Papus, a contemporary French occultist, in an extended study
of the “Doctrine of Eliphas Levi,” asks scornfully: “Who now
remembers anything of Paul Augnez or Esquiros, journalists pre¬
tending to initiation, and posing as professors of the occult sciences
in the salons they frequented1?” No doubt they are forgotten, but
Eliphas Levi states, in the Histoire de la Magie, that, by the publi¬
cation of his romance of “The Magician,” Esquiros founded a
new school of fantastic magic, and gives sufficient account of his
work to show that it was in parts excessively curious.
   t A woman who was associated with his mission, was, in like
manner, supposed to have been Marie Antoinette.—See Histoire de
la Magie, 1. 7., c. 5.

                     TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                             Vll


the provinces, addressing the country people, and suffering,
as he himself tells us, persecution from the ill-disposed.t
But the prophet ceased to prophesy, presumably for want
of an audience, and Id vraie legitimite was not restored,
so the disciple returned to Paris, where, in spite of the
pledge of his diaconate, he effected a runaway match with
Mdlle. Noemy, a beautiful girl of sixteen. This lady bore
him two children, who died in tender years, and sub¬
sequently she deserted him. Her husband is said to have
tried all expedients to procure her return,# but in vain, and
she even further asserted her position by obtaining a legal
annulment of her marriage, on the ground that the con¬
tracting parties were a minor and a person bound to celibacy
by an irrevocable vow. The lady, it may be added, had
other domestic adventures, ending in a second marriage
about the year 1872. Madame Constant was not only very
beautiful, but exceedingly talented, and after her separa¬
tion she became famous as a sculptor, exhibiting at the
Salon and elsewhere under the name of Claude Yingmy.
It is not impossible that she may be still alive; in the
sense of her artistic genius, at least, she is something more
than a memory.
  At what date Alphonse Louis Constant applied himself
to the study of the occult sciences is uncertain, like most
other epochs of his life. The statement on page 142 of
this translation, that in the year 1825 he entered on a
fateful path, which led him through suffering to knowledge,


  j- A vicious story, which has received recently some publicity in Paris,
charges Constant with spreading a report of his death soon after
his release from prison, assuming another name, imposing upon the
Bishop of Eveux, and obtaining a licence to preach and administer
the sacraments in that diocese, though he was not a priest. He is
represented as drawing large congregations to the cathedral by his
preaching, but at length the judge who had sentenced him unmasked
the impostor, and the sacrilegious farce thus terminated dramatically.
   * Including Black Magic and pacts with Lucifer, according to the
silly calumnies of his enemies.

Vlll               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


must not be understood in the sense that his initiation took
place at that period, which was indeed early in boyhood.
It obviously refers to his enrolment among the scholars of
Saint Sulpice, which, in a sense, led to suffering, and per¬
haps; ultimately to science, as it certainly obtained him
education. The episode of the New Alliance—so Gannean
termed his system—connects with transcendentalism, at
least on the side of hallucination, and may have furnished
the required impulse to the mind of the disciple; but in
1846 and 1847, certain pamphlets issued by Constant under
the auspices of the Libraire Societaire and the Libraire
Phalansterienne shew that his inclinations were still to¬
wards Socialism, tinctured by religious aspirations. The
period which intervened between his wife’s desertion* and
the publication of the Dogme de la Haute Magie, in 1855,
was that, probably, which he devoted less or more to occult
study. In the interim he issued a large “Dictionary of
Christian Literature,” which is still extant in the encyclo¬
paedic series of the Abbe Migne; this work betrays no lean¬
ing towards occult science, and, indeed, no acquaintance
therewith. What it does exhibit unmistakably is the in¬
tellectual insincerity of the author, for he assumes therein
the mask of perfect orthodoxy, and that accent in matters of
religion which is characteristic of the voice of Rome. The
Dogme de la Haute Magie was succeeded in 1856 by its com¬
panion volume the Rituel, both of which are here translated
for the first time into English. It was followed in rapid
succession by the Histoire de la Magie, I860; La Clef des
Grands Mysteres, 1861; a second edition of the Dogme et
Rituel, to which a long and irrelevant introduction was
unfortunately prefixed, 1862; Fables et Symboles, 1864;

  * I must not be understood as definitely attaching blame to Madame
Constant for the course she adopted. Her husband was approach¬
ing middle life when he withdrew her—still a child—from her legal
protectors, and the runaway marriage which began by forswearing
was, under the circumstances, little better than a seduction thinly
legalised, and it was afterwards not improperly dissolved.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     IX


Le Sorder de Meudon, a beautiful pastoral idyll, impressed
with the cachet cabalistique; and La Science des Esprits,
1865. The two last works incorporate the substance of the
pamphlets published in 1846 and 1847.
   The precarious existence of Constant’s younger days was
in one sense but faintly improved in his age. His books
did not command a large circulation, but they secured him
admirers and pupils, from whom he received remuneration
in return for personal or written courses of instruction. He
was commonly to be found chez lui in a species of magical
vestment, which may be pardoned in a French magus, and
his only available portrait—prefixed to this volume—rep¬
resents him in that guise. He outlived the Franco-German
war, and as he had exchanged Socialism for a sort of
transcendentalised Imperialism, his political faith must
have been as much tried by the events which followed the
siege of Paris as was his patriotic enthusiasm by the reverses
which culminated at Sedan. His contradictory life closed
in 1875 amidst the last offices of the church which had al¬
most expelled him from her bosom. He left many manu¬
scripts behind him, which are still in course of publication,
and innumerable letters to his pupils—Baron Spedalieri
alone possesses nine volumes—have been happily preserved
in most cases, and are in some respects more valuable than
the formal treatises.
   No modern expositor of occult science can bear any com¬
parison with Eliphas Levi, and among ancient expositors,
though many stand higher in authority, all yield to him in
living interest, for he, is actually the spirit of modem
thought forcing an answer for the times from the old
oracles. Hence there are greater names, but there is no
influence so great—no fascination in occult literature ex¬
ceeds that of the French magus. The others are surrendered
to specialists and the typical serious students to whom all
dull and unreadable masterpieces are dedicated, directly or
not; but he is read and appreciated, much as we read and
appreciate new and delightful verse which, through some

X                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


conceit of the poet, is put into the vesture of Chaucer.
Indeed, the writings of Eliphas Levi stand, as regards the
grand old line of initiation, in relatively the same position
as the “Earthly Paradise” of Mr. William Morris stands to
the “Canterbury Tales.” There is the recurrence to the
old conceptions, and there is the assumption of the old
drapery, but there is in each case the new spirit. The
‘ ‘ incommunicable axiom ’ ’ and the ‘ ‘ great arcanum, ’ ’ Azoth,
Inri, and Tetragrammaton, which are the vestures of the
occult philosopher, are like the “cloth of Bruges and hogs¬
heads of Guienne, Florence gold cloth, and Ypres napery”
of the poet. In both cases it is the year 1850 et seq., in a
mask of high fantasy. Moreover, “the idle singer of an
empty day” is paralleled fairly enough by “the poor and
obscure scholar who has recovered the lever of Archimedes. ’’
The comparison is intentionally grotesque, but it obtains
notwithstanding, and even admits of development, for as
Mr. Morris in a sense voided the raison d’etre of his poetry,
and, in express contradiction to his own mournful question,
has endeavored to “set the crooked straight” by betaking
himself to Socialism, so Eliphas Levi surrendered the rod
of miracles and voided his Doctrine of Magic by devising
a one-sided and insincere concordat with orthodox religion,
and expiring in the arms of “my venerable masters in
theology,” the descendants, and decadent at that, of the
“imbecile theologians of the middle ages.” But the one is,
as the other was, a man of sufficient ability to make a
paradoxical defence of a position which remains untenable.
     Students of Eliphas Levi will be acquainted with the
qualifications and stealthy retractations by which the some¬
what uncompromising position of initiated superiority in
the “Doctrine and Ritual,” had its real significance read
out of it by the later works of the magus. I have dealt
with this point exhuastively in another place,* and there is

  * See the Critical Essay prefixed to ‘1 The Mysteries of Magic: a
Digest of the Writings of Eliphas Levi.” London: George Redway.
1886.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      XI


no call to pass over the same ground a second time. I
propose rather to indicate as briefly as possible some new
considerations which will help us to understand why there
were grave discrepancies between the “Doctrine and Ritual
of Transcendent Magic” and the volumes which followed
these. In the first place, the earlier books were written
more expressly from the standpoint of initiation, and in the
language thereof; they obviously contain much which it
would be mere folly to construe after a literal fashion, and
what Eliphas Levi wrote at a later period is not so much
discrepant with his earlier instruction—though it is this
also—as the qualifications placed by a modern transcen-
dentalist on the teachnical exaggerations of the secret
sciences. For the proof we need travel no further than the
introduction to 11 The Doctrine of Magic, ’ ’ and to the Hebrew
manuscript cited therein, as to the powers and privileges
of the magus. Here the literal interpretation would be in¬
sanity; these claims conceal a secret meaning, and are
trickery in their verbal sense. They are what Eliphas Levi
himself terms “hyperbolic,” adding: “If the sage do not
materially and actually perform these things, he accom¬
plishes others which are much greater and more admir¬
able” (p. 223). But this consideration is not in itself
sufficient to take account of the issues that are involved;
it will not explain, for example, why Eliphas Levi, who
consistently teaches in the 1 ‘ Doctrine and Ritual ’ ’ that the
dogmas of so-called revealed religion are nurse-tales for
children, should subsequently have insisted on their accep¬
tation in the sense of the orthodox Church by the grown
men of science, and it becomes necessary here to touch upon
a matter which, by its nature, and obviously, does not admit
of complete elucidation.
  The precise period of study which produced the “Doctrine
and Ritual of Transcendent Magic” as its first literary
result is not indicated with any certainty, as we have seen,
in the life of the author, nor do I regard Eliphas Levi as
constitutionally capable of profound or extensive book

Xii                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


study. Intensely suggestive, he is at the same time without
much evidence of depth; splendid in generalisation, he is
without accuracy in detail, and it would be difficult to cite
a worse guide over mere matters of fact. His ‘ ‘ History of
Magic ’ ’ is a case in point; as a philosophical survey it is
admirable, and there is nothing in occult literature to ap¬
proach it for literary excellence, but it swarms with his¬
torical inaccuracies; it is in all respects an accomplished
and in no way an erudite performance, nor do I think that
the writer much concerned himself with any real reading
of the authorities whom he cites. The French verb parcourir
represents his method of study,and not the verb appro-
fondir. Let us take one typical case. There is no occult
writer whom he cites with more satisfaction, and towards
whom he exhibits more reverence, than William Postel, and
of all Postel’s books there is none which he mentions so
often as the Clavis Absconditorum d Constitutione Mundi;
yet he had read this minute treatise so carelessly that he
missed a vital point concerning it, and apparently died
unaware that the symbolic key prefixed to it was the work
of the editor and not the work of Postel. It does not
therefore seem unreasonable to affirm that had Levi been
left to himself, he would not have got far in occult science,
because his Gallic vivacity would have been blunted too
quickly by the horrors of mere research; but he did some¬
how fall within a circle of initiation which curtailed the
necessity for such research, and put him in the right path,
making visits to the Bibliotheque Nationale and the Arsenal
of only subsidiary importance. This, therefore, constitutes
the importance of the “Doctrine and Ritual”; disguised
indubitably, it is still the voice of initiation; of what school
does not matter, for in this connection nothing can be
spoken plainly, and I can ask only the lenience of deferred
judgment from my readers for my honourable assurance
that I am not speaking idly. The grades of that initiation
had been only partly ascended by Eliphas Levi when he
published the “Doctrine and Ritual,” and its publication

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   Xlll


 closed the path of his progress: as he was expelled by Saint
 Sulpice for the exercise of private judgment in matters of
 doctrinal belief, so he was expelled by his occult chiefs for
 the undue exercise of personal discretion in the matter
 of the revelation of the mysteries. Now, these facts explain
 in the first place the importance, as I have said, of the
 “Doctrine and Ritual,” because it represents a knowledge
 which cannot be derived from books; they explain, secondly,
 the shortcomings of that work, because it is not the result
 of a full knowledge; why, thirdly, the later writings con¬
 tain no evidence of further knowledge; and, lastly, I think
 that they materially assist us to understand why there are
 retractations, qualifications, and subterfuges in the said
 later works. Having gone too far, he naturally attempted
 to go back, and just as he strove to patch up a species of
 modus vivendi with the church of his childhood, so he en¬
 deavoured, by throwing dust in the eyes of his readers, to
make his peace with that initiation, the first law of which
 he had indubitably violated. In both cases, and quite
naturally, he failed.
   It remains for me to state what I feel personally to be
the chief limitation of Levi, namely, that he was a tran-
scendantalist but not a mystic, and, indeed, he was scarcely
a transcendentalist in the accepted sense, for he was funda¬
mentally a materialist—a materialist, moreover, who at
times approached perilously towards atheism, as when he
states that God is a hypothesis which is “very probably
necessary”; he was, moreover, a disbeliever in any real
communication with the world of spirits.          He defines
mysticism as the shadow and the buffer of intellectual
light, and loses no opportunity to enlarge upon its false
illuminism, its excesses, and fatuities. There is, therefore,
no way from man to God in his system, while the sole
avenues of influx from God to man are sacramentally, and
in virtue merely of a tolerable hypothesis. Thus man must
remain in simple intellectualism if he would rest in reason;
the sphere of material experience is that of his knowledge;

XIV               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


and as to all beyond it, there are only the presumptions of
analogy. I submit that this is not the doctrine of occult
science, nor the summum bonum of the greater initiation;
that transcendental pneumatology is more by its own hy¬
pothesis than an alphabetical system argued kabbalis-
tically; and that more than mere memories can on the same
assumption be evoked in the astral light. The hierarchic
order of the visible world has its complement in the in¬
visible hierarchy, which analogy leads us to discern, being
at the same time a process of our perception rather than
a rigid law governing the modes of manifestation in all
things seen and unseen; initiation takes us to the bottom
step of the ladder of the invisible hierarchy and instructs us
in the principles of ascent, but the ascent rests personally
with ourselves; the voices of some who have preceded can
be heard above us, but they are of those who are still upon
the way, and they die as they rise into the silence, towards
which we also must ascend alone, where initiation can no
longer help us, unto that bourne from whence no traveller
returns, and the influxes are sacramental only to those who
are below.
   An annotated translation exceeded the scope of the pres¬
ent undertaking, but there is much in the text which follows
that offers scope for detailed criticism, and there are points
also where further elucidation would be useful. One of the
most obvious defects, the result of mere carelessness or
undue haste in writing, is the promise to explain or to prove
given points later on, which are forgotten subsequently by
the author. Instances will be found on p. 65, concerning
the method of determining the appearance of unborn chil¬
dren by means of the pentagram; on p. 83, concerning the
rules for the recognition of sex in the astral body; on p. 97,
concerning the notary art; on p. 100, concerning the mag¬
ical side of the Exercises of St. Ignatius; on p. 123, concern¬
ing the alleged sorcery of Grandier and Girard; on p. 125,
concerning Schroepffer’s secrets and formulas for evocation;
on .p. 134, concerning the occult iconography of Gaffarel.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     XV


 In some cases the promised elucidations appear in other
 places than those indicated, but they are mostly wanting al¬
 together.   There are other perplexities with which the
 reader must deal according to his judgment. The explana¬
 tion of the quadrature of the circle on p. 37 is a childish
 folly; the illustration of perpetual motion on p. 55 in¬
 volves a mechanical absurdity; the doctrine of the perpetua¬
 tion of the same physiognomies from generation to genera¬
 tion is not less absurd in heredity; the cause assigned to
 cholera and other ravaging epidemics, more especially the
 reference to bacteria, seems equally outrageous in physics.
 There is one other matter to which attention should be
 directed; the Hebrew quotations in the original—and the
 observation applies generally to all the works of Levi—
swarm with typographical and other errors, some of which
it is impossible to correct, as, for example, the passage cited
from Rabbi Abraham on p. 266. So also the Greek con¬
juration, pp. 277 and 278, is simply untranslatable as it
stands, and the version given is not only highly conjectural,
but omits an entire passage owing to insuperable difficulties.
Lastly, after careful consideration, I have judged it the
wiser course to leave out the preliminary essay which was
prefixed to the second edition of the “Doctrine and
Ritual”; its prophetic utterances upon the mission of Na¬
poleon III. have been stultified by subsequent events; it is
devoid of any connection with the work which it precedes,
and, representing as it does the later views of Levi, it would
be a source of confusion to the reader. The present trans¬
lation represents, therefore, the first edition of the Dogme
et Ritual de la Haute Magie, omitting nothing but a few
unimportant citations from old French grimoires in an un¬
necessary appendix at the end. The portrait of Levi is
from a carte-de-visite in the possession of Mr. Edward Mait¬
land, and was issued with his “Life of Anna Kingsford,”
a few months ago.
  London, September 1896.


                TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                              PAGE
Biographical    Preface   .                                         v

Explanation of the Figures Contained in this Work.xxi




          THE DOCTRINE OF TRANSCENDENT MAGIC
Introduction    .                                                   3

Chapter I. The Candidate.  Unity of the Doctrine—Qualifica¬
  tions necessary for the Adept. 27
Chapter  II. The Pillars of the Temple. Foundations of the
  Doctrine—The Two Principles—Agent and Patient. 37
Chapter III.    The Triangle of Solomon.   Universal Theology of
  the Triad—The Macrocosm ..                                       44
Chapter IV.  The Tetragram. Magical Virtue of the Tetrad—
  Analogies and Adaptations—Elementary Spirits of the Kab¬
  balah   . 52
Chapter V. The Pentagram.  The Microcosm and the sign thereof
  —Power over Elements and Spirits. 61
Chapter   VI. Magical Equilibrium. Action of the Will—Im¬
  pulse and Resistance—Sexual love—The Plenum and the Void.. 69
Chapter  VII. The Fiery Sword. The Sanctum Regnum—The
  seven Angels and seven Genii of the Planets—Universal Virtue
  of the Septenary. 77
Chapter VIII. Realisation. Analogical reproduction of Forces
 —Incarnation of Ideas—Parallelism—Necessary Antagonism.. 81
Chapter IX.               The Magical Lamp, Mantle, and Staff
                Initiation.
  —Prophecy and Intuition—Security and stability of the Initi¬
  ate in the midst of dangers—Exercise of Magical Power.88
Chapter X.The Kabbalah. The Sephiroth—The Semhamphoras
 —The Paths and Gates—Bereschith and Mercavah—Gematria
 and Temurah . 91
Chapter XI.  The Magic Chain. Magnetic Currents—Secrets of
 great successes—Talking Tables—Fluidic Manifestations. 99
Chapter XII.                Hermetic Magic—Doctrines of
                The Great Work.
 Hermes—The Minerva of the World—The grand and unique
 Athanor—'The Hanged Man.108
Chapter XIII.              Revelations from the other World
                 Necromancy.
 —Secrets of Death and of Life—Evocations.113

xviii               TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                             PAGE
Chapter XIV. Transmutations. Lycanthropy—Mutual posses¬
 sions, or embryonic state of souls—The Wand of Circe—The
 Elixir of Cagliostro .:.122
Chapter XV. Black Magic. Demonomania—Obsessions—Urban
 Grandier—Girard—'The work of M. Eudes de Mirville.129

Chapter XVI. Bewitchments. Dangerous forces—Power of life
 and death—Facts and Principles—Remedies—Practice of Para¬
 celsus .•.131

Chapter XVII. Astrology. Knowledge of Men by the Signs of
 their Nativity—Phrenology—'Chiromancy—Metoposcopy—Plan¬
 ets and Stars—Climacteric years—Predictions by means of As¬
 tral Revolutions .140

Chapter XVIII. Charms and Philtres. Venomous Magic—
 Powders and Pacts of Sorcerers—The Jettatura at Naples—The
 Evil Eye—Superstitions—Talismans.148
Chapter XIX. The Stone of the Philosophers—Elagabalus.
 What this Stone is—Why it is a Stone—Singular Analogies. .. .157

Chapter XX. The Universal Medicine. Extension of Life by
 means of Potable Gold—Resurrection—Abolition of Pain.162

Chapter XXI. Divination. Dreams—Somnambulism—Presenti¬
 ments—Second Sight—Divinatory Instruments—Alliette and his
 discoveries concerning the Tarot.166

Chapter XXII. Summary and General Key of the Four Secret
 Sciences. The Kabbalah—Magic—Alchemy—Magnetism or Oc¬
 cult Medicine .172

                    TABLE OF CONTENTS                           xix



          THE RITUAL OF TRANSCENDENT MAGIC
                 PAGE
Introduction .181

Chapter I. Preparations. Dispositions and Principles of Magi¬
  cal Operation—Personal Preparations of the Operator.197
Chapter II. Magical Equilibrium. Alternative nse of Forces—
  Oppositions necessary in the Practice—Simultaneous attack and
  resistance—The Sword and Trowel of the Builders of the Temple.206
Chapter III. The Triangle of Pantacles. Use of the Triad in
  Conjurations and Magical Sacrifices—Triangle of evocations and
  Pantacles—Triangular Combinations—The Magical Trident of
  Paracelsus .213
Chapter IV.    The Conjuration of the Four. Occult Elements
  and their Use—Manner of overcoming and subjecting Elemen¬
  tary Spirits and Maleficent Genii .•.'.221
Chapter V. The Blazing Pentagram. Use and Consecration of
  the Pentagram .231
Chapter VI. The Medium and Mediator. Application of Will
  to the Great Agent—The Natural Medium and the Extra-natural
  Mediator .236
Chapter VII. The Septenary of Talismans. Ceremonies, Vest¬
  ments, and Perfumes proper to the seven days of the week—
  Composition of the Seven Talismans and Consecration of Magi¬
  cal instruments .242
Chapter VIII. A Warning to the Imprudent. Precautions nec¬
  essary for the accomplishment of the Great Works of Science. .256
Chapter IX. The Ceremonial of Initiates. Its end and inten¬
 tion .260
Chapter X. The Key of Occultism.   Use of Pantacles—Their
  ancient and modern mysteries—Key of Biblical obscurities—
  Ezekiel and St. John.265
Chapter XI. The Triple Chain. Methods of its formation.270
Chapter XII.                 Its Processes and Secrets—
               The Great Work.
 Raymond Lully and Nicholas Flamel.274
Chapter XIII. Necromancy. Ceremonial for the Resurrection of
 the Dead and for Necromancy.280
Chapter XIV. Transmutations. Methods for changing the na¬
 ture of things—The Ring of Gyges—'Words which accomplish
 Transmutations .292
Chapter XV. The Sabbath of the Sorcerers. Rites and special
 evocations of the Sabbath—The Goat of Mendes and its worship
 —Aberations of Catherine de Medecis and Giles de Laval,
 Lord of Retz .299

XX                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                            PAGE
Chapter XVI. Witchcraft and Spells.
                             Ceremonial for the same
 —Mode of defence against them.317
Chapter XVII.  The Writing of the Stars. Divination by Stars
 Planisphere of Gaffarel—How the Destinies of Men and Em¬
 pires may be read in Heaven.325
Chapter  XVIII. Philtres and Magnetism. Composition of
 Philtres—How to influence Destinies—Remedies and Preven¬
 tives .338
Chapter  XIX. The Mastery of the Sun. Use of the Philo¬
 sophical Stone—How it must be preserved, disintegrated, and
 recomposed .347
Chapter  XX. The Thaumaturge.         Therapeutics—Warm and
 cold Insufflations—Passes with and without contact—Imposition
 of hands—Diverse virtues of saliva—Oil and Wine—Incubation
 and Massage .352
Chapter XXI. The Science of the Prophets. Ceremonial for
 Divinatory Operations—'The Clavicle of Trithemius—Probable
 future of Europe and of the world.359
Chapter  XXII. The Book of Hermes. After what manner all
 science is contained in the occult work of Hermes—Antiquity
 of this book—Labours of Court de Gebelin and of Etteilla—
 The Theraphim of the Hebrews according to Gaffarel—The Key
 of William Postel—A book of Saint Martin—The true shape of
 the Ark of the Covenant—Italian and German Tarots—Chinese
 Tarots—A German Medal of the sixteenth century—Universal
 Key of the Tarot—Its application to the Symbols of the Apoca¬
 lypse. The seven seals of the Christian Kabbalah—Conclusion
 of tne entire work .                                         369


                SUPPLEMENT TO THE RITUAL.

The Nuctemeron of Appolonius of Tyana.401

The Nuctemeron according to the Hebrews.                     409
INDEX     .415

     EXPLANATION OF THE FIGURES CONTAINED IN
                           THIS WORK.

                                                               PAGE
Figure I. The Great Symbol of Solomon.                            2
    The Double Triangle of Solomon, represented by the two
  Ancients of the Kabbalah; the Macroprosopus and the Micro-
  prosopus; the God of Light and the God of Reflections; mercy
  and vengeance; the white Jehovah and the black Jehovah.
Figure   II.  Sacerdotal Esotericism making the sign of Excom¬
  munication . 26
     A sacerdotal hand making the sign of esotericism and pro¬
  jecting the figure of the demon in its shadow. Above are the
  Ace of Deniers, as found in the Chinese Tarot, and two super¬
  posed triangles, one white and one black. It is a new allegory
  explaining the same mysteries; it is the origin of good and evil;
  it is the creation of the demon by mystery.
Figure   III.   The Triangle of Solomon. 40
Figure   IY.    The Four Great Kabbalistic Names. 55
Figure   V.     The Pentagram of Faust. 61
Figure   YI. The Tetragram of the Zohar. 93
Figure YII.   Addha-Nari, grand Indian Pantacle.154
     This pantheistic image represents Religion or Truth, terrible
  for the profane and gentle for initiates. It has more than one
  analogy with the Cherub of Ezekiel. The human figure is placed
  between a bridled bull and a tiger, thus forming the triangle of
  Kether, Geburah, and Gedulah, or Chesed. In the Indian sym¬
  bol, the four magical signs of the Tarot are found in the four
  hands of Addha-Nari—on the side of the initiate and of mercy
  are the sceptre and the cup; on the side of the profane, rep¬
  resented by the tiger, are the sword and the circle, which latter
  may become either the ring of a chain or an iron collar. On the
  side of the initiate, the goddess is clothed only with the skin of
  the tiger; on that of the tiger itself she wears a long star-
  spangled robe, and even her hair is veiled. A fountain of milk
  springs from her forehead, falls on the side of the initiate, and
  about Addha-Nari and the two animals it forms a magic circle,
  enclosing them in an island which represents the world. The
  goddess wears round her neck a magic chain, formed of iron
  links on the side of the profane and of intelligent heads on that
  of the initiate; she bears on her forehead the figure of the
  lingam, and on either side of her are three superposed lines
  which represent the equilibrium of the triad, and recall the
  trigrams of Fo-Hi.
Figure VIII. The Pantacles of Ezekiel and Pythagoras.173
    The four-headed Cherubim of Ezekiel’s prophecy, explained
  by the double triangle of Solomon.   Below is the wheel of
                                xxi

xxii          EXPLANATION OF THE FIGURES

                                                               page
  Ezekiel, key of all pantaeles, and the pantaele of Pythagoras.
  The cherub of Ezekiel is here represented as it is described by
  the prophet. Its four heads are the tetrad of Mercavah; its six
  wings are the senary of Bereschith. The human figure in the
  middle represents reason; the eagle’s head is faith; the bull
  is resignation and toil; the lion is warfare and conquest. This
  symbol is analogous to that of the Egyptian sphinx, but is more
  appropriate to the Kabbalah of the Hebrews.
Figure   IX. The Sabbatic Goat. The Bapliomet of Mendes. .. .180
     A pantheistic and magical figure of the Absolute. The torch
  placed between the two horns represents the equilibrating in¬
  telligence of the triad. The goat’s head, which is synthetic, and
  unites some characteristics of the dog, bull, and ass, represents
  the exclusive responsibility of matter and the expiation of bodily
  sins in the body. The hands are human, to exhibit the sanctity
  of labour; they make the sign of esotericism above and below, to
  impress mystery on initiates, and they point at two lunar cres¬
  cents, the upper being white and the lower black, to explain the
  correspondences of good and evil, mercy and justice. The lower
  part of the body is veiled, portraying the mysteries of universal
  generation, which is expressed solely by the symbol of the cadu-
  ceus. The belly of the goat is scaled, and should be coloured
  green; the semi-circle above should be blue; the plumage, reach¬
  ing to the breast, should be of various hues. The goat has female
  breasts, and thus its only human characteristics are those of
  maternity and toil, otherwise the signs of redemption. On its
  forehead, between the horns and beneath the torch, is the sign
  of the microcosm, or the pentagram with one beam in the ascend¬
  ant, symbol of human intelligence, which, placed thus below the
  torch, makes the flame of the latter an image of divine revela¬
  tion. This Pantheos should be seated on a cube, and its footstool
  should be a single ball, or a ball and a triangular stool. In our
  design we have given the former only to avoid complicating
  the figure.
Figure   X. The Triangle of Solomon.195
Figure  XI. The Trident of Paracelsus.212
     This trident, symbol of the triad, is formed of three pyra¬
  midal teeth superposed on a Greek or Latin tau. On one of its
  teeth is a jod, which on one side pierces a crescent, and on the
  other a transverse line, a figure which recalls hieroglyphically
  the zodiacal sign of the Crab. On the opposite tooth is a com¬
  posite sign recalling that of the Twins and that of the Lion.
  Between the claws of the Crab is the sun, and the astronomical
  cross is seen in proximity to the lion. On the middle tooth there
  is hieroglyphically depicted the figure of the celestial serpent,
  with the sign of Jupiter for its head. By the side of the Crab
  is the word Obito, or Begone, Retire; and by the side of the
  Lion is the word Imo, Although, Persist. In the centre, and
  near the symbolical serpent there is Ap Do Sel, a word composed
  of an abbreviation, of a word written kabbalistically and in the
  Hebrew fashion, and, finally, of a complete ordinary word; Ap
  which should be read Ar, because these are the first two letters

               EXPLANATION OF THE FIGURES                         xxiii

                                                                  PAGE
   of the Greek Archeus; Do, which should be read Od; and,
  lastly, Sel, Salt. These are the three prime substances, and the
   occult names of Archeus and Od have the same significance as
   the Sulphur and Mercury of the Philosophers. On the iron stem
   which serves as a haft for the trident there is the triplicated
   letter P. P. P., a phallic and lingamic hieroglyph, with the
   words Vli Dox Fato, which must be read by taking the first
   letter for the number of the Pentagram in Roman figures, thus
  completing the phrase Pentagrammatica Libertate Dox Fato,
  equivalent to the three letters of Cagliostro—L. P. D.—Liberty,
  Power, Duty. On the one side, absolute liberty; on the other,
  necessity or invincible fatality; in the centre, Reason, the Kab-
  balistic Absolute, wThich constitutes universal equilibrium. This
  admirable magical summary of Paracelsus will serve as a key
  to the obscure works of the Kabbalist Wronski, a remarkable
  man of learning who more than once allowed himself to be car¬
  ried away from his Absolute Reason by the mysticism of his
  nation, and by pecuniary speculations unworthy of so distin¬
  guished a thinker. We allow him at the same time the honour
  and the glory of having discovered before us the secret of the
  Trident of Paracelsus. Thus, Paracelsus represents the Passive
  by the Crab, the Active by the Lion, Intelligence or equilibrating
  Reason by Jupiter or the Man-King ruling the serpent; then he
  balances forces by giving the Passive the fecundation of the
  Active represented by the Sun, and to the Active space and
  might to conquer and enlighten under the symbol of the Cross.
  He says to the Passive: Obey the impulse of the Active and ad¬
  vance with it by the very equilibrium of resistance.       To the
  Active he says: Resist the immobility of obstacle; persist and
  advance. Then he explains these alternated forces by the great
  central triad—Liberty, Necessity, Reason,—Reason in the
  centre, Liberty and Necessity in counterpoise. There is the
  power of the Trident, there its haft and foundation; it is the
  universal law of nature; it is the very essence of the Word,
  realised and demonstrated by the triad of human life—the Ar¬
  cheus, or mind; the Od, or plastic mediator; and the Salt or
  visible matter. We have given separately the explanation of
  this figure because it is of the highest importance, and gives the
  measure of the greatest genius of the occult sciences. After this
  interpretation, it will be understood why, in the course of our
  work, we invariably bow with the traditional veneration of true
  adepts before the divine Paracelsus.

Figure XIII.    The Pantagram.....234

FigureXIY. Magical Instruments—the Lamp, Rod, Sword, and
 Dagger ..                                             .252
Figure XV.     The Key of Thoth.292
Figure XYI.    Goetic Circle of Black Evocations and Pacts.310

Figures XYII.  and XVIII. Divers infernal characters taken from
  Agrippa, Peter of Apono, a number of Grimoires, and the docu¬
  ments of the trial of Urban Grandier..'.312, 313

xxiv            EXPLANATION OF THE FIGURES

                                                            PAGE

Figure XIX.    Kabbalistic signs of Orion...328
Figure  XX. Infernal Characters of the Twelve Signs of the
  Zodiac .330
Figure XXI. Magic Squares of the Planetary Genii according to
  Paraeelsus I... ..375, 376
Figure XXII.    Chariot of Hermes, seventh Key of the Tarot.379
Figure XXIII.   The Ark of the Covenant.385
Figure XXIV.    Apocalyptic Key—Tne Seven Seals of St John.. .390

THE DOCTRINE OF TRANSCENDENT MAGIC




                  INTRODUCTION


Behind the veil   of all the hieratic and mystical allegories
of ancient doctrines, behind the shadows and the strange
ordeals of all initiations, under the seal of all sacred writ¬
ings, in the ruins of Ninevah or Thebes, on the crumbling
stones of the old temples, and on the blackened visage of
the Assyrian or Egyptian sphinx, in the monstrous or
marvellous paintings which interpret to the faithful of
India the inspired pages of the Vedas, in the strange em¬
blems of our old books of alchemy, in the ceremonies at
reception practised by all mysterious societies, traces are
found of a doctrine which is everywhere the same, and
everywhere carefully concealed. Occult philosophy seems
to have been the nurse or god-mother of all intellectual
forces, the key of all divine obscurities, and the absolute
queen of society in those ages when it was reserved ex¬
clusively for the education of priests and of kings. It
reigned in Persia with the magi, who at length perished, as
perish all masters of the world, because they abused their
power; it endowed India with the most wonderful tradi¬
tions, and with an incredible wealth of poesy, grace, and
terror in its emblems; it civilised Greece to the music of
the lyre of Orpheus; it concealed the principles of all the
sciences and of all human intellectual progress in the bold
calculations of Pythagoras; fable abounded in its miracles,
and history, attempting to appreciate this unknown power,
became confused with fable; it shook or strengthened em¬
pires by its oracles, caused tyrants to tremble on their
thrones, and governed all minds, either by curiosity or by
fear. For this science, said the crowd, there is nothing
impossible; it commands the elements, knows the language

4                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


of the stars, and directs the planetary courses; when it
speaks, the moon falls blood-red from heaven; the dead rise
in their graves and articulate ominous words as the night
wind blows through their skulls. Mistress of love or of
hate, the science can dispense paradise or hell at its
pleasure to human hearts; it disposes of all forms, and
distributes beauty or ugliness; with the rod of Circe it
alternately changes men into brutes and animals into men;
it even disposes of life or death, and can confer wealth on
its adepts by the transmutation of metals and immortality
by its quintessence or elixir compounded of gold and light.
Such was magic from Zoroaster to Manes, from Orpheus to
Apollonius of Tyana, when positive Christianity, at length
victorious over the brilliant dreams and titanic aspirations
of the Alexandrian school, dared to launch its anathemas
publicly against this philosophy, and thus forced it to be¬
come more occult and mysterious than ever. Moreover,
strange and alarming rumours began to circulate concerning
initiates or adepts; these men were everywhere surrounded
by an ominous influence; they killed or drove mad those
who allowed themselves to be carried away by their honeyed
eloquence or by the fame of their learning. The women
whom they loved became Stryges, their children vanished at
their nocturnal meetings, and men whispered shudderingly
and in secret of bloody orgies and abominable banquets.
Bones had been found in the crypts of ancient temples,
shrieks had been heard in the night, harvests withered and
herds sickened when the magician passed by. Diseases
which defied medical skill at times appeared in the world,
and always, it was said, beneath the envenomed glance of
the adepts. At length an universal cry of execration went
up against magic, the mere name became a crime, and the
common hatred was formulated in this sentence: “Magi¬
cians to the flames!” as it was shouted some centuries
earlier: “To the lions with the Christians!” Now the mul¬
titude never conspires except against real powers; it
possesses not the knowledge of what is true, but it has the

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      5

instinct of what is strong. It remained for the eighteenth
century to deride both Christians and magic, while in¬
fatuated with the homilies of Rousseau and the illusions
of Cagliostro.
   Science, notwithstanding, is at the basis of magic, as at
the foundation of Christianity there is love, and in the
Gospel symbols we see the Word incarnate adored in his
cradle by three magi, led thither by a star (the triad and
the sign of the microcosm), and receiving their gifts of gold,
frankincense, and myrrh, a second mysterious triplicity,
under which emblem the highest secrets of the Kabbalah
are allegorically contained. Christianity owes, therefore, no
hatred to magic, but human ignorance has ever stood in fear
of the unknown. The science was driven into hiding to
escape the impassioned assaults of a blind love; it clothed
itself with new hieroglyphics, dissimulated its labours,
denied its hopes. Then it was that the jargon of alchemy
was created, a permanent deception for the vulgar, a living
language only for the true disciple of Hermes.
   Extraordinary fact! Among the sacred books of the
Christians there are two works which the infallible Church
makes no claim to understand and has never attempted to
explain; these are the prophecy of Ezekiel and the Apo-
calypse, two Kabbalistic Keys assuredly reserved in heaven
for the commentaries of magician Kings, books sealed with
seven seals for faithful believers, yet perfectly plain to an
initiated infidel of the occult sciences. There is also another
book, but, although it is popular in a sense and may be
found everywhere, this is of all most occult and unknown,
because it has the key of all others; it is in public evidence
without being known to the public; no one dreams of seek¬
ing it where it actually is, and elsewhere it is lost labour to
look for it. This book, possibly anterior to that of Enoch,
has never been translated, but is still preserved unmutilated
in primeval characters, on detached leaves, like the tablets
of the ancients. A distinguished scholar has revealed,
though no one has observed it, not indeed its secret, but its

6                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


antiquity and singular preservation; another scholar, but of
a mind more fantastic than judicious, passed thirty years in
the study of this book, and has merely suspected its whole
importance. It is, in fact, a monumental and extraordinary
work, strong and simple as the architecture of the pyramids,
and consequently enduring like those—a book which is the
sum of all the sciences, which can resolve all problems by
its infinite combinations, which speaks by evoking thought,
is the inspirer and regulator of all possible conceptions, the
masterpiece perhaps of the human mind, assuredly one of
the finest things bequeathed to us by antiquity, an universal
key, the name of which has been explained and compre¬
hended only by the learned William Postel, an unique text,
whereof the initial characters alone exalted the devout spirit
of Saint Martin into ecstasy, and might have restored reason
to the sublime and unfortunate Swedenborg. We shall
speak of this book later on, and its mathematical and pre¬
cise explanation will be the complement and crown of our
conscientious undertaking. The original alliance of Chris¬
tianity and the science of the magi, once it is thoroughly
demonstrated, will be a discovery of no second-rate im¬
portance, and we question not that the serious study of
magic and the Kabbalah will lead earnest minds to the
reconciliation of science and dogma, of reason and faith,
heretofore regarded as impossible.
   We have said that the Church, whose special office is the
custody of the Keys, does not pretend to possess those of
the Apocalypse or of Ezekiel. In the opinion of Christians
the scientific and magical clavicles of Solomon are lost; yet,
at the same time, it is certain that, in the domain of in¬
telligence ruled by the Word, nothing which has been
written can perish; things which men cease to understand
simply cease to exist for them, at least in the order of the
Word, and they enter then into the domain of enigma and
mystery. Furthermore, the antipathy, and even open war,
of the official church against all that belongs to the realm
of magic, which is a kind of personal and emancipated

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     7

priesthood, is allied with necessary and even with inherent
causes in the social and hierarchic constitution of Christian
sacerdotalism. The Church ignores magic—for she must
either ignore it or perish, as we shall prove later on; yet
she does not the less recognise that her mysterious founder
was saluted in his cradle by the three magi—that is to
say, by the hieratic ambassadors of the three parts of the
known world and the three analogical worlds of occult
philosophy. In the school of Alexandria, magic and Chris¬
tianity almost joined hands under the auspices of Ammonius
Saccas and of Plato; the doctrine of Hermes is found almost
in its entirety in the writings attributed to Denis the Areo-
pagite; and Synesius sketched the plan of a treatise on
dreams, which was later on to be annotated by Cardan, and
composed hymns which might have served for the liturgy of
the Church of Swedenborg, could a church of the illu¬
minated possess a liturgy. With this period of fiery ab¬
stractions and impassioned warfare of words there must
also be connected the philosophic reign of Julian, called the
Apostate because in his youth he made an unwilling pro¬
fession of Christianity. Everyone is aware that Julian was
sufficiently wrongheaded to be an unseasonable hero of
Plutarch, and was, if one may say so, the Don Quixote of
Koman Chivalry; but what most people do not know is
that Julian was one of the illuminated and an initiate of
the first order; that he believed in the unity of God and
in the universal doctrine of the Trinity; that, in a word,
he regretted nothing of the old world but its magnificent
symbols and its exceedingly gracious images. Julian was
not a pagan; he was a Gnostic allured by the allegories of
Greek polytheism, who had the misfortune to find the name
of Jesus Christ less sonorous than that of Orpheus. The
Emperor personally paid for the academical tastes of the
philosopher and rhetorician, and after affording himself the
spectacle and satisfaction of expiring like Epaminondas
with the periods of Cato, he had in public opinion, already

8                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


thoroughly Christianised, anathemas for his funeral oration
and a scornful epithet for his ultimate celebrity.
   Let us skip the little men and small matters of the Bas-
Empire, and pass on to the Middle Ages. . . . Stay, take
this book! Glance at the seventh page, then seat yourself
on the mantle lam spreading, and let each of us cover our
eyes with one of its comers. . . . Your head swims, does
it not, and the earth seems to fly beneath your feet ? Hold
tightly, and do not look around. . . . The vertigo ceases;
we are here. Stand up and open your eyes, but take care
before all things to make no Christian sign and to pronounce
no Christian words. We are in a landscape of Salvator
Kosa, a troubled wilderness which seems resting after a
storm; there is no moon in the sky, but you can distinguish
little stars gleaming in the brushwood, and you can hear
about you the slow flight of great birds, who seem to whisper
strange oracles as they pass. Let us approach silently that
cross-road among the rocks. A harsh, funeral trumpet
winds suddenly, and black torches flare up on every side.
A tumultuous throng is surging round a vacant throne; all
look and wait. Suddenly they cast themselves on the
ground. A goat-headed prince bounds forward among
them; he ascends the throne, turns, and by assuming a
stooping posture, presents to the assembly a human face,
which, carrying black torches, every one comes forward to
salute and to kiss. With a hoarse laugh he recovers an
upright position, and then distributes gold, secret instruc¬
tions, occult medicines, and poisons to his faithful bonds¬
men. Meanwhile, fires are lighted of fern and alder, piled
over with human bones and the fat of executed criminals.
Druidesses crowned with wild parsley and vervain immo¬
late unbaptised children with golden knives and prepare
horrible love-feasts. Tables are spread, masked men seat
themselves by half-nude females, and a Bacchanalian orgie
begins; there is nothing missing but salt, the symbol of
wisdom and immortality. Wine flows in streams, leaving
stains like blood; obscene talk and fond caresses begin,

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                       9

and presently the whole assembly is drank with wine, with
pleasure, with crime, and singing. They rise, a disordered
throng, and hasten to form infernal dances. . . . Then
come all legendary monsters, all phantoms of nightmare;
enormous toads play inverted flutes and blow with their
paws on their flanks; limping scarabeei mingle in the dance;
crabs play the castanets; crocodiles beat time on their scales;
elephants and mammoths appear habited like Cupids and
foot it in the ring; finally, the giddy circles break up and
scatter on all sides. . . . Every yelling dancer drags
away a dishevelled female. . . . Lamps and candles
formed of human fat go out smoking in the darkness.
. . . Cries are heard here and there, mingled with peals
of laughter, blasphemies, and rattlings of the throat. Come,
rouse yourself, do not make the sign of the cross! See, I
have brought you home; you are in your own bed, somewhat
worn-out, possibly a trifle shattered, by your night’s journey
and dissipation; but you have witnessed something of which
everyone talks without knowledge; you have been initiated
into secrets no less terrible than the grotto of Triphonius;
you have been present at the Sabbath. It remains for you
now to preserve your reason, to have a wholesome dread of
the law, and to keep at a respectful distance from the
Church and her faggots.
   Would you care, as a change, to behold something less
fantastic, more real, and also more truly terribje? You
shall assist at the execution of Jacques de Molay and his
accomplices or his brethren in martyrdom. ... Do not,
however, be misled, confuse not the guilty and the innocent!
Did the Templars really adore Baphomet? Did they offer
a shameful salutation to the buttocks of the goat of Mendes?
What was actually this secret and potent association which
imperilled Church and State, and was thus destroyed un¬
heard? Judge nothing lightly; they are guilty of a great
crime; they have allowed the sanctuary of antique initiation
to be entered by the profane. By them for a second time
have the fruits of the tree of the knowledge of good and

10                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


evil been gathered and shared, so that they might become
the masters of the world. The sentence which condemns
them has a higher and earlier origin than the tribunal of
pope or king: “On the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shalt surely die,” said God Himself, as we see in the book
of Genesis.
   What is taking place in the world, and why do priests
and potentates tremble? What secret power threatens
tiaras and crowns ? A few madmen are roaming from land
to land, concealing, as they say, the philosophical stone
under their ragged vesture. They can change earth into
gold, and they are without food or lodging! Their brows
are encircled by an aureole of glory and by a shadow of
ignominy! One has discovered the universal science and
goes vainly seeking death to escape the agonies of his
triumph—he is the Majorcan Raymond Lully. Another
heals imaginary diseases by fantastic remedies, giving a
formal denial in advance to the proverb which enforces
the futility of a cautery on a wooden leg—he is the mar¬
vellous Paracelsus, always drunk and always lucid, like the
heroes of Rabelais. Here is William Postel writing naively
to the fathers of the Council of Trent, informing them that
he has discovered the absolute doctrine, hidden from the
foundation of the world, and is longing to share it with
them. The council does not concern itself with the maniac,
does not condescend to condemn him, and proceeds to ex¬
amine the weighty questions of efficacious grace and sufficing
grace. He whom we see perishing poor and abandoned is
Cornelius Agrippa, less of a magician than any, though
the vulgar persist in regarding him as a more potent sor¬
cerer than all because he was sometimes a cynic and mys-
tifier. What secret do these men bear with them to their
 tomb? Why are they wondered at without being under¬
 stood ? Why are they condemned unheard ? Why are they
 initiates of those terrific secret sciences of which the Church
 and society are afraid? Why are they acquainted with
 things of which others know nothing? Why do they con-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      11

ceal what all men burn to know? Why are they invested
with a dread and unknown power? The occult sciences!
Magic! These words will reveal all and give food for
further thought! De omni re scibili et quibusdam aliis.
   But what, as a fact, was this magic? What was the
power of these men who were at once so proud and so
persecuted? If they were really strong, why did they not
overcome their enemies? But if they were weak and foolish,
why did people honour them by fearing them ? Does magic
exist ? Is there an occult knowledge which is truly a power,
which works wonders fit to be compared with the miracles
of authorized religions? To these two palmary questions
we make answer by an affirmation and a book. The book
shall justify the affirmation, and the affirmation is this,
Yes, there existed in the past, and there exists in the pres¬
ent, a potent and real magic; yes, all that legends have said
of it is true, but, in contrariety to what commonly happens,
popular exaggerations are, in this case, not only beside but
below the truth. There is indeed a formidable secret, the
revelation of which has once already transformed the world,
as testified in Egyptian religious tradition, symbolically
summarised by Moses at the beginning of Genesis. This
secret constitutes the fatal science of good and evil, and the
consequence of its revelation is death. Moses depicts it
under the figure of a tree which is in the centre of the
Terrestrial Paradise, is in proximity to the tree of life and
has a radical connection therewith; at the foot of this tree is
the source of the four mysterious rivers; it is guarded by
the sword of fire and by the four figures of the Biblical
sphinx, the Cherubim of Ezekiel. . . . Here I must
pause, and I fear already that I have said too much. Yes,
there is one sole, universal, and imperishable dogma, strong
as the supreme reason; simple, like all that is great; in¬
telligible, like all that is universally and absolutely true;
and this dogma has been the parent of all others. Yes,
there is a science which confers on man powers apparently

12                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


superhuman; I find them enumerated as follows in a He¬
brew manuscript of the sixteenth century:—
   “These are the powers and privileges of the man who
holds in his right hand the clavicles of Solomon, and in his
left the branch of the blossoming almond. ^ Aleph.—He
beholds God face to face, without dying, and converses
familiarly with the seven genii who command the entire
celestial army. ^ Beth.—He is above all afflictions and all
fears. ^ Ghimel.—He reigns with all heaven and is served
by all hell. ^ Daleth.—He disposes of his own health and
life and can equally influence that of others. ^ He.—He
can neither be surprised by misfortune, nor overwhelmed by
disasters, nor conquered by his enemies. ^ Van.—He knows
the reason of the past, present, and future. ^ Dzain.—He
possesses the secret of the resurrection of the dead and the
key of immortality.
   “Such are the seven chief privileges, and those which
rank next are as follows:—
   “ n Cheth.—To find the philosophical stone. ^ Teth.—To
enjoy the universal medicine.            lod.—To be acquainted
with the laws of perpetual motion and in a position to
demonstrate the quadrature of the circle. ^ Caph.—To
change into gold not only all metals, but also the earth
itself, and even the refuse of the earth. ^ Lamed.—To sub¬
due the most ferocious animals and be able to pronounce the
words which paralyse and charm serpents. ^ Mem.—To
possess the Ars Notoria which gives the universal science.
2 Nun.—To speak learnedly on all subjects, without prep¬
aration and without study.
   i i
       These, finally, are the seven least powers of the magus—
   ((
       £ Samech.—To know at first sight the deep things of the
souls of men and the mysteries of the hearts of women,
 y Gnain.—To force nature to make him free at his pleasure,
g Phe.—To foresee all future events which do not depend on
a superior free will, or an all undiscemible cause. ^ Tsade.
—To give at once and to all the most efficacious consolations
and the most wholesome counsels. ^ Coph.—To triumph

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     13

over adversities.   ^ Resell.—To conquer love and hate,
ty Schin.—To have the secret of wealth, to be always its mas¬
ter and never its slave. To know how to enjoy even pov¬
erty and never become abject or miserable. ^ Tau.—Let us
add to these three septenaries that the wise man rules the
elements, stills tempests, cures the diseased by his touch,
and raises the dead!
   “At the same time, there are certain things which have
 been sealed by Solomon with his triple seal. It is enough
that the initiates know, and as for others, whether they
deride, doubt, or believe, whether they threaten or fear,
what matters it to science or to us ? ’ ’
   Such are actually the issues of occult philosophy, and we
are in a position to withstand an accusation of insanity or a
suspicion of imposture when we affirm that all these privi¬
leges are real. To demonstrate this is the sole end of our
work on occult philosophy. The philosophical stone, the
universal medicine, the transmutation of metals, the quad¬
rature of the circle, and the secret of perpetual motion, are
thus neither mystifications of science nor dreams of mad¬
ness. They are terms which must be understood in their
veritable sense; they are expressions of the different appli¬
cations of one same secret, the several characteristics of one
same operation, which is defined in a more comprehensive
manner under the name of the great work. Furthermore,
there exists in nature a force which is immeasurably more
powerful than steam, and by means of which a single man,
who knows how to adapt and direct it, might upset and
alter the face of the world. This force was known to the
ancients; it consists in an universal agent having equilib¬
rium for its supreme law, while its direction is concerned im¬
mediately with the great arcanum of transcendent magic.
By the direction of this agent it is possible to change the
very order of the seasons; to produce at night the phe¬
nomena of day; to correspond instantaneously between one
extremity of the earth and the other; to see, like
Apollonius, what is taking place on the other side of the

14                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 world; to heal or injure at a distance; to give speech an
universal success and reverberation. This agent, which
'barely manifests under the uncertain methods of Mesmer’s
 followers, is precisely that which the adepts of the middle
 ages denominated the first matter of the great work. The
 Gnostics represented it as the fiery body of the Holy Spirit;
 it was the object of adoration in the secret rites of the
 Sabbath and the Temple, under the hieroglyphic figure of
 Baphomet or the Androgyne of Mendes. All this will be
proved.
    Such are the secrets of occult philosophy, such is magic
 in history; let us now glance at it as it appears in its books
and its achievements, in its initiations and its rites. The
key of all magical allegories is found in the tablets we have
already mentioned, and these tablets we regard as the work
of Hermes. About this book, which may be called the
keystone of the whole edifice of occult science, are grouped
innumerable legends which are either its partial translation
or its commentary renewed endlessly under a thousand dif¬
ferent forms. Sometimes these ingenious fables combine
harmoniously into a great epic which characterises an epoch,
though how or why is not clear to the uninitiated. Thus,
the fabulous history of the Golden Fleece both resumes and
veils the Hermetic and magical doctrines of Orpheus, and if
we recur only to the mysterious poetry of Greece, it is be¬
cause the sanctuaries of Egypt and India to some extent dis¬
may us by their resources, and leave our choice embarrassed
in the midst of such abundant wealth. We are eager, more¬
over, to reach the Theba'id at once, that dread synthesis of
all doctrine, past, present, and future, that, so to speak, in¬
finite fable, which comprehends, like the Deity of Orpheus,
the two extremities of the cycle of human life. Extraordi¬
nary fact! The seven gates of Thebes, attacked and de¬
fended by seven chiefs who have sworn upon the blood of
victims, possess the same significance as the seven seals of
the sacred book interpreted by seven genii, and assailed by
a monster with seven heads, after being opened by a living

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     15

yet immolated lamb, in the allegorical work of St. John.
The mysterious origin of Oedipus, found suspended from
the tree of Cytheron like a bleeding fruit, recalls the sym¬
bols of Moses and the narratives of Genesis. He makes war
upon his father, whom he slays without knowing—alarming
prophecy of the blind emancipation of reason without
science; he then meets with the sphinx—the sphinx, that
symbol of symbols, the eternal enigma of the vulgar, the
granite pedestal of the science of the sages, the voracious
and silent monster whose invariable form expresses the one
dogma of the great universal mystery. How is the tetrad
changed into the duad and explained by the triad ? In more
common but more emblematic terms, what is that animal
which in the morning has four feet, two at noon, and three
in the evening? Philosophically speaking, how does the
doctrine of elementary forces produce the dualism of Zo¬
roaster, while it is summed by the triad of Pythagoras and
Plato ? What is the ultimate reason of allegories and num¬
bers, the final message of all symbolisms? Oedipus replies
with a simple and terrible word which destroys the sphinx
and makes the diviner King of Thebes; the answer to the
enigma is Man! . . . Unfortunate! He has seen too
much, and yet with insufficient clearness; he must presently
expiate his calamitous and imperfect clairvoyance by a vol¬
untary blindness, and then vanish in the midst of a storm,
like all civilisations which may at any time divine the answer
to the riddle of the sphinx without grasping its whole im¬
port and mystery. Everything is symbolical and trans¬
cendental in this titanic epic of human destinies. The two
hostile brethren express the second part of the grand mys¬
tery divinely completed by the sacrifice of Antigone; then
comes the last war; the brethren slay one another, Capaneus
is destroyed by the lightning which he defies, Amphiaraiis
is swallowed by the earth, and all these are so many alle¬
gories which, by their truth and their grandeur, astonish
those who can penetrate their triple hieratic sense. H^schy-
lus, annotated by Ballanche, gives only a weak notion con-

16                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


cerning them, whatever the primeval sublimities of the Greek
poet or the beauty of the French critic.
   The secret book of antique initation was not unknown to
Homer, wTio outlines its plan and chief figures on the shield
of Achilles, with minute precision. But the gracious fictions
of Homer replaced speedily in the popular memory the sim¬
ple and abstract truths of primeval revelation. Humanity
clung to the form and allowed the idea to be forgotten;
signs lost power in their multiplication; magic also at this
period became corrupted, and degenerated with the sorcerers
of Thessaly into the most profane enchantments. The crime
of Oedipus brought forth its deadly fruits, and the science
of good and evil erected evil into a sacrilegious divinity.
Men, weary of the light, took refuge in the shadow of bodily
substance; the dream of the void, which is filled by God,
soon appeared to be greater than God himself in their eyes,
and thus hell wras created.
   When, in the course of this work, we make use of the
consecrated terms God, Heaven, and Hell, let it be thor¬
oughly understood, once for all, that our meaning is as far
removed from that which the profane attach to them as ini¬
tiation is distant from vulgar thought. God, for us, is the
Azot of the sages, the efficient and final principle of the
great work.
   Returning to the fable of Oedipus, the crime of the King
of Thebes was that he failed to understand the sphinx, that
he destroyed the scourge of Thebes without being pure
enough to complete the expiation in the name of his people.
The plague, in consequence, avenged speedily the death of
the monster, and the King of Thebes, forced to abdicate,
sacrificed himself to the terrible names of the sphinx, more
alive and voracious than ever when it had passed from the
domain of form into that of idea. Oedipus divined what
was man and he put out his own eyes because he did not
see what wras God. He divulged half of the great arcanum,
and, to save his people, it was necessary for him to bear

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    17

the remaining half of the terrible secret into exile and the
tomb.
  After the colossal fable of Oedipus we find the gracious
poem of Psyche, which was certainly not invented by
Apuleius. The great magical arcanum reappears here un¬
der the figure of a mysterious union between a god and a
weak mortal abandoned alone and naked on a rock. Psyche
must remain in ignorance of the secret of her ideal royalty,
and if she behold her husband she must lose him. Here
Apuleius commentates and interprets Moses, but did not
the Elohim of Israel and the gods of Apuleius both issue
from the sanctuaries of Memphis and Thebes? Psyche is
the sister of Eve, or, rather, is Eve spiritualised. Both
desire to know and lose innocence for the honour of the
ordeal. Both deserve to go down into hell, one to bring
back the antique box of Pandora, the other to find and to
crush the head of the old serpent, who is the symbol of time
and of evil. Both are guilty of the crime which must be
expiated by the Prometheus of ancient days and the Luci¬
fer of the Christian legend, the one delivered, the other
overcome, by Hercules and by the Saviour. The great
magical secret is, therefore, the lamp and dagger of Psyche,
the apple of Eve, the sacred fire of Prometheus, the burning
sceptre of Lucifer, but it is also the holy cross of the Re¬
deemer. To be acquainted writh it sufficiently to abuse or
divulge it is to deserve all sufferings; to know it as one
should know it, namely, to make use of and conceal it, is
to be master of the absolute.
   Everything is contained in a single word, which consists
of four letters; it is the Tetragram of the Hebrews, the
Azot of the alchemists, the Thot of the Bohemians, or
the Taro of the Kabbalists. This word, expressed after so
many manners, means God for the profane, man for the
philosophers, and imparts to the adepts the final word of
human sciences and the key of divine power; but he only
can use it who understands the necessity of never revealing
it. Had Oedipus, instead of killing the sphinx, overcome

18                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


it, harnessed it to his chariot, and thus entered Theb6s, he
would have been king without incest, without misfortunes,
and without exile. Had Psyche, by meekness and affection,
persuaded Love to reveal himself, she would never have lost
Love. Now, Love is one of the mythological images of the
great secret and the great agent, because it at once expresses
an action and a passion, a void and a plenitude, a shaft and
a wound. The initiates will understand me, and, on account
of the profane, I must not speak more clearly.
   After the marvellous Golden Ass of Apuleius, we find no
more magical epics. Science, conquered in Alexandria by
the fanaticism of the murderers of Hypatia, became Chris¬
tian, or, rather, concealed itself under Christian veils with
Ammonius, Synesius, and the pseudonymous author of the
books of Dionysius the Areopagite. In such times it was
needful to excuse miracles by the garb of superstition and
science by an unintelligible language. Hieroglyphic writing
was revived; pantacles and characters were invented to
summarise an entire doctrine by a sign, a whole sequence
of tendencies and revelations in a word. What was the end
of the aspirants to knowledge ? They sought the secret of
the great work, or the philosophical stone, or the perpetual
motion, or the quadrature of the circle, or the universal
medicine—formulas which often saved them from persecu¬
tion and hatred by causing them to be taxed with madness,
and all signifying one of the phases of the great magical
secret, as we shall shew later on. This absence of epics
continues till our Romance of the Rose; but the rose-symbol,
which expresses also the mysterious and magical sense of
Dante’s poem, is borrowed from the transcendent Kabbalah,
and it is time that we should have recourse to this immense
and concealed source of universal philosophy.
    The Bible, with all its allegories, gives expression to the
religious knowledge of the Hebrews in only an incomplete
and veiled manner. The book which we have mentioned,
the hieratic characters of which we shall explain subse¬
 quently, that book which William Postel names the Genesis

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     19

of Enoch, certainly existed before Moses and the prophets,
whose doctrine, fundamentally identical with that of the
ancient Egyptians, had also its exotericism and its veils.
When Moses spoke to the people, says the sacred book al¬
legorically, he placed a veil over his face, and he removed
it when addressing God; this accounts for the alleged Bib¬
lical absurdities which so exercised the satirical powers of
Voltaire. The books were only writen as memorials of
tradition, and in symbols that were unintelligible for the
profane. The Pentateuch and the poems of the prophets
were, moreover, elementary works, alike in doctrine, eth¬
ics, and liturgy; the true secret and traditional philos¬
ophy was not committed to writing until a later period,
and under veils even less transparent. Thus arose a second
and unknown Bible, or rather one which was not compre¬
hended by Christians, a storehouse, so they say, of monstrous
absurdities, for, in this case, believers, confounded in the
same ignorance, speak the language of sceptics; a monu¬
ment, as we affirm, which comprises all that philosophical
genius and religious genius have ever accomplished or imag¬
ined in the order of the sublime; a treasure encompassed by
thorns; a diamond concealed in a rude and opaque stone:
our readers will have already guessed that we refer to the
Talmud. How strange is the destiny of the Jews, those
scapegoats, martyrs, and saviours of the world, a people
full of vitality, a bold and hardy race, which persecutions
have always preserved intact, because it has not yet accom¬
plished its mission! Do not our apostolical traditions de¬
clare that, after the decline of faith among the Gentiles, sal¬
vation shall again come forth out of the house of Jacob, and
that then the crucified Jew who is adored by the Christians
will give the empire of the world into the hands of God his
Father ?
   On penetrating into the sanctuary of the Kabbalah one
is seized with admiration at the sight of a doctrine so logi¬
cal, so simple, and, at the same time, so absolute. The es¬
sential union of ideas and signs; the consecration of the

20                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


most fundamental realities by primitive characters; the trin¬
ity of words, letters, and numbers; a philisophy simple as
the alphabet, profound and infinite as the Word; theorems
more complete and luminous than those of Pythagoras; a
theology which may be summed up on the fingers; an infinite
which can be held in the hollow of an infant’s hand; ten
figures and twenty-two letters, a triangle, a square, and a
circle; these are the entire elements of the Kabbalah. These
are the component principles of the written Word, reflec¬
tion of that spoken Word which created the world! All
truly dogmatic religions have issued from the Kabbalah and
return therein; whatsoever is grand or scientific in the re¬
ligious dreams of all the illuminated, Jacob Boehme, Swed¬
enborg, Saint Martin, &c., is borrowed from the Kabbalah;
all masonic associations owe to it their secrets and their sym¬
bols. The Kabbalah alone consecrates the alliance of univer¬
sal reason and the divine Word; it establishes, by the coun¬
terpoise of two forces apparently opposed, the eternal bal¬
ance of being; it only reconciles reason with faith, power
with liberty, science with mystery; it has the keys of the
present, past and future!
   To become initiated into the Kabbalah, it is insufficient
to read and to meditate upon the writings of Reuchlin,
Galatinus, Kircher, or Picus de Mirandola; it is necessary
to study and to understand the Hebrew writers in the col¬
lection of Pistorius, the Septer Jetzirah above all; it is nec¬
essary also to master the great book Zohar, read attentively
in the collection of 1684, entitled Kabbala Denudata, the
treatise of Kabbalistic Pneumatics, and that of the Revolu¬
tion of Souls; and afterwards to enter boldly into the lumi¬
nous darkness of the whole dogmatic and allegorical body
of the Talmud. Then we shall be in a position to under¬
stand William Postel, and can admit secretly that apart
from his very premature and over-generous dreams about
the emancipation of women, this celebrated, learned, illumi¬
nated man could not have been so mad as is pretended by
those who have not read him.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                       21

   We have sketched rapidly the history of occult philoso¬
phy ; we have indicated its sources and analysed in a few
words its principal books. This work refers only to the
science, but magic, or, rather, magical power, is composed
of two things, a science and a force; without the force the
science is nothing, or, rather, it is a danger. To give knowl¬
edge to power alone, such is the supreme law of initiations.
Hence did the Great Revealer say:11 The kingdom of heaven
suff ereth violence, and the violent only shall carry it away.’ 9
The door of truth is closed like the sanctuary of a virgin; he
must be a man who would enter. All miracles are pro¬
mised to faith, and what is faith except the audacity of a
will which does not hesitate in the darkness, but advances
towards the light in spite of all ordeals, and surmounting all
obstacles? It is unnecessary to repeat here the history of
ancient initiations; the more dangerous and terrible they
were, the greater was their efficacy. Hence, in those days,
the world had men to govern and instruct it. The sacerdotal
art and the royal art consisted above all in ordeals of
courage, discretion, and will. It was a novitiate similar to
that of those priests who, under the name of Jesuits, are so
unpopular at the present day, but would govern the world,
notwithstanding, had they a truly wise and intelligent chief.
   After passing our life in the search after the absolute in
religion, science, and justice; after turning in the circle of
Faust, we have reached the primal doctrine and the first
book of humanity. There we pause, there we have discov¬
ered the. secret of human omnipotence and indefinite prog¬
ress, the key of all symbolisms, the first and final doctrine,
and we have come to understand what was meant by that
expression so often made use of in the Gospel—the King¬
dom of God.
   To provide a fixed point as a fulcrum for human activity
is to solve the problem of Archimedes by realising the ap¬
plication of his famous lever. This it is which was accom¬
plished by the great initators who have electrified the world,
and they could not have done so except by means of the

22                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


great and incommunicable secret. However, as a guarantee
of its renewed youth, the symbolical phoenix never reap¬
peared before the eyes of the world without having solemnly
consumed the remains and evidences of his previous life. It
is thus that Moses caused all those to perish in the desert
who could have known Egypt and her mysteries; thus, at
Ephesus, St. Paul burnt all books which treated of the oc¬
cult sciences; thus, finally, the French Revolution, daughter
of the great Johannite Orient and the ashes of the Tem¬
plars, spoliated the churches and blasphemed the allegories
of the divine cultus. But all doctrines and all revivals pro¬
scribe magic, and condemn its mysteries to the flames and
to oblivion. The reason is that each cultus or philosophy
which comes into the world is a Benjamin of humanity which
lives by the death of its mother; it is because the symbolical
serpent seems ever devouring its own tail; it is because, as
essential condition of existence, a void is necessary to every
plenitude, space for every dimension, an affirmation for
each negation; it is the eternal realisation of the phoenix
allegory.
  Two illustrious scholars have already preceded me along
the path I am travelling, but they have, so to speak, spent
the dark night therein. I refer to Yolney, and Dupuis, to
Dupuis above all, whose immense erudition has produced
only a negative work, for in the origin of all religions he
has seen nothing but astronomy, taking thus the symbolic
cycle for doctrine and the calendar for legend. He was
deficient in one branch of knowledge, that of true magic,
which comprises the secrets of the Kabbalah. Dupuis passed
through the antique sanctuaries like the prophet Ezekiel
over the plain strewn with bones, and only understood
death, for want of that word which collects the virtue of
the four winds, and can make a living people of all the vast
ossuary, by crying to the ancient symbols: “Arise! Take up
a new form and walk! ’ ’ Hence the hour has come when
we must have the boldness to attempt what no one has dared
to perform previously. Like Julian, we would rebuild the

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     23

 temple, and in so doing we do not believe that we shall be
 belying a wisdom that we adore, which also Julian would
 himself have been worthy to adore, had the rancorous and
 fanatical doctors of his period permitted him to understand
 it. For us the temple has two pillars, on one of which Chris¬
tianity has inscribed its name. We have, therefore, no wish
to attack Christianity; far from it, we seek to explain and
 accomplish it. Intelligence and will have alternately exer¬
cised their powTer in the world; religion and philosophy are
still at war in our own days, but they must end by agreeing.
 The provisional object of Christianity was to establish, by
 obedience and faith, a supernatural or religious equality
 among men, and to immobilise intelligence by faith, so as
to provide a fulcrum for virtue which came for the destruc¬
tion of the aristocracy of science, or rather, to replace that
aristocracy already destroyed. Philosophy, on the contrary,
 has laboured to bring back men by liberty and reason to
natural inequality, and to substitute astuteness for virtue by
inaugurating the reign of industry. Neither of the two
 operations has proved complete and adequate, neither has
brought men to perfection and felicity. What is now
 dreamed, almost without daring to hope for it, is an alliance
between these two forces so long regarded as contrary, and
there is good ground for desiring their union, for these two
great powers of the human soul are no more opposed to one
another than the sex of man is opposed to that of woman;
undoubtedly they differ, but their apparently contrary dis¬
positions come only from their aptitude to meet and unite.
    * ‘ There is no less proposed, therefore, than an universal
solution of all problems ? ’ ’
    No doubt, since we are concerned with explaining the
philosophical stone, perpetual motion, the secret of the great
work and of the universal medicine. We shall be accused
of insanity, like the divine Paracelsus, or of charlatanism,
like the great and unfortunate Agrippa. If the pyre of
Urban Grandier be extinguished, the sullen proscriptions of
silence and of calumny remain. We do not brave but are

24                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


resigned to them. We have not sought ourselves the pub¬
lication of this book, and we believe that if the time be come
to produce speech, it will be produced by us or by others.
We shall therefore remain calm and wait.
   Our work has two parts; in the one we establish the
Kabbalistic and magical doctrine in its entirety; the other
is consecrated to the cultus, that is, to ceremonial magic.
The one is that which the ancient sages termed the clavicle,
the other that which rural people still call the grimoire.
The numbers and subjects of the chapters, which correspond
in both parts, are in no sense arbitrary, and are all indicated
in the great universal key, of which we give for the first
time a complete and adequate explanation. Let this work
now go its way where it wills, and become what Providence
determines; it is finished, and we believe it to be enduring,
because it is strong, like all that is reasonable and
conscientious.
                                         ELIPHAS LEVI.



                            The
Doctrine of Transcendent Magic

                            1 x A

                    THE CANDIDATE

                 DISCIPLINA ENSOPH KETER


When a philosopher adopted as the basis for a new apoca¬
lypse of human wisdom the axiom: ‘‘I think, therefore I
am/’ in a measure he unconsciously altered, from the stand¬
point of Christian revelation, the old conception of the Su¬
preme Being. I am that I am, said the Being of beings of
Moses. I am he who thinks, says the man of Descartes, and
to think being to speak inwardly, this man may affirm like
the God of St. John the Evangelist: I am he in whom and
by whom the word manifests—In principio erat verbum.
Now, what is a principle ? It is a groundwork of speech, it
is a reason for the existence of the word. The essence of
the word is in the principle; the principle is that which is;
intelligence is a principle which speaks. What, further, is
intellectual light? It is speech. What is revelation? It
is also speech; being is the principle, speech is the means,
and the plenitude or development and perfection of being is
the end. To speak is to create. But to say: ‘ ‘ I think, there¬
fore I exist,” is to argue from consequence to principle,
and certain contradictions which have been adduced by a
great writer, Lamennais, have abundantly proved the philo¬
sophical imperfection of this method. I am, therefore some¬
thing exists—would appear to us a more primitive and sim-
                               27

28                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


pie foundation for experimental philosophy. I am, there¬
fore being exists. Ego sum qui sum—such is the first reve¬
lation of God in man and of man in the world, while it is
also the first axiom of occult philosophy.     NtSHKiTH
       Being is being. Hence this philosophy, having that
which is for its principle, is in no sense hypothesis or guess¬
work.
   Mercurius Trismegistus begins his admirable symbol,
known under the name of the Emerald Table, by this three¬
fold affirmation: It is true, it is certain without error, it is
of all truth. Thus, in physics, the true confirmed by ex¬
perience ; in philosophy, certitude purged from any alloy of
error; in the domain of religion or the infinite, absolute
truth indicated by analogy; such are the first necessities of
true science, and magic only can impart these to its adepts.
   But you, before all things, who are you, thus taking this
work in your hands and proposing to read it? On the
pediment of a temple consecrated by antiquity to the God
of Light was an inscription of two words: “Know thyself.”
I impress the same counsel on every man when he seeks to
approach science. Magic, which the men of old denominated
the sanctum regnum, the holy kingdom, or kingdom of God,
regnum Dei, exists only for kings and for priests. Are you
priests? Are you kings? The priesthood of magic is not
a vulgar priesthood, and its royalty enters not into competi¬
tion with the princes of this world. The monarchs of science
are the priests of truth, and their sovereignty is hidden from
the multitude like their prayers and sacrifices. The kings
of science are men who know the truth and the truth has
made free, according to the specific promise given by the
most mighty of the initiators.
   The man who is enslaved by his passions or worldly pre¬
judices can in no wise be initiated; he must alter or he will
never attain; hence he cannot be an adept, for the word
signifies a person who has attained by will and by work.
The man who loves his own opinions and fears to part with
them, who suspects new truths, who is unprepared to doubt

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      29

everything rather than admit anything on chance, should
close this book; for him it is useless and dangerous; he will
fail to understand it, and it will trouble him, while if he
should divine its meaning, it will be a still greater source of
disquietude. If you hold by anything in the world more
than by reason, truth, and justice; if your will be uncertain
and vacillating, either in good or evil; if logic alarm you,
or the naked truth make you blush; if you are hurt when
accepted errors are assailed; condemn this work straight
away; do not read it; let it cease to exist for you; but at
the same time do not cry it down as dangerous. The secrets
which it records will be understood by an elect few, and
will be held back by those who understand them. Shew
light to the birds of the night-time, and you hide their light;
it is the light which blinds them, and for them is more dark
than the darkness. I shall therefore speak clearly and make
known everything, with the firm conviction that initiates
alone, or those who deserve initiation, will read all and
understand in part.
   There is a true and a false science, a divine magic and
an infernal magic—in other words, one which is delusive
and darksome; it is our task to reveal the one and to un¬
veil the other, to distinguish the magician from the sorcerer,
and the adept from the charlatan. The magician avails
himself of a force which he knows, the sorcerer seeks to
abuse a force which he does not understand. If it be
possible in a scientific work to employ a term so vulgar and
so discredited, then the devil gives himself to the magician
and the sorcerer gives himself to the devil. The magician
is the sovereign pontiff of nature, the sorcerer is her pro-
faner only. The sorcerer bears the same relation to the
magician that a superstitious and fanatical person bears to
a truly religious man.
   Before advancing further let us tersely define magic.
Magic is the traditional science of the secrets of nature
which has been transmitted to us from the magi. By means
of this science the adept becomes invested with a species

30                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


of relative omnipotence and can operate superhumanly—
that is, after a manner which transcends the normal pos¬
sibility of men. Thereby many celebrated hierophants,
such as Mercurius Trismegistus, Osiris, Orpheus, Apol¬
lonius of Tyana, and others whom it might be danger¬
ous or unwise to iname, came after their death to be adored
and invoked as gods. Thereby others also, according to
that ebb-and-flow of opinion which is responsible for the
caprices of success, became emissaries of infernus or sus¬
pected adventures, like the emperor Julian, Apuleius, the
enchanter Merlin, and that arch-sorcerer, as he was termed
in his day, the illustrious and unfortunate Cornelius
Agrippa.
    To attain the sanctum regnnm, in other words, the
knowledge and power of the magi, there are four indis¬
pensable conditions—an intelligence illuminated by study,
an intrepidity which nothing can check, a will which noth¬
ing can break, and a discretion which nothing can corrupt
 and nothing intoxicate. To know, to dare, to will, to
keep silence—such are the four words of the magus, in¬
 scribed upon the four symbolical forms of the sphinx.
 These four words can be combined after four manners, and
 explained four times by one another.*
    On the first page of the Book of Hermes the adept
 is depicted with a large hat, which, if turned down, would
 conceal his entire head. One hand is extended towards
 heaven, which he seems to command with his rod, while
the other is placed upon his breast; before him are the chief
 symbols or instruments of science, and he has others hid¬
 den in a juggler’s wallet. His body and arms form the let¬
 ter Aleph, the first of the alphabet which the Jews bor¬
 rowed from the Egyptians; to this symbol we shall have
 occasion to recur later on.
    The magus is truly what the Hebrew Kabbalists call the
 Microprosopus, that is, the creator of the little world. The

                    * See the Tarot cards.

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                       31


 first of all magical sciences being the knowledge of one’s
 self, so is one’s own creation first of all works of science;
 it contains the others, and is the principle of the great
work. The term, however, requires explanation. Supreme
reason being the sole invariable and consequently imperish¬
able principle—what we term death being change—hence
the intelligence which cleaves closely to this principle and,
in a manner, identifies itself therewith, does hereby make
itself unchangeable, and, as a result, immortal. To cleave
invariably to reason, it will be understood that it is neces¬
sary to attain independence of all those forces which by
their fatal and inevitable movement produce the alternatives
of life and death. To know how to suffer, to forbear, and to
die—such are the first secrets which place us beyond reach
of affliction, the desires of the flesh, and the fear of annihila¬
tion. The man who seeks and finds a glorious death has
faith in immortality and universal humanity believes in it
with him and for him, raising altars and statues to his
memory in token of eternal life.
    Man becomes king of the brutes only by subduing or
taming them; otherwise he will be their victim or slave.
Brutes are the type of our passions; they are the instinctive
forces of nature. The world is a field of battle where liberty
struggles with inertia by the opposition of active force.
Physical laws are millstones; if you cannot be the miller
you must be the grain. You are called to be king of
the air, water, earth, and fire; but to reign over these four
animals of symbolism, it is necessary to conquer and en¬
chain them. He who aspires to be a sage and to know the
great enigma of nature must be the heir and despoiler of
the sphinx; his the human head in order to possess speech,
his the eagle’s wings in order to scale the heights; his the
bull’s flanks in order to furrow the depths, his the lion’s
talons to make a way on the right and the left, before and
behind.
  You, therefore, who seek initiation, are you learned as
Faust? Are you insensible as Job? No, is it not so?

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


But you may become equal to both if you will. Have you
overcome the vortices of vague thoughts ? Are you without
indecision or capriciousness? Do you consent to pleasure
only when you will, and do you wish for it only when you
should? No, is it not so? Not invariably at least, but
it may become so if you choose. The sphinx has not only a
man’s head, it has woman’s breasts; do you know how to
resist feminine charms? No, is it not so? And you laugh
outright in replying, vaunting your moral weakness for the
glorification of your physical and vital force. Be it so; I
allow you to render this homage to the ass of Sterne or
Apuleius. The ass has its merit, I agree; it was consecrated
to Priapus as was the goat to the god of Mendes. But
take it for what it is worth, and decide whether ass or man
shall be master. (He alone can possess truly the pleasure
of love who has conquered the love of pleasure. To be
able and to forbear is to be twice able. Woman enchains
you by your desires; master your desires and you will en¬
chain her. J The greatest injury that can be inflicted on a
man is to call him a coward. Now, what is a cowardly
person? One who neglects his moral dignity in order to
obey blindly the instincts of nature. As a fact, in the
presence of danger it is natural to be afraid and seek flight;
why, then, is it shameful? Because honour has erected it
into a law that we must prefer our duty to our inclinations
or fears. What is honour from this point of view? It is
universal presentience of immortality and appreciation of
the means which can lead to it. The last trophy which
man can* win from death is to triumph over the appetite for
life, not by despair, but by a more exalted hope, which is
contained in faith, for all that is noble and honest, by the
undivided consent of the world. To learn self-conquest is
therefore to learn life, and the austerities of stoicism were
no vain parade of freedom! To yield to the forces of
nature is to follow the stream of collective life, and to be
the slave of secondary causes. To resist and subdue nature
is to make one’s self a personal and imperishable life; it is

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     33

to break free from the vicissitudes of life and death. Every
man who is prepared to die rather than renounce truth and
justice is most truly living, for immortality abides in his
soul. To find or to form such men was the end of all
ancient initiations. Pythagoras disciplined his pupils by
silence and all kinds of self-denial; candidates in Egypt
were tried by the four elements; and we know the self-
inflicted austerities of fakirs and brahmans in India for
attaining the kingdom of free will and divine independence.
All macerations of asceticism are borrowed from the initia¬
tions of ancient mysteries; they have ceased because those
qualified for initiation, no longer finding initiators, and
the leaders of conscience becoming in the lapse of time
as uninstructed as the vulgar, the blind have grown weary
of following the blind, and no one has cared to pass through
ordeals the end of which was now only in doubt and des¬
pair; for the path of light was lost. To succeed in per¬
forming something we must know what it is proposed to do,
or at least must have faith in some one who does know it.
But shall I stake my life on a venture, or follow someone at
chance who himself knows not where he is going?
    We must not set out rashly along the path of the trans¬
cendent sciences, but, once started, we must reach the end
or perish. To doubt, is to become a fool; to pause is to
 fall; to recoil is to cast one’s self into an abyss. You,
therefore, who are undertaking the study of this book, if
you persevere with it to the close and understand it, it will
 make you either a monarch or a madman. Do what you
 will with the volume, you will be unable to despise or to
 forget it. If you are pure, it will be your light; if strong,
your arm; if holy, your religion; if wise, the rule of your
 wisdom. But if you are wicked, for you it will be an
 infernal torch; it will lacerate your breast like a poniard;
 it will rankle in your memory like a remorse; it will people
 your imagination with chimeras, and will drive you through
 folly to despair. You will endeavour to laugh at it, and
 will only gnash your teeth; this book will be the file in the

34                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


fable which the serpent tried to bite, but it destroyed all his
teeth.
   Let us now enter on the series of initiations. I have
said that revelation is the word. As a fact, the word, or
speech, is the veil of being and the characteristic sign of
life. Every form is the veil of a word, because the idea
which is the mother of the word is the sole reason for the
existence of forms. Every figure is a character, every char¬
acter derives from and returns into a word. For this reason
the ancient sages, of whom Trismegistus is the organ, formu¬
lated their sole dogma in these terms:—“That which is
above is like that which is below, and that which is below
is like that which is above.” In other words, the form is
proportional to the idea; the shadow is the measure of the
body calculated with its relation to the luminous ray; the
scabbard is as deep as the sword is long; the negation is
in proportion to the contrary affirmation; production is
equal to destruction in the movement which preserves life;
 and there is no point in infinite space which may not be
 regarded as the centre of a circle having an extending
 circumference indefinitely receding into space. , Every in¬
 dividuality is, therefore, indefinitely perfectible, since the
 moral order is analogous to the physical, and since we
 cannot conceive any point as unable to dilate, increase, and
 radiate in a philosophically infinite circle. What can be
 affirmed of the soul in its totality may be affirmed of each
 faculty of the soul. The intelligence and will of man are
 instruments of incalculable power and capacity. But in¬
 telligence and will possess as their help-mate and instrument
 a faculty which is too imperfectly known, the omnipotence
 of which belongs exclusively to the domain of magic. I
 speak of the imagination, which the Kabbalists term the
 Diaphane, or the Translucid. Imagination, in effect, is like
 the souFs eye; therein forms are outlined and preserved;
 thereby we behold the reflections of the invisible world; it
 is the glass of visions and the apparatus of magical life; by
its intervention we heal diseases, modify the seasons, drive

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     35

death away from the living, and raise the dead to life, be¬
cause it is the imagination which exalts the will and gives
it a hold upon the universal agent. Imagination determines
the shape of the child in its mother’s womb, and decides
the destiny of men; it lends wings to contagion, and directs
the weapons of warfare.         Are you exposed in battle ?
Believe yourself to be invulnerable, like Achilles, and you
will be so, says Paracelsus. Fear attracts bullets, but they \
are repelled by courage. It is well known that persons with
amputated limbs feel pain in the very members which they
possess no longer. Paracelsus operated upon living blood by
medicating the product of a bleeding; he cured headache
at a distance by treating hair cut from the patient. By
the science of the imaginary unity and solidarity of all
parts of the body, he anticipated and outstripped all the
theories, or rather all the experiences, of our most celebrated
magnetisers. Hence his cures were miraculous, and to his
name of Philip Theophrastus Bombast, he deserved the ad¬
dition of Aureolus Paracelsus, with the further epithet of
divine!
   Imagination is the instrument of the adaptation of the
word. Imagination applied to reason is genius. Reason is
one, as genius is one, in the multiplicity of its works. There
is one principle, there is one truth, there is one reason,
there is one absolute and universal philosophy. Whatso¬
ever is subsists in unity considered as beginning, and re¬
turns into unity considered as end. One is in one; that is to
say, all is in all. Unity is the principle of numbers; it is
also the principle of motion, and, consequently, of life. The
entire human body is summed up in the unity of a single
organ, which is the brain. All religions are summed up in
the unity of a single dogma, which is the affirmation of
being and its equality with itself, which constitutes its
mathematical value. There is only one dogma in magic, and
it is this:—The visible is the manifestation of the invisible,
or, in other terms, the perfect word, in things appreciable
and visible, bears an exact proportion to the things which
are inappreciable by our senses and unseen by our eyes.

36                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


The magus uplifts one hand towards heaven and points
down the other to earth, and he says: “Above, immensity:
Below, immensity still! Immensity equals immensity.”—
This is true in things seen as in things unseen.
   The first letter in the alphabet of the sacred language,
Aleph, N, represents a man extending one hand towards
heaven and the other to earth. It is an expression of the
active principle in everything; it is creation in heaven
corresponding to the omnipotence of the word below. This
letter is a pantacle in itself, that is, a character expressing
the universal science. It is supplementary to the sacred
signs of the Macrocosm and the Microcosm; it explains the
masonic double-triangle and the five-pointed blazing star;
for the word is one and revelation is one. By endowing
man with reason, God gave him speech; and revelation,
manifold in its forms but one in its principle, consists
entirely in the universal word, the interpreter of the ab¬
solute reason. This is the significance of that term so much
misconstrued, catholicity, which, in modern hieratic lan¬
guage, means infallibility. The universal in reason is the
absolute, and the absolute is the infallible. If absolute
reason impelled universal society to believe irresistibly the
utterance of a child, that child would be infallible by the
ordination of God and of all humanity. Faith is nothing
else but reasonable confidence in this unity of reason and in
this universality of the word. To believe is to place con¬
fidence in that which we as yet do not know when reason
assures us beforehand of ultimately knowing or at least
recognising it. Absurd are the so-called philosophers who
cry, ‘ ‘ I will never believe in a thing which I do not know!’9
 Shallow reasoners! If you knew, would you need to believe ?
   But must I believe on chance, and apart from reason?
Certainly not. Blind and haphazard belief is superstition
and folly. We may believe in causes which reason compels
us to admit on the evidence of effects known and appre¬
ciated by science. Science! Great word and great prob¬
lem! What is science? We shall answer in the second
chapter of this book.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     37




           THE PILLARS OF THE TEMPLE

                CHOCHMAH      DOMUS    GNOSIS

Science   is the absolute and complete possession of truth.
Hence have the sages of all the centuries trembled before
such an absolute and terrible word; they have hesitated to
arrogate to themselves the first privilege of divinity by
assuming the possession of science, and have been contented,
instead of the verb to know, with that which expresses
cognisance, while, instead of the word science, they have
adopted that of gnosis, which represents simply the notion
of learning by intuition. What, in fact, does man know?
Nothing, and at the same time he is allowed to ignore noth¬
ing. Devoid of knowledge, he is called upon to know all.
Now, knowledge supposes the duad—a being who knows and
an object known. The duad is the generator of society
and of law; it is also the number of the gnosis. The duad
is unity multiplying itself in order to create, and hence in
sacred symbolism Eve issues from the inmost bosom of
Adam. Adam is the human tetragram, summed up in the
mysterious Jod, type of the Kabbalistic phallus. By add¬
ing to this Jod the triadic name of Eve, the name of Jehova
is formed, which is eminently the Kabbalistic and magical
word,        which the high-priest in the temple pronounced
Jodcheva. So unity complete in the fruitfulness of the
triad forms therewith the tetrad, which is the key of all
numbers, of all movements, and of all forms. By a revo¬
lution about its own centre, the square produces a circle
equal to itself, and this is the quadrature of the circle, the
circular movement of four equal angles around the same
point.
  “That which is above equals that which is below,’’ says
Hermes. Here then is the duad serving as the measure of

38                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


unity, and the relation of equality between above and below
forms with these the triad. The created principle is the
ideal phallus; the created principle is the formal eteis.
The insertion of the vertical phallus into the horizontal eteis
forms the stauros of the Gnostics, or the philosophical cross
of masons. Thus, the intersection of two produces four,
which, by its movement, defines the circle with all degrees
thereof.
   ^ is man; ^ is woman; 1 is the principle; 2 is the
word; A is the active; B is the passive; the monad is
Bohas; the duad is Jakin. In the trigrams of Fohi, unity
is the yang and the duad is the yin.




                         yang     yin

Bohas and Jakin are the names of the two symbolical pillars
without the chief door of Solomon’s Kabbalistic temple.
In the Kabbalah these pillars explain all mysteries of an¬
tagonism, whether natural, political, or religious, and they
explain also the procreative struggle between the man and
the woman, for, according to the law of nature, the woman
must resist the man, and he must entice or overcome her.
The active principle seeks the passive principle, the plenum
desires the void, the serpent’s jaw attracts the serpent’s
tail, and in turning upon himself, he, at the same time,
flies and pursues himself. Woman is the creation of man,
and universal creation is the bride of the First Principle.
   When the Supreme Being became a creator, he erected a
jod or a phallus, and to provide a place in the fulness of
the uncreated light, it was necessary to hollow out a eteis or
trench of shadow equivalent to the dimension determined
by his creative desire, and attributed by him to the ideal
jod of the radiating light. Such is the mysterious language
of the Kabbalists in the Talmud, and on account of vulgar

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      39

ignorance and malignity, it is impossible for us to explain
or simplify it further. What then, is the creation ? It is
the mansion of the creative Word. What is the cteis? It
is the mansion of the phallus. What is the nature of the
active principle? To diffuse. What is that of the passive?
To gather in and to fructify. What it man? He who
initiates, who bruises, who labours, who sows. What is
woman? She who forms, reunites, irrigates, and harvests.
Man wages war, woman brings peace about; man destroys
to create, woman builds up to preserve; man is revolution,
woman is conciliation; man is the father of Cain, woman
the mother of Abel. What, moreover, is wisdom? It is
the agreement and union of two principles, the mildness of
 Abel directing the activity of Cain, man guided by the
sweet inspirations of woman, debauchery conquered by law¬
 ful marriage, revolutionary energy softened and subdued
by the gentleness of order and peace, pride subjugated by
love, science acknowledging the inspirations of faith. Then
 human science becomes wise, and submits itself to the infal¬
 libility of universal reason, instructed by love or universal
 charity. Then it can take the name of gnosis, because it
 knows at least thatl as yet it cannot boast of knowing
 perfectly.
    The monad can only manifest by the duad; unity itself
 and the notion of unity at once constitute two. The unity
 of the Macrocosm reveals itself by the two opposite points
 of two triangles. Human unity fulfils itself to right and
 left. Primitive man is androgynous. All organs of the
 human body are disposed in pairs, excepting the nose, the
 tongue, the unbilicus, and the Kabbalistic jod. Divinity,
 one in its essence, has two essential conditions as the funda¬
 mental grounds of its being—necessity and liberty. The
 laws of supreme reason necessitate and rule liberty in God,
 who is of necessity wise and reasonable.
    To make light visible God has merely hypotheticated the
 shadow.     To manifest the truth he has permitted the
 possibility of doubt. The shadow bodies forth the light,

40                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




 and the possibility of error is requisite for the temporal
 manifestation of truth. If the buckler of Satan did not
 intercept the spear of Michael, the might of the angel would
 be lost in the void or manifested by infinite destruction
launched below from above. Did not the heel of Michael
restrain Satan in his ascent, Satan would dethrone God, or
rather he would lose himself in the abysses of the altitude.
 Hence Satan is needful do Michael as the pedestal to the
statue, and Michael is necessary to Satan as the brake to
the locomotive. In analogical and universal dynamics one
leans only on that which resists,. Furthermore, the universe
is balanced by two forces which maintain it in equilibrium,
the force which attracts and that which repels. They exist
alike in physics, in philosophy, and in religion; in physics
they produce equilibrium, in philosophy criticism, in re¬
ligion progressive revelation. The ancients represented this
mystery in the conflict between Eros and Anteros, the
struggle between Jacob and the angel, and by the equilib¬
rium of the golden mountain, which gods on the one side
and demons on the other hold bound by the symbolic serpent
of India. It is also typified by the caduceus of Ilermanubis,
by the two cherubim of the ark, by the twofold sphinx of
the chariot of Osiris, and by the two seraphim, respectively
black and white. Its scientific reality is demonstrated by

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    41

the phenomena of polarity, and by the universal law of
sympathies or antipathies.
    The undiscerning disciples of Zoroaster divided the duad
without referring it to unity, thus separating the pillars of
the temple, and endeavouring to halve God. Conceive the
absolute as two, and you must immediately conceive it as
three to recover the unity principle. For this reason, the
 material elements, analogous to the divine elements, are
understood firstly as four, explained as two, and exist
 ultimately as three.
   Revelation is the duad; every word is double, and sup¬
 poses two.   The ethic which results from revelation is
founded on antagonism, which results from the duad.
 Spirit and form attract and repel one another, like sign
and idea, fiction and truth. Supreme reason necessitates
 dogma when communicating to finite intelligences, and
dogma, by its passage from the domain of ideas to that
of forms, participates in two worlds, and has inevitably two
senses speaking in succession or simultaneously, that is, to
the spirit and the flesh. So are there two forces in the
moral region, one which assaults and one which curbs and
expiates. They are represented in the mythos of Genesis
by the typical personalities of Cain and Abel.          Abel
oppresses Cain by reason of his moral superiority; Cain
to get free immortalises his brother by slaying him, and
becomes the victim of his own crime. Cain could not suffer
the life of Abel, and the blood of Abel suffers not the sleep
of Cain. In the Gospel the type of Cain is replaced by
that of the Prodigal Son, whom his father fully forgives
because he returns after having endured much.
   There is mercy and there is justice in God; to the just
He dispenses justice and to sinners mercy. In the soul of
the world, which is the universal agent, there is a current
of love and a current of wrath. This ambient and all-
penetrating fluid; this ray loosened from the sun’s splen¬
dour, and fixed by the weight of the atmosphere and the
power of central attraction; this body of the Holy Spirit,

42                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


which we term the universal agent, while it was typified by
the ancients under the symbol of a serpent devouring his
tail? this electro-magnetic ether, this vital and lumious
caloric, is depicted in archaic monuments by the girdle of
Isis, twice-folded in a love-knot round two poles, as well as
by the serpent devouring his own tail, emblematic of pru¬
dence and of Saturn. Motion and life consist in the ex¬
treme tension of two forces. “I would thou wert cold or
hot,” said the Master. As a fact, a great sinner is more
really alive than is a tepid, effeminate man, and the fulness
of his return to virtue will be in proportion to the extent
of his errors. She who is destined to crush the serpent’s
head is intelligence, which ever rises above the stream of
blind forces. The Kabbalists call her the virgin of the sea,
whose dripping feet the infernal dragon, stupefied by de¬
light, craws forward to lick with his fiery tongues. These
are the hieratic mysteries of the duad. But there is one,
and the last of all, which must not be made known, the
reason, according to Hermes Trismegistus, being the mal-
comprehension of the vulgar, who would ascribe to the neces¬
sities of science the immoral aspect of blind fatality. ‘ ‘ By
the fear of the unknown must the crowd be restrained, ’ ’ he
observes in another place, and Christ also said: “Cast not
your pearls before swine, lest, trampling them under their
feet, they turn and rend you. ’ ’ The tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, of which the fruits are death, is the type
of this hieratic secret of the duad, which could only be
misconstrued if divulged, and would lead commonly to the
unholy denial of free will, which is the principle of moral
life. It is hence in the essence of things that the revelation
of this secret means death, and it is not at the same time
the great secret of magic; but the arcanum of the duad
leads up to that of the tetrad, or more correctly proceeds
therefrom, and is resolved by the triad, which contains
the word of the enigma propounded by the sphinx, as it was
required to have been found in order to save the life, atone

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    43

for the unconscious crime, and establish the Kingdom of
CEdipus.
   In the hieroglyphic work of Hermes, the Tarot, called also
the book of Thoth, the duad is represented either by the
horns of Isis, having her head veiled and an open book
partially concealed under her mantle, or otherwise by a
sovereign lady, Juno, the Greek goddess, having one hand
uplifted towards heaven and the other pointed to earth, as
if formulating by this gesture the one and twofold dogma
which is the foundation of magic, and begins the marvellous
symbols of the Emerald Table of Hermes. In the Apoca¬
lypse of St John there is a refemce to two witnesses or
martyrs on whom prophetic tradition confers the names of
Elias and Enoch—Elias, man of faith, enthusiasm, miracle;
Enoch one with him who is called Hermes by the Egyptians,
honoured by the Phoenicians as Cadmus, author of the
sacred alphabet, and the universal key to the initiations of
the Logos, father of the Kabbalah, he who, according to the
sacred allegories, did not die like other men, but was trans¬
ported to heaven, to return at the end of time. Much the
same statement is made of St John himself, who recovered
and explained in his Apocalypse the symbolism of the word
of Enoch. This resurrection of St John and Enoch, ex¬
pected at the close of the ages of ignorance, will be the
restitution of their doctrine by the comprehension of the
Kabbalistic keys which unlock the temple of unity and
universal philosophy, too long occult, and reserved solely
for the elect, who perish at the hands of the world.
   But we have said that the reproduction of the monad by
the duad leads of necessity to the conception and dogma of
the triad, so we come now to this great number, which is
the fulness and perfect word of unity.

44                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                           3 : G
            THE TRIANGLE OF SOLOMON

            PLENITUDO VOCUS      BINAH   PHYSIS

The perfect word is the triad, because it supposes an in¬
telligent principle, a speaking principle, and a principle
spoken. The absolute, revealing itself by speech, endows
this speech with a sense equivalent to itself, and in the
understanding thereof creates itself a third time. Thus,
also, the sun manifests itself by its light, and proves or
makes this manifestation efficacious by heat.
   The triad is traced in space by the heavenly zenith, the
infinite height, connected with east and west by two straight
diverging lines. With this visible triangle reason compares
another which is invisible, but is assumed to be equal in
dimension; the abyss is its apex and its reversed base is
parallel to the horizontal line stretching from east to west,
these two triangles, combined in a single figure, which is
the six-pointed star, form the sacred symbol of Solomon’s
seal, the resplendent star of the Macrocosm. The notion
of the infinite and the absolute is expressed by this sign,
which is the grand pantacle—that is to say, the most
simple and complete abridgment of the science of all
things.
   Grammar itself attributes three persons to the verb. The
first is that which speaks, the second that which is spoken
to, and the third the object. In creating, the Infinite Prince
speaks to himself of himself. Such is the explanation of
the triad and the origin of the dogma of the Trinity. The
magical dogma is also one in three and three in one. That
which is above is like or equal to that which is below. Thus,
two things which resemble one another and the word which
signifies their resemblance make three. The triad is the
universal dogma. In magic—principle, realisation, adapta-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      45

tion; in alchemy—azoth, incorporation, transmutation; in
theology—God, incarnation, redemption; in the human soul
—thought, love and action; in the family—father, mother,
and child. The triad is the end and supreme expression of
love; we seek one another as two only to become three.
   There are three intelligible worlds which correspond one
with another by hierarchic analogy; the natural or physical,
the spiritual or metaphysical, and the divine or religious
worlds. From this principle follows the hierarchy of spirits,
divided into three orders, and again subdivided by the
triad in each of these three orders.
   All these revelations are logical deductions from the first
mathematical notions of being and number. Unity must
multiply itself in order to become active. An indivisible,
motionless, and sterile principle would be unity dead and
incomprehensible. Were God only one He would never be
creator or father. Were he two there would be antagonism
or division in the infinite, which would mean the division
also or death of all possible things. He is therefore three
for the creation by Himself and in His image of the infinite
multitude of beings and numbers. So is He truly one in
Himself and triple in our conception, which also brings us
to behold him as triple in Himself and one in our intelli¬
gence and our love. This is a mystery for the faithful, and
a logical necessity for the initiate into the absolute and real
sciences.
   The Word manifested by life is realisation or incarnation.
The life of the Word accomplishing its cyclic movement is
adaptation or redemption. This triple dogma was known
in all sanctuaries illuminated by the tradition of the sages.
Do you wish to ascertain which is the true religion? Seek
that which realises most in the divine order, which hu¬
manises God and makes man divine, which preserves the
triadic dogma intact, which clothes the Word with flesh by
making God manifest to the hands and eyes of the most
ignorant, which finally is by its doctrine suitable to all and
can adapt itself to all—the religion which is hierarchic and

46                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


cyclic, having allegories and images for children, an exalted
philosophy for grown men, sublime hopes and sweet con¬
solations for the old.
   The primeval sages, when seeking the First of Causes,
beheld good and evil in the world; they considered the
shadow and the light; they compared winter with spring,
age with youth, life with death, and their conclusion was
this: The First Cause is beneficent and severe; it gives
and takes away life. Then are there two contrary prin¬
ciples, the one good and the other evil, exclaimed the dis¬
ciples of Manes. No, the two principles of universal equilib¬
rium are not contrary, although contrasted in appearance,
for a singular wisdom opposes one to another. Good is on
the right, evil on the left, but the supreme excellence is
above both, applying evil to the victory of good and good
to the amendment of evil.
   The principle of harmony is in unity, and it is this which
imparts such power to the uneven number in magic. Now,
the most perfect of the odd numbers is three, because it is
the trilogy of unity. In the trigrams of Fohi, the superior
triad is composed of three yang, or masculine figures, be¬
cause nothing passive can be admitted into the idea of God,
considered as the principle of production in the three worlds.
For the same reason, the Christian trinity by no means
permits the personification of the mother, who is implicitly
included in that of the son. For the same reason, also, it
is contrary to the laws of hieratic and orthodox symbology
to personify the Holy Ghost under the form of a woman.
Woman comes forth from man as nature comes forth from
God; so Christ ascends Himself to heaven, and assumes the
Virgin Mother: we speak of the ascension of the Saviour,
and the assumption of the Mother of God. God, considered
as Father, has nature for his daughter; as Son, He has the
Virgin for His mother and the Church for His bride; as
Holy Spirit, He regenerates and fructifies humanity.
Hence, in the trigrams of Fohi, the three inferior yin cor¬
respond to the three superior yang, for these trigrams con-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    47

stitnte a pantacle like that of the two triangles of Solomon,
but with a triadic interpretation of the six points of the
blazing star.




  Dogma is only divine inasmuch as it is truly human—
that is to say, in so far as it sums up the highest reason of
humanity; so also the Master, whom we term the Man-
God, called Himself the Son of Man. Revelation is the
expression of belief accepted and formulated by universal
reason in the human word, on which account it is said that
the divinity is human and the humanity divine in the Man-
God. We affirm all this philosophically, not theologically,

without infringing in any way on the teaching of the
Church, which condemns, and must always condemn, magic.
Paracelsus and Agrippa did not set up altar against altar,
but bowed to the ruling religion of their time; to the elect
of science, the things of science; to the faithful, the things
of faith.
   In his hymn to the royal Sun, the Emperor Julian gives
a theory of the triad which is almost identical with that of
the illuminated Swedenborg. The sun of the divine world
is the infinite, spiritual, and uncreated light, which is ver¬
balised, so to speak, in the philosophical world, and be¬
comes the fountain of souls and of truth; then it incor¬
porates and becomes visible light in the sun of the third
world, the central sun of our suns, of which the fixed stars
are the ever-living sparkles. The Kabbalists compare the
spirit to a substance which remains fluid in the divine
medium, and under the influence of the essential light, its
exterior, however, becoming solidified, like wax, when ex¬
posed to the air in the colder realms of reasoning oy of
visible forms. These shells, envelopes petrified or cami-
fied, were such an expression possible, are the source of
errors or of evil which connect with the heaviness and

48                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


hardness of the animal envelopes. In the book “Zohar,”
and in that of the “Revolution of Souls,” perverse spirits
or evil demons are never named otherwise than as shells—
cortices. The cortices of the world of spirits are trans¬
parent, while those of the material world! are opaque.
Bodies are only temporary shells, whence souls have to be
liberated; but those which in this life obey the body com¬
pose for themselves an interior body or fluidic shell, which,
after death, becomes their prison-house and torment, until
the time arrives when they succeed in dissolving it in the
warmth of the divine light, towards which, however, the
burden of their grossness hinders them from ascending.
Indeed, they can do so only after infinite struggles, and
by the mediation of the just, who stretch forth their hands
towards them. During the whole period of the process
they are devoured by the interior activity of the captive
spirit, as in a burning furnace. Those who attain the
pyre of expiation burn themselves thereon, like Hercules
upon Mount Etna, and so are delivered from their suffer¬
ings, but the courage of the majority fails before this or¬
deal, which seems to them a second death more appalling
than the first, and so they remain in hell, which is, rightly
and actually, eternal; but therein souls are never precipi¬
tated, nor are they ever retained despite themselves.
   The three worlds correspond together by means of the
thirty-two paths of light which are the steps of the sacred
ladder; every true thought corresponds to a divine grace in
heaven and a good work on earth; every grace of God
manifests a truth, and produces one or many acts; recipro¬
cally, every act affects a truth or falsehood in the heavens,
a grace or a punishment. When a man pronounces the
tetragram—say, the Kabbalists—the nine heavens sustain
a shock, and then all spirits cry out one upon another:
“Who is it thus disturbing the kingdom of heaven?”
Then does the earth communicate unto the first heaven
the sins of the rash being who takes the Eternal Name

                      TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     49

    in vain, and the accusing word is transmitted from circle to
    circle, from star to star, and from hierarchy to hierarchy.
       Every speech possesses three senses, every act has a triple
    bearing, every form a triple idea, for the absolute cor¬
    responds from world to world by its forms. Every de¬
    termination of human will modifies nature, affects philo¬
    sophy, and is written in heaven. There are therefore two
    fatalities, the one resulting from the Uncreated Will in its
    accord with wisdom, the other from created wills according
    with the necessity of secondary causes in their correspon¬
    dence with the First Cause. There is hence nothing in¬
    different in life, and our apparently most simple resolutions
    frequently determine an incalculable series of benefits or
    evils, above all in the affinities of our diaphane with the
    great magical agent, as wTe shall explain elsewhere.
       The triad, being the fundamental principle of the whole
    Kabbalah, or sacred tradition of our fathers, was necessarily
    the fundamental dogma of Christianity, the apparent dual¬
    ism of which it explains by the intervention of a har¬
    monious and all-powerful unity. Christ did not put his
    teaching into writing, and only revealed it in secret to his
    favoured disciple, the one kabbalist, and he a great kab-
    balist, among the apostles. So is the apocalypse the book of
\   the gnosis or secret doctrine of the first Christians, the key
    of which doctrine is indicated by an occult versicle of the
    Lord’s Prayer, which the Vulgate leaves untranslated, while
    in the Greek rite, which preserves the traditions of St John,
    the priests only are permitted to pronounce it. This ver¬
    sicle, completely kabbalistic, is found in the text of the
    Gospel according to St Matthew, and in several Hebrew
    copies. The sacred word Malchuth substituted for Kether,
    which is its kabbalistic correspondent, and the balance of
    Geburah and Chesed, repeating itself in the circles or
    heavens called eons by the Gnostics, provide the keystone of
    the whole Christian temple in this occult versicle. It has
    been retained by Protestants in their New Testament, with¬
    out their recovering its lofty and wonderful meaning, which

50                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


would have unveiled to them all the mysteries of the apoca¬
lypse. But it is a tradition in the Church that the mani¬
festation of these mysteries is held over to the last times.
   Malchuth, based upon Geburah and Chesed, is the temple
of Solomon having Jakin and Bohas for its pillars; it is the
adamic doctrine founded, for the one part, on the resigna¬
tion of Abel and, for the other, on the labours and self-
reproach of Cain; it is the equilibrium of being established
on necessity and liberty, stability and motion; it is the
demonstration of the universal lever sought in vain by
Archimedes. A scholar whose whole talents were employed
in being obscure, who died without seeking to be understood,
resolved this supreme equation, discovered by him in the
Kabbalah, and was in dread of its source transpiring if he
expressed himself more clearly. We have seen one of his
disciples and admirers most indignant, perhaps in good
faith, at the suggestion that his master was a Kabbalist,
but we can state notwithstanding, to the glory of the same
learned man, that his researches have appreciably shortened
our work in the occult sciences, and that the key of the
transcendent Kabbalah above all, indicated in the arcane
versicle recently cited, has been skilfully applied to an ab¬
solute reform of all the sciences in the books of Hoene
Wronski.
   The secret virtue of the gospels is therefore contained
in three words, and these three words have established
three dogmas and three hierarchies. All science reposes
upon three principles, as the syllogism upon three terms.
There are also three distinct classes, or three original and
natural ranks, among men, who are called to advance from
the lower to the higher. The Jews term these three series
or degrees in the progress of spirits, Asiah, Jetzirah, and
Briah. The Gnostics, who were Christian Kabbalists, called
them Hyle, Psyche, and Gnosis; by the Jews the supreme
circle was named Atziluth, and by the Gnostics Pleroma.
In the tetragram, the triad, taken at the beginning of the
Word, expresses the divine copulation; taken at the end,

                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                 51


it expresses the female and maternity. Eve has a name of
three letters, but the primitive Adam is signified simply
by the letter Jod, whence Jehovah should be pronounced
Jeva, and this point takes us to the great and supreme
mystery of magic, embodied in the tetrad.

52                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                   THE TETRAGRAM

     GEBURAH CHESED      PORTA LIBRORUM      ELEMENTA

In nature there are two forces producing equilibrium, and
these three constitute a single law. Here, then, is the triad
resumed in unity, and by adding the conception of unity to
that of the triad we are brought to the tetrad, the first
square and perfect number, the source of all numerical com¬
binations and the principle of all forms. Affirmation, nega¬
tion, discussion, solution, such are the four philosophical
operations of the human mind. Discussion conciliates nega¬
tion with affirmation by rendering them necessary to each
other. In the same way, the philosophical triad, emanat¬
ing from the antagonism of the duad, is completed by
the tetrad, the four-square ground of all truth. According
to the consecrated dogma, there are three persons in God,
and these three constitute only one Deity. Three and one
provide the conception of four, because unity is required
to explain the three. Hence, in almost all languages, the
name of God consists of four letters, and in Hebrew these
four are really three, one of them being repeated twice, that
which expresses the Word and the creation of the Word.
   Two affirmations make two corresponding denials either
possible or necessary. Being is declared, nothing is not.
The affirmation as Word produces affirmation as realisation
or incarnation of the Word, and each of these affirmations
corresponds to the denial of its opposite. Thus, in the
opinion of the kabbalists, the name of the demon or of evil
is composed of the same letters as the name of God or good¬
ness, but spelt backwards. This evil is the last reflection
or imperfect mirage of light in shadow. But all which
exists, whether of good or evil, in light or darkness, exists

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     53

and manifests by the tetrad. The affirmation of unity sup¬
poses the number four, unless it turns in unity itself as in a
vicious circle. So also the triad, as we have already ob¬
served, is explained by the duad and resolved by the tetrad,
which is the squared unity of even numbers and the quad¬
rangular base of the cube, unity of construction, of solidity,
and of measure.
   The kabbalistic tetragram, Jodheva, expresses God in
humanity and humanity in God. The four astronomical
cardinal points are, relatively to us, the yea and the nay of
light—east and west—and the yea and nay of warmth—-
south and north. As we have already said, according to the
sole dogma of the Kabbalah, that which is in visible nature
reveals that which is in the domain of invisible nature, or
secondary causes are in strict proportion and analogous to
the manifestations of the First Cause. So is this First
Cause invariably revealed by the cross—that unity made up
of two, that key to the mysteries of India and Egypt, the
 Tau of the patriarchs, the divine sign of Osiris, the Stauros
of the Gnostics, the keystone of the temple, the symbol of
occult masonry; the cross, central point of the junction of
the right angles of two infinite triangles ; the cross, which
in the French language seems to be the first root and funda¬
mental substantive of the verb to believe and the verb to
grow, thus combining the conceptions of science, religion-,
and progress.
   The great magic agent manifests by four kinds of phe¬
nomena, and has been subjected to the experiments of pro¬
fane science under four names—caloric, light, electricity,
magnetism. It has also received the names of Tetragram,
Inri, Azoth, Ether, Od, Magnetic Fluid, Soul of the Earth,
Lucifer, &c. The great magic agent in the fourth emana¬
tion of the life-principle, of which the sun is the third
form—see the initiates of the school of Alexandria and the
dogma of Hermes Trismegistus. In this way the eye of the
world, as the ancients called it, is the mirage of the reflec¬
tion of God, and the soul of the earth is a permanent glance

54                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


of the sun which the earth conceives and guards by im¬
pregnation. The moon concurs in this impregnation of the
earth by reflecting a solar image during the night, so that
Hermes was right when he said of the great agent: ‘ ‘ The sun
is its father, the moon its mother. ’ ’ Then he adds: ‘ ‘ The
wind has borne it in the belly thereof, ’ ’ because the atmos¬
phere is the recipient, and, as it were, the crucible of the
solar rays, by means of which there forms that living image
of the sun which penetrates the whole earth, fructifies it,
and determines all that is produced at its surface by its
emanations and permanent currents, analogous to those of
the sun itself. This solar agent subsists by two contrary
forces—one of attraction and one of projection, whence
Hermes says that it ascends and descends eternally. The
force of attraction is always fixed at the centre of bodies,
that of projection in their outlines or at their surface. By
this dual force all is created and all preserved. Its motion
is a rolling up and an unrolling which is successive and
indefinite, or, rather, simultaneous and perpetual, by spirals
of opposite movements which never meet. It is the same
movement as that of the sun, which attracts and repels
at once all the planets of its system. To be acquainted
with the movement of this terrestrial sun in such a manner
as to be able to take advantage of its currents and direct
them, is to have accomplished the great work and to be
master of the world. Armed with such a force you may
make yourself adored; the crowd will believe you are God.
   The absolute secret of this direction has been in the
possession of certain men, and can yet be discovered. It is
the great magical arcanum, depending on an incommu¬
nicable axiom and on an instrument which is the great
and unique athanor of the highest grade of Hermetists.
The incommunicable axiom is kabbalistically enclosed in the
four letters of the tetragram arranged in the following
manner:—

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    55




in the letters of the words AZOTH and INRI written kab-
balistically; and in the monogram of Christ as embroidered
on the labarum, which the Kabbalist Postel interprets by
the word ROTA, whence the adepts have formed their Taro
or Tarot, by the repetition of the first letter, thus indicat¬
ing the circle, and suggesting that the word is put back¬
wards. All magical science is comprised in the knowledge
of this secret. To know it and have the courage to use it is
human omnipotence; to reveal it to a profane person is to
lose it; to reveal it even to a disciple is to abdicate in
favour of that disciple, who, henceforward, possesses the
right of life and death over his master—I am speaking
from the magical standpoint—and will certainly slay him
for fear of dying himself. But this has nothing in common
with deeds qualified as murder in criminal legislation; the
practical philosophy which is the basis and point of de¬
parture for our laws does not recognize the facts of be¬
witchment and of occult influences. We touch here upon
extraordinary revelations, and are prepared for the unbelief
and derision of incredulous fanaticism; voltairean religion
has also its fanatics, pace the great shades who must now
be lurking sullenly in the vaults of the Pantheon, while

56                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


Catholicism, strong ever in its practices and prestige, chants
the office overhead.
   The perfect word, that which is adequate to the thought
which it expresses, always virtually contains or supposes a
tetrad: the idea, with its three necessary and correlated
forms, then the image of the thing expressed, with the three
terms of the judgment which qualifies it. When I say:
“Beings exists,” I affirm implicitly that the void is non¬
existent. A height, a breadth which the height sub-divides
longitudinally, a depth separated from the height by the
intersection of the breadth, such is the natural tetrad com¬
posed of two lines at right angles one to another. Nature
also has four motions produced by two forces which sustain
each other by their tendency in an opposite direction. Now,
the law which rules bodies is analogous to that which
governs minds, and that which governs minds is the very
manifestation of God’s secret—that is to say, of the mys¬
tery of the creation. Imagine a watch having two parallel
springs, with an engagement which makes them work in an
opposite direction so that the one in unwinding winds up
the other. In this way, the watch will wind up itself, and
you will have discovered perpetual motion. The engage¬
ment should be at two ends and of extreme accuracy. Is
this beyond attainment? We think not. But when it is
found out the inventor will understand by analogy all the
secrets of nature—progress in direct proportion to the re¬
sistance. The absolute movement of life is thus the per¬
petual consequence of two contrary tendencies which are
never opposed. When one seems to yield to the other, it is
a spring which is winding up, and you may expect a re¬
action, the moment and characteristics of which it is quite
possible to foresee and determine. Hence at the period of
the most extreme Christian fervour was the reign of Anti¬
christ known and predicted. But Antichrist will prepare
and determine the second advent and final triumph of the
Man-God. This again is a vigorous and kabbalistical con¬
clusion contained in the Gospel premises. Hence the Chris-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      57

tian prophecy comprises a fourfold revelation: 1. Fall
of the old world and triumph of the Gospel under the
first advent; 2. Great apostasy and coming of Antichrist;
3. Fall of Antichrist and recurrence to Christian ideas;
4. Definitive triumph of the Gospel, or Second Advent,
designated under the name of the Last Judgment. This
fourfold prophecy contains, as will be seen, two affirmations
and two negations, the idea of two ruins or universal deaths
and of two resurrections; for to every conception which ap¬
pears upon the social horizon an east and a west, a zenith
and a nadir, may be ascribed without fear of error. Thus
is the philosophical cross the key of prophecy, and all
gates of science may be opened with the pantacle of Eze¬
kiel, the centre of which is a star formed by the interlace¬
ment of two crosses.




   Does not human life present itself also under these four
 phases or successive transformations—birth, life, death, im¬
mortality? And remark here that the immortality of the
soul, necessitated as a complement of the tetrad, is kab-
balistically proved by analogy, which is the sole dogma of
truly universal religion, as it is the key of science and the
universal law of nature. As a fact, death can be no more
an absolute end than birth is a real beginning. Birth
proves the pre-existence of the humon being, since nothing
is produced from nothing, and death proves immortality,
since being can no more cease to be being than nothingness
can cease to be nothingness. Being and nothingness are
two absolutely irreconcileable ideas, with this difference, that
the idea of nothingness, which is altogether negative, issues

58                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 from the idea itself of being, whence nothingness cannot
 even be understood as an absolute negation, whilst the
notion of being can never be referred to that of nothingness,
and still less can it come forth therefrom. To say that the
world has been produced out of nothing is to advance a
monstrous absurdity. All that is proceeds from what has
                                   #


been, and consequently nothing that is can ever more cease
to be. The succession of forms is produced by the alterna¬
tives of movement; they are the phenomena of life which
replace one another without destroying themselves. All
things change; nothing perishes. The sun does not die
when it vanishes from the horizon; even the most fluidic
forms are immortal, subsisting always in the permanence of
their raison d’etre, which is the combination of the light
with the aggregated potences of the molecules of the first
substance. Hence they are preserved in the astral fluid,
and can be evoked and reproduced according to the will of
the sage, as we shall see when treating of second sight and
the evocation of memories in necromancy or other magical
works. We shall return to the great magical agent in the
fourth chapter of the Ritual, where we shall complete our
indications of the characteristics of the great arcanum, and
of the means of recovering this tremendous power.
   Here let us add some words about the four magical
elements and elementary spirits. The magical elements are:
in alchemy, salt, sulphur, mercury, and azoth; in Kabbalah,
the macroprosopus, the microprosopus, and the two mothers;
in hieroglyphics, the man, eagle, lion, and bull; in old
physics, according to vulgar names and notions, air, water,
earth, and fire. But in magical science we know that water
is not ordinary water, fire is not simply fire, &c. These
expressions conceal a more recondite meaning. Modem
science has decomposed the four elements of the ancients,
and reduced them to a number of so-called simple bodies.
That which is simple, however, is the primitive substance
properly so-called; there is therefore only one material
element, which always manifests by the tetrad in its forms.

                      TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    59

We shall therefore preserve the wise distinction of element¬
ary appearances admitted by the ancients, and shall recog¬
nise air, fire, earth, and water as the four positive and visible
elements of magic.
   The subtle and the gross, the swift and slow dissolvent,
or the instruments of heat and cold, constitute, in occult
physics, the two positive and negative principles of the
tetrad, and should be thus tabulated

                              Azoth.
                              Eagle.
                              Air.




           Sulphur.                            Mercury
           Lion.                               Man.
           Fire.                               Water.




                               Salt.
                               Bull.
                               Earth.

   Thus, air and earth represent the male principle * fire and
water are referable to the female principle, since the philo¬
sophical cross of pantacles, as already affirmed, is a primitive
and elementary hieroglyph of the lingam of the gymno-
sophists. To these four elementary forms correspond the
four following philosophical ideas—Spirit, Matter, Motion,
Rest. As a fact, all science is comprised in the understand¬
ing of these four things, which alchemy has reduced to three
—the Absolute, the Fixed, and the Volatile—referred by
the Kabbalah to the essential idea of God, who is absolute
reason, necessity, and liberty, a threefold notion expressed
in the occult books of the Hebrews. Under the names of
Kether, Chochmah, and Binah for the divine world; of
Tiphereth, Chesed, and Geburah in the moral world; and

60                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


of Jesod, Hod, and Netsah in the physical world, which
together with the moral, is contained in the idea of the
Kingdom or Malchuth, we shall explain in the tenth chapter
this theogony as rational as it is sublime.
   Now, created spirits, being called to emancipation by
ordeal, are placed from their birth between these four forces,
two positive and two negative, and have it in their power to
affirm or deny good, to choose life or death. To discover
the fixed point, that is, the fixed centre of the cross, is the
first problem which is given them to resolve; their initial
conquest must be that of their own liberty. They begin by
being drawn, some to the north, others to the south; some
to the right, others to the left; and in so far as they are
not free, they cannot have the use of reason, nor can they
take flesh otherwise than in animal forms. These unemanci¬
pated spirits, slaves of the four elements, are those which the
kabbalists call elementary daimons, and they people the
elements which correspond to their state of servitude.
Sylphs, undines, gnomes, and salamanders therefore really
exist, some wandering and seeking incarnation, others in¬
carnate and living on this earth. These are vicious and im¬
perfect men. We shall return to this subject in the fifteenth
chapter, which treats of enchantments and demons.
   That is also an occult tradition by which the ancients
were led to admit the existence of four ages in the world,
only it was not made known to the vulgar that these ages
were successive and were renewed, like the four seasons of
the year. Thus, the golden age has passed, and it is yet to
come. This, however, belongs to the spirit of prophecy, and
we shall speak of it in the ninth chapter, which is concerned
with the initiate and the seer. If we now add the idea of
unity to the tetrad, we shall have, together and separately,
the conceptions of the divine synthesis and analysis, the god
of the initiates and that of the profane. Here the doctrine
becomes more popular, and passes from the domain of the
abstract; the grand hierophant intervenes.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     61




                            5 - E
                              n
                    THE PENTAGRAM

                       GEBURAH      ECCE


                            1       2




Hereunto we have exposed the magical dogma in its more
arid and abstract phases; now enchantments begin; now
we can proclaim wonders and reveal the most secret things.
The pentagram signifies the domination of the mind over
the elements, and by this sign are enchained the demons of
the air, the spirits of fire, the phantoms of the water, and
ghosts of earth. Equipped with this sign, and suitably dis¬
posed, you may behold the infinite through the medium of
that faculty which is like the soul’s eye, and you will be
ministered unto by legions of angels and hosts of fiends.
   And now, in the first place, let us establish certain prin¬
ciples. There is no invisible world; there are, however,
many degrees of perfection in organs. The body is the

62                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


coarse and, as it were, the perishable cortex of the soul.
The soul can perceive of itself, and independently of the
mediation of the physical organs, by means of its sensibility
and its diaphane, the things, both spiritual and corporal,
which are existent in the universe. Spiritual and corporal
are simply terms which express the degrees of tenuity or
density in substance. What is called the imagination within
us is only the soul’s inherent faculty of assimilating the
images and reflections contained in the living light, which
is the great magnetic agent. These images and reflections
are revelations when science intervenes to reveal us their
body or light. The man of genius differs from the dreamer
and the fool in this only, that his creations are analogous
to truth, while those of the fool and the dreamer are lost
reflections and bewrayed images. Hence, for the wise man,
to imagine is to see, as, for the magician, to speak is to
create. Therefore, by means of the imagination, demons
and spirits can be beheld really and in truth; but the
imagination of the adept is diaphanous, whilst that of the
crowd is opaque; the light of truth traverses the one as
ordinary light passes through a transparent casement, and
is refracted by the other as when the ordinary light falls
upon a vitreous block full of scoria and foreign matter.
That which most contributes to the errors of the vulgar is
the reflection of depraved imaginations one in the other.
But the seer, by a positive science, knows that what he im¬
agines is true, and the event invariably confirms his vision.
We shall state in the Ritual after what manner this lucidity
can be acquired.
    It is by means of this light that static visionaries place
 themselves in communication with all worlds, as so fre¬
 quently occurred to Swedenborg, who, notwithstanding, was
 imperfectly lucid, seeing that he did not distinguish re¬
 flections from rays, and often intermingled chimerical
 fancies with his most admirable dreams. We say dreams,
 because dream is the consequence of a natural and peri¬
 odical ecstasy, which we term sleep; to be in acstasy is to

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     63

sleep; magnetic somnambulism is a production and direc¬
tion of sleep. The errors which occur therein are occasioned
by reflections from the diaphane of waking persons, and,
above all, of the magnetiser. Dream is vision produced
by the refraction of a ray of truth. The chimerical fantasy
is hallucination occasioned by a reflection. The temptation
of St Anthony, with its nightmares and its monsters, repre¬
sents the confusion of reflections with direct rays. So long
as the soul struggles it is reasonable; when it yields to this
specie, of invading intoxication it becomes mad. To dis¬
entangle the direct ray, and separate it from the reflection
—such is the work of the initiate. Here let us state dis¬
tinctly that this work is through all times accomplished
in the world by some of the flower of mankind, that there
is hence a permanent revelation by intuition, and that
there is no insuperable barrier which separates souls, be¬
cause there are no sudden interruptions, and no abrupt
walls in nature by which minds can be divided from one
another. All is transition and blending, and, assuming the
perfectibility, if not infinite, at least indefinite, of human
faculties, it will be seen that every person can attain to
see all, and therefore to know all. There is no void in
nature; all is peopled. There is no true death in nature;
all is alive. “Seest thou that star?” asked Napoleon of
Cardinal Feseh. “No, Sire.” “I see it,” said the Em¬
peror, and he most certainly did. When great men are ac¬
cused of having been superstitious, it is because they be¬
held what remains unseen by the crowd. Men of genius
differ from simple seers by their faculty of sensibly com¬
municating to other men what they themselves perceive,
and of making themselves believed by the force of en¬
thusiasm and sympathy. Such persons are the medium
of the Divine Word.
  Let us now state the manner in which visions operate.
All forms correspond to ideas, and there is no idea which
has not its proper and peculiar form. The primordial light,
which is the vehicle of all ideas, is the mother of all forms,

64                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


and transmits them from emanation to emanation, merely
diminished or modified according to the density of the
media. Secondary forms are reflections which return to
the font of the emanated light. The forms of objects,
being a modification of light, remain in the light where
the reflection consigns them. Hence the astral light, or
terrestrial fluid, which we call the great magnetic agent, is
saturated with all kinds of images or reflections. Now, our
soul can evoke these, and refer them to its diaphane, as the
kabbalists term it. Such images are always present to us,
and are only effaced by the more powerful impressions of
reality during waking hours, or by preoccupation of the
mind, which makes our imagination inattentive to the fluidic
panorama of the astral light. When we sleep, this spectacle
presents itself spontaneously before us, and in this way
dreams are produced—dreams vague and incoherent if some
governing will do not remain active during the sleep, giv¬
ing, even unconsciously to our intelligence, a direction to
the dream, which then transforms into vision. Animal
magnetism is nothing else but an artificial sleep produced
by the voluntary or enforced union of two wills, one of
which is awake while the other slumbers—that is, one of
which directs the other in the choice of reflections for the
transformation of dreams into visions, and the attainment of
truth by means of images. Thus, somnambulists do not
actually travel to the place where they are sent by the
magnetiser; they evoke its images in the astral light, and
can behold nothing which does not exist in that light.
The astral light has a direct action on the nerves, which are
its conductors in the animal economy, transmitting it to
the brain, whence also, in the state of somnambulism, it is
possible to see by means of the nerves, without being de¬
pendent on radiant light, the astral fluid being a latent
light, in the same way that physics recognise the existence
of a latent caloric.
  Magnetism between two persons is certainly a wonderful
discovery, but the magnetising of a person by himself,

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     65

 accomplishing his own lucidity and directing himself at
 will, is the perfection of magical art. The secret of this
 great work does not rest for discovery; it has been known
 and practised by a great number of initiates, above all by
 the celebrated Apollonius of Tyana, who has left a theory
 concerning it, as we shall see in the Ritual. The secret of
 magnetic lucidity, and the direction of the phenomena of
 magnetism depend on two things—the agreement of minds
 and the complete union of wills, in a direction which is
 possible and determined by science. This is for the opera¬
 tion of magnetism between two or more persons. Solitary
 magnetism requires preparations of, which we have spoken
 in our initial chapter, when enumerating and establishing
 in all their difficulty the essential qualities of a veritable
 adept. In the following chapters we shall further elucidate
this important and fundamental point.
    The empire of the will over the astral light, which is the
physical soul of the four elements, is represented in magic
by the pentagram, which we have set at the head of this
chapter. The elementary spirits are subservient to this
sign when employed with understanding, and, by placing it
in the circle or on the table of evocations, they can be
rendered tractable, which is magically called to imprison
them. Let us briefly explain this marvel. All created
beings communicate with one another by signs, and all ad¬
here to a certain number of truths expressed by deter¬
minate forms. The perfection of forms increases in pro¬
portion to the detachment of spirits, and those that are not
overweighted by the chains of matter, recognise by intuition
out of hand whether a sign is the expression of a real power
or of a precipitate will. The intelligence of the wise man
therefore gives value to his pantacle, as science gives weight
to his will, and spirits comprehend this power immediately.
Thus, by means of the pentagram, spirits can be forced to
appear in vision, whether in the waking or sleeping state,
by themselves leading before our diaphane their reflection,
which exists in the astral light, if they have lived, or a re-

66                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 flection analogous to their spiritual logos if they have not
 lived on earth. This explains all visions, and accounts for
 the dead invariably appearing to seers, either such as they
 were upon earth, or such as they are in the grave, never as
 they subsist in a condition which escapes the perceptions of
 our actual organism.
    Pregnant women are influenced more than others by the
 astral light, which concurs in the formation of the child,
 and perpetually offers them reminiscences of the forms
which abound therein. This explains how it is that women
 of the highest virtue deceive the malignity of observers by
 equivocal resemblances. On the fruit of their marriage
 they impress frequently an image which has struck them
 in dream, and it is thus that the same physiognomies are
perpetuated from generation to generation. The Kabbalistic
usage of the pentagram can therefore determine the appear¬
 ance of unborn children, and an initiated woman might
 endow her son with the characteristics of Nero or Achilles
as much as with those of Louis XIV. or Napoleon. We
shall indicate the method in our Ritual.
    The pentagram is called in Kabbalah the sign of the
microcosm, that sign so exalted by Goethe in the beautiful
monologue of Faust: “Ah, how do all my senses leap at
this sight! I feel the young and sacred pleasure of life
bubbling in my nerves and veins. Was it a God who
traced this sign which stills the vertigo of my soul, fills
my poor heart with joy, and, in a mysterious rapture,
unveils the forces of nature around me. Am I myself a
God! All is so clear to me; I behold in these simple lines
the revelation of active nature to my soul. I realise for
the first time the truth of the wise man’s words: The
world of spirits is not closed! Thy sense is obtuse, thy
heart is dead! Arise! Bathe, 0 adept of science, thy
breast, still enveloped by an earthly veil, in the splendours
of the dawning day!” (Faust, Fart i. sc. 1).
    On the 24th of July in the year 1854, the author of
this book, Eliphas Levi, made experiments of evocation with

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     67

the pentagram, after due preparation by all the ceremonies
which are indicated in the thirteenth chapter of the Ritual.
The success of this experiment, details of which, as regards
its principles, will be found in the corresponding chapter of
this our doctrinal part, establishes a new pathological fact,
which men of true science will admit without difficulty.
The repeated experience, in all three times, gave results
truly extraordinary, but positive and unmixed with halluci¬
nation. We invite sceptics to make a conscientious and
intelligent attempt before shrugging their shoulders and




smiling. The figure of the pentagram, perfected in accord¬
ance with science, and used by the author in his experiment,
is that which is found at the head of this chapter, and it is
more perfect than any in the keys of Solomon, or in the
magical calendars of Tycho Brahe and Duchentau. We
must, however, remark that the use of the pentagram is
most dangerous for operators who are not in possession
of its complete and perfect understanding. The direction of
the points of the star is in no sense arbitrary, and may
change the entire character of the operation, as we shall
explain in the Ritual.
   Paracelsus, that innovator in magic, who surpassed all
other initiates in his unaided practical success, affirms that

68                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


every magical figure and every kabbalistic sign of the pan-
tacles which compel spirits, may be reduced to two, which
are the synthesis of all the others; these are the sign of the
Macrocosm or the seal of Solomon, the form of which we
have already given, and now reproduce here, and that of the
Microcosm, more potent even than the first—that is to say,
the pentagram, of which he provides a most minute descrip¬
tion in his occult philosophy. If it be asked how a sign
can exercise so much power over spirits, we inquire in re¬
turn why the whole Christian world bows down before the
sign of the cross ? The sign is nothing by itself, and has no
force apart from the doctrine of which it is the summary
and the logos. Now, a sign which sums, by their ex¬
pression, all the occult forces of nature, a sign which has
ever exhibited to elementary spirits and others a power
greater than their own, naturally fills them with respect and
fear, and enforces their obedience by the empire of science
and of will over ignorance and weakness. By the penta¬
gram also is measured the exact proportions of the great
and unique athanor necessary to the confection of the philo¬
sophical stone and the accomplishment of the great work.
The most perfect alembic in which the quintessence can be
elaborated is conformable to this figure, and the quintessence
itself is represented by the sign of the pentagram.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     69



                            6 ^ D

                MAGICAL EQUILIBRIUM

                     TIPHERETH      UNCUS

Supreme     intelligence is necessarily reasonable. God, in
philosophy, may be only a hypothesis, but he is a hypothesis
imposed by good sense on human reason.            To personify
the Absolute Reason is to determine the divine ideal.
Necessity, liberty, and reason—these are the great and su¬
preme triangle of the Kabbalists, who name reason Kether,
necessity Chochmah, and liberty Binah, in their first divine
triad. Fatality, will, and power, such is the magical triad,
which corresponds in things human to the divine triad.
Fatality is the inevitable sequence of effects and causes in a
determined order. Will is the directing faculty of intelli¬
gent forces for the conciliation of the liberty of persons with
the necessity of things. Power is the wise application of
will which enlists fatality itself in the accomplishment of
the desires of the sage. When Moses smote the rock, he
did not create the spring of water, he revealed it to the
people, because occult science had made it known to himself
by means of the divining rod. It is in like manner with all
miracles of magic; a law exists, which is ignored by the
vulgar and made use of by the initiate. Occult laws are
often diametrically opposed to common ideas. For example,
the crowd believes in the sympathy of things which are
alike and in the hostility of things contrary, but it is the
opposite which is the true law. It used to be affirmed that
nature detests the void, but it should be said that nature
desires it, were the void not, in physics, the most irrational
of fictions. In all things the vulgar mind habitually takes
shadow for reality, turns its back upon light, and is reflected
in the obscurity which it projects itself. The forces of
nature are at the disposal of one who knows how to resist
them. Are you master sufficiently of yourself to be never

70                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


intoxicated? Then will you direct the terrible and fatal
power of intoxication. If you would make others drunk,
possess them with the desire of drink, but do not partake
of it yourself. That man will dispose of the love of others
who is master of his own. If you would possess, do not
give. The world is magnetised by the light of the sun, and
we are magnetised by the astral light of the world. That
which operates in the body of the planet repeats itself in
us. Within us there are three analogical and hierarchic
worlds, as in all nature.
   Man is the microcosm or little world, and, according to
the doctrine of analogies, whatsoever is in the great world
is reproduced in the small. Hence we have three centres
of fluidic attraction and projection—the brain, the heart or
epigastric region, and the genital organ. Each of these in¬
struments is double—in other words, we find the suggestion
of the triad therein. Each attracts on one side and repels
on another. It is by means of these apparatuses that we
place ourselves in communication with the universal fluid
transmitted into us by the nervous system. These three
centres are, moreover, the seat of the threefold magnetic
operation, as we shall explain elsewhere. When the magus
has attained lucidity, whether through the mediation of a
pythoness, or by his own development, he communicates and
directs at will the magnetic vibrations in the whole mass of
the astral light, the currents of which he divines by means
of the magic rod, which is a perfected divining rod. By
the aid of these vibrations he influences the nervous system
of persons surrendered to his action, accelerates or suspends
the currents of life, soothes or tortures, heals or hurts; in
fine, slays or brings to life. . . . Here, however, we pause
in presence of the smile of incredulity. Let us permit it to
enjoy the cheap triumph of denying what it does not know.
   We shall demonstrate later on that death is always pre¬
ceded by a lethargic sleep, and only takes place gradually;
that resurrection is possible in certain cases; that lethargy
is a real, but uncompleted, death; and that the final

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      71

paroxysm is in many cases subsequent to inhumation. This,
however, is not the subject of the present chapter. We now
affirm that a lucid will can act upon the mass of the astral
light, and, in concurrence with other wills, which it absorbs
and draws along, can determine great and irresistible cur¬
rents. We say also that the astral light condenses or
rarefies in proportion as currents accumulate, more or less,
ati certain centres. When it is deficient in the energy
required for the support of life, diseases accompanied by
sudden decomposition follow, of the kind which baffle
physicians. There is not other cause, by example, in the
case of cholera-morbus, and the swarms of animalculae ob¬
served or supposed by some specialists may be the effect
rather than the cause. Cholera should therefore be treated
by insufflation, did not the operator thereby run the chance
of an exchange with the patient, which would be very for¬
midable for himself. Every intelligent effort of will is a
projection of the human fluid or light, and here it is need¬
ful to distinguish the human from the astral light, and
animal from universal magnetism. In making use of the
word fluid, we employ an accepted expression, and would
make ourselves understood in this manner, but we are far
from deciding that the latent light is a fluid. Everything
prompts us, on the contrary, to prefer the system of vibra¬
tions in the explanation of this phenomenal subject. How¬
ever it may be, the light in question, being the instrument
of life, cleaves naturally to all living centres, attaches itself
to the nucleus of planets, even as to the heart of man—and
by the heart we understand magically the great sympathetic
—identifying itself with the individual life of the being
which it animates, and it is by this quality of sympathetic
assimilation that it distributes itself without confusion.
Hence it is terrestrial in its affinity with the sphere of the
earth, and human exclusively in its affinity with men.
   It is for this reason that electricity, caloric, light, and
magnetism, produced by ordinary physical means, not only
do not originate, but rather tend to neutralise the effects of

72                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


animal magnetism. The astral light, subordinated to a
blind mechanism, and proceeding from arbitrary automatic
centres, is a dead light, and works mathematically, follow¬
ing given impulsions or fatal laws; the human light is fatal
                                                                  '


only to the ignorant in chance experiments; in the seer it
is subjected to intelligence, submitted to imagination, and
dependent on will. This light, continually projected by the
will, constitutes the personal atmospheres of Swedenborg.
The body absorbs what environs it, and radiates perpetually
by projecting its influences and invisible molecules; it is the
same with the spirit, so that this phenomenon, by some
mystics termed respiration, has really the influence, both
physical and moral, which is assigned to it. It is un¬
doubtedly contagious to breathe the same air as diseased
persons, and to be within the circle of attraction and ex¬
pansion which surrounds the wicked.
   When the magnetic atmosphere of two persons is so equili¬
brated that the attractive faculty of one draws the ex¬
pansive faculty of the other, a tendency is produced which
is termed sympathy; then imagination, calling up to it all
the rays or reflections analogous to that which it experi¬
ences, makes a poem of the desires which captivate the will,
and, if the persons differ in sex, it occasions in them, or
more commonly in the weaker of the two, a complete in¬
toxication of the astral light, which is termed passion par
excellence, or love. Love is one of the great instruments of
magical power, bub it is categorically forbidden to the
magus, at least as an intoxication or passion. Woe to the
Samson of the Kabbalah if he permit himself to be put
asleep by Delilah! The Hercules of science, who exchanges
his royal sceptre for the distaff of Omphale, will soon ex¬
perience the vengeance of Dejanira, and nothing will be left
for him but the pyre of Mount (Eta, in order to escape the
devouring folds of the coat of Nessus. Sexual love is ever
an illusion, for it is the result of an imaginary mirage.
The astral light is the universal seducer, typified by the
serpent of Genesis. This subtle agent, ever active, ever

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                       73

abounding in sap, ever fruitful in alluring dreams and
sensuous images; this force, which by itself is blind and
subordinated to every will, whether for good or evil; this
every renewing circulus of unbridled life, which produces
vertigo in the imprudent; this corporal spirit; this fiery
body; this impalpable omnipresent ether; this monstrous
seduction of nature—how shall we define it comprehensively
and how characterise its action ? To some extent indifferent
in itself, it lends itself to good as to evil; it transmits light
and propagates darkness; it may be called equally Lucifer
and Lucifuge; it is a. serpent but it is also an aureole; it is
a fire, but it may belong equally to the torments of in-
femus, or to the sacrifice of incense offered up to heaven.
To dispose of it, we must, like the predestined women, set
our foot upon its head.
   In the elementary world water corresponds to the kabba-
listic woman and fire to the serpent. To subdue the serpent,
that is, to govern the circle of the astral light, we must place
ourselves outside its currents, that is, we must isolate our¬
selves. For this reason Apollonius of Tyana wrapped him¬
self completely in a mantle of fine wool, setting his feet
thereon and drawing it over his head. Then he bent his
back in semi-circular fashion, and closed his eyes, after
fulfilling certain rites, probably magnetic passes and sacra¬
mental words designed to fix the imagination and determine
the action of the will. The woollen mantle is of great use
in magic, and was the common conveyance of sorcerers on
their way to the Sabbath, which proves that the sorcerers
did not really go to the Sabbath, but the Sabbath came to
the sorcerers, when isolated in their mantle, and conducted
to their translucid images analogous to their magical pre¬
occupations, combined with reflections of all kindred acts
previously accomplished in the world.
   This torrent of universal life is also represented in re¬
ligious doctrines by the expiatory fire of hell. It is the in¬
strument of initiation, the monster to be overcome, the
enemy to subdue; it is this which brings to our evocations

74                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


and to the conjurations of goetic magic such swarms of
larvae and phantoms; therein are preserved all the forms
which by their fantastic and fortuitous assemblage people
our nightmares with such abominable deformities. To allow
ourselves to be sucked down by this whirling stream is to
fall into the abysses of madness, more frightful than those
of death; to expel the darkness of this chaos and force it to
give perfect forms to our thoughts—this is, to be a man of
genius, it is to create, it is to be victorious over hell! The
astral light directs the instincts of animals and offers battle
to the intelligence of man, which it strives to pervert by
the enticements of its reflections, and the illusion of its
images, a fatal and inevitable operation, directed and made
still more calamitous by the elementary spirits and suffering
souls, whose restless wills seek out sympathies in our weak¬
ness, and tempt us not so much to destroy us as to win
friends for themselves.
   That book of consciences which, according to Christian
doctrine, shall be opened at the last day, is no other than
the astral light, which preserves the impress of every logos,
that is to say, of all actions and all forms. Our acts
modify our magnetic respiration in such a way that a seer,
meeting any person for the first time, can tell whether that
person is innocent or criminal, and what are his virtues or
his crimes. This faculty, which belongs to divination, was
called by the Christian mystics of the early Church the
discernment of spirits.
   Those who abdicate the empire of reason and delight to
let their wills wander in pursuit of the reflections in the
astral light, are subject to alternations of mania and melan¬
choly which have originated all the marvels of demoniacal
possession, though it is true, at the same time, that by
means of these reflections impure spirits can act upon
similar souls, make use of them as docile instruments, and
even habitually torment their organism, wherein they enter
and reside by obsession, or embryonically. These kabbalistic
terms are explained in the Hebrew book of the Revolution

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     75

of Souls, of which our thirteenth chapter will contain a
succinct analysis. It is therefore extremely dangerous to
make sport of the mysteries of magic; it is, above all, ex¬
cessively rash to practise its rites from curiosity, by experi¬
ment, and as if to exploit higher forces. The inquisitive
who, without being adepts, busy themselves with evocations
or occult magnetism, are like children playing with fire in
the neighbourhood of a cask of gunpowder; sooner or later
they will fall victims to some terrible explosion.
   To be isolated from the astral light it is not enough to
envelop one’s self in a woollen fabric; we must also, and
above all, impose absolute tranquillity on mind and heart,
we must have quitted the world of passions and be assured
of perseverance in the spontaneous operations of an in¬
flexible will. We must frequently reiterate the acts of this
will, for, as we shall see in the introduction to the Ritual,
the will only assures itself by acts, as the power and per¬
petuity of religions depend on their rites and ceremonies.
   There are intoxicating substances, which, by increasing
nervous sensibility, exalt the power and consequently the
allurements of astral representations; by the same means,
but pursuing a contrary course, spirits may be alarmed and
disturbed. These substances, of themselves magnetic, and
further magnetised by the operators, are what people term
philters and enchanted potions. But we shall not enter
here upon this dangerous application of magic, which
Cornelius Agrippa himself terms venomous magic. It is
true that there are no longer pyres for sorcerers, but always,
and more than ever, are there penalties dealt out to male¬
factors. Let us confine ourselves therefore to stating, as the
occasion offers, the reality of this power.
   To direct the astral light we must understand also its
double vibration, as well as the balance of forces termed
magical equilibrium and expressed in the Kabbalah by the
senary. Considered in its first cause, this equilibrium is the
will of God; it is liberty in man, and mathematical equilib¬
rium in matter. Equilibrium produces stability and dura-

76                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


tion. Liberty generates the immortality of man, and the
will of God gives effect to the laws of eternal reason.
Equilibrium in ideas is reason and in forces power.
Equilibrium is exact; fulfil its law, and it is there; violate
it, however slightly, and it is destroyed. For this reason
nothing is useless or lost. Eyery utterance and every move- I
ment are for or against truth, which is composed of for and
against conciliated, or at least equilibrated. We shall state
in the introduction to the Ritual how magical equilibrium
should be produced, and why it is necessary to the success
of all operations.
   Omnipotence is the most absolute liberty; now, absolute
liberty cannot exist apart from perfect equilibrium. Magical
equilibrium is hence one of the first conditions of success in
the operations of science, and must be sought even in occult
chemistry, by learning to combine contraries without
neutralising them by one another* Magical equilibrium
explains the great and primeval mystery of the existence
and relative necessity of evil. This relative necessity gives,
in black magic, the measure of the power of demons or
impure spirits, to whom virtues practised upon earth are a
source of increased rage and apparently of increased power.
At the epochs when saints and angels work miracles openly,
sorcerers and fiends in their turn operate marvels and
prodigies. Rivalry often creates success; we lean upon that
which resists.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    77




                   THE FIERY SWORD
                      NETSAH    GLADIUS

 The septenary is the sacred number in all theogonies and in
all symbols, because it is composed of the triad and the
tetrad. The number seven represents magical power in all
its fulness; it is the mind reinforced by all elementary
potencies; it is the soul served by nature; it is the sanctum
regnum mentioned in the keys of Solomon, and represented
in the Tarot by a crowned warrior, who bears a triangle on
his cuirass, and is posed upon a cube, to which two sphinxes
are harnessed, straining in opposite directions, while their
heads are turned the same way. This warrior is armed with
a fiery sword, and holds in his other hand, a sceptre sur¬
mounted by a triangle and a sphere. The cube is the
philosophical stone; the sphinxes are the two forces of the
great agent, corresponding to Jakin and Bohas, the two
pillars of the temple; the cuirass is the knowledge of
divine things, which renders the wise man invulnerable to
human assaults; the sceptre is the magic rod; the fiery
sword is the symbol of victory over the deadly sins, seven
in number, like the virtues, the conceptions of both being
typified by the ancients under the figures of the seven
planets then known. Thus, faith—that aspiration towards
the infinite, that noble self-reliance sustained by confidence
in all virtues—that faith, which, in weak natures, may de¬
generate into pride, was represented by the Sun; hope, the
enemy of avarice, by the Moon; charity, in opposition to
luxury, by Venus, the bright star of the morning and
evening; strength, superior to wrath, by Mars; prudence,
hostile to idleness, by Mercury; temperance, opposed to
gluttony, by Saturn, who was given a stone instead of his
children to devour; finally, justice, in opposition to envy,
by Jupiter, the conqueror of the Titans. Such are the
symbols borrowed by astronomy from the Hellenic cultus.
In the Kabbalah of the Hebrews, the Sun represents the

78                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


angel of light; the Moon, the angel of aspirations and
dreams; Mars, the destroying angel; Mercury, the angel
of progress; Jupiter, the angel of power; Saturn, the angel
of the wilderness. They were named Michael, Gabriel,
Samael, Anael, Raphael, Zachariel, and Orifiel.
   These governing potencies of souls shared human life in
periods, which astrologers measured by the revolutions of
the corresponding planets. But kabbalistic astrology must
not be confounded with judicial astrology. We will explain
this distinction. Infancy is dedicated to the Sun, childhood
to the Moon, youth to Mars and Venus, manhood to Mer¬
cury, ripe age to Jupiter, and old age to Saturn. Now, hu¬
manity in general subsists under laws of development anal¬
ogous to those of individual life. On this groundwork
Trithemius establishes his prophetic key of the seven spir¬
its, to which we shall subsequently refer; by means thereof,
observing the analogical proportions of successive events,
it is possible to predict important future occurrences with
certitude, and to fix beforehand, from age to age, the des¬
tinies of nations and the world. St. John, depositary of the
secret doctrine of Christ, has introduced it into the kabba¬
listic book of the Apocalypse, which he represents sealed
with seven seals. We there find the seven genii of ancient
mythologies, with the cups and swords of the Tarot. The
doctrine concealed under these emblems is the pure Kab¬
balah, already lost by the Pharisees at the time of Christ’s
advent. The scenes which succeed one another in this won¬
derful prophetic epic are so many pantacles, the keys of
which are the ternary, the quaternary, the septenary, and
the duodenary. Its hieroglyphic figures are analogous to
those of the book of Hermes or the Genesis of Enoch, to
make use of a tentative title which expresses merely the
 personal opinion of the erudite William Postel.
    The cherub, or symbolic bull, which Moses placed at the
 gate of the edenic world, bearing a fiery sword, is a sphinx,
having a bull’s body and a human head; it is the antique
 Assyrian sphinx, and the combat and victory of Mithras

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     79

 were its hieroglyphic analysis. Now, this armed sphinx
 represents the law of mystery which watches at the door of
 initiation to warn away the profane. Voltaire, who knew
 nothing of all this, was highly diverted at the notion of a
 bull brandishing a sword. What would he have said had he
 visited the ruins of Memphis and Thebes, and what would
 the echo of past ages which slumbers in the tombs of
 Rameses have replied to those light sarcasms so much rel¬
 ished in France? The Mosaic cherub represents also the
 great magical mystery, of which the elements are expressed
 by the septenary, without, however, giving the final word.
 This verbum inenarrabile of the sages of the Alexandrian
 interpret by            thus expressing the triplicity of the
 school; this word which Hebrew Kabbalists write             and
secondary principle, the dualism of the means, and the equal
unity of the first and final principle, then further the alli¬
ance between the triad and the tetrad in a word composed
of four letters, which form seven by means of a triple and
double repetition—this word is pronounced Ararita.
   The virtue of the septenary is absolute in magic, for the
number is decisive in all things; hence all religions have
consecrated it in their rites. The seventh year was a jubi¬
lee among the Jews; the seventh day is set apart for rest
and prayer; there are seven sacraments, &c. The seven col¬
ours of the prism an dthe seven musical notes, correspond
also to the seven planets of the ancients, that is, to the seven
chords of the human lyre. The spiritual heaven has never
changed, and astrology has been more invariable than as¬
tronomy. The seven planets are, in fact, the hieroglyphic
symbols of the key of our affections. To compose talismans
of the Sun, Moon, or Saturn, is to attach the will magneti¬
cally to signs corresponding to the chief powers of the soul;
to consecrate something to Mercury or Venus is to magnetise
that object according to a direct intention, whether pleas¬
ure, science, or profit be the end in view. The analogous
metals, animals, plants, and perfumes are auxiliaries to this
end. The seven magical animals are:—(a) Among birds,

80                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 corresponding to the divine world, the swan, the owl, the
 vulture, the dove, the stork, the eagle, and the pewit; (b)
 among fish, corresponding to the spiritual or scientific world,
 the seal, the cat-fish, the pike, the mullet, the chub, the dol¬
 phin, the sepia or cutle-fish; (c) among quadrupeds, cor¬
 responding to the natural world, the lion, the cat, the wolf,
 the he-goat, the monkey, the stag, and the mole. The blood,
 fat, liver, and gall of these animals serve in enchantments;
 their brain combines with the perfumes of the planets, and
 it is recognised by ancient practice that they possess mag¬
netic virtues corresponding to the seven planetary influences.
    The talismans of the seven spirits are engraved either on
precious stones, such as the carbuncle, crystal, diamond,
emerald, agate, sapphire, and onyx; or upon metals, such
as gold, silver, iron, copper, fixed mercury, pewter, and lead.
The kabbalistic signs of the seven spirits are:—for the Sun,
a serpent with the head of a lion; for the Moon, a globe
divided by two crescents; for Mars, a dragon biting the hilt
of a sword; for Venus, a lingam; for Mercury, the Her¬
metic caduceus and the cynocephalus; for Jupiter, the blaz¬
ing pentagram in the talons or beak of an eagle; for Saturn,
a lame and aged man, or a serpent curled about the sun-
stone. All these symbols are found on the graven stones of
the ancients, and especially on those talismans of the Gnos¬
tic epochs which are known by the name of Abraxas. In
the collection of the talismans of Paracelsus, Jupiter is rep¬
resented by a priest in ecclesiastical costume, while in the
Tarot he appears as a grand hierophant crowned with a
triple tiara, holding a three-fold cross in his hands, forming
the magical triangle, and representing at once the sceptre
and key of the three worlds.
    By combining all that we have said about the unity of
the triad and tetrad, we shall find all that remains for us to
say concerning the septenary, that grand and complete
magical unity composed of four and three.*

   * With reference to the plants and colours of the septenary em¬
ployed in magnetic experiences, see the erudite work of M. Ragon
on La Magonnerie Occulte.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    81




                           8nH

                      REALISATION

                        HOD    VIVENS

Causes manifest by effects, and effects are proportioned to
causes. The divine word, the one word, the tetragram, has
affirmed itself by tetradic creation.      Human fecundity
proves divine fecundity; the jod of the divine name is the
eternal virility of the First Principle. Man understands
that he was made in the image of God when he attains com¬
prehension of God by increasing to infinity the idea
which he forms of himself. When realising God as the
infinite man, man says unto himself: I am the finite
God. Magic differs from mysticism because it judges noth¬
ing d priori until after it has established d posteriori the
base itself of its judgments, that is to say, after having un¬
derstood the cause by the effects contained in the very
energy of the cause, by means of the universal law of anal¬
ogy. Hence in the occult sciences all is real, and theories
are established only on the foundations of experience. Real¬
ities alone constitute the proportions of the ideal, and the
magus admits nothing as certain in the domain of ideas
save that which is demonstrated by realisation. In other
words, what is true in the cause manifests in the effect.
What is not realised does not exist. The realisation of
speech is the logos properly so called. A thought realises
itself in becoming speech; it realises itself also by signs,
sounds, and representations of signs: this is the first degree
of realisation. Then it is imprinted on the astral light by
means of the signs of writing or speech; it influences other
minds by reflection upon them; it is refracted by crossing
the diaphane of other men; it assumes new forms and pro¬
portions; it is then translated into acts and modifies the
world: this is the last degree of realisation. Men who are

82                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


born into a world modified by an idea bear away with
them the impression thereof, and it is thus that the word is
made flesh. The impression of the disobedience of Adam,
preserved in the astral light, could only be effaced by the
stronger impression of the obedience of the Saviour, and
thus the original sin and redemption of the world can be
explained in a natural and magical sense. The astral light,
or soul of the world, was the instrument of Adam’s omnipo¬
tence; it became afterwards the instrument of his punish¬
ment, being corrupted and troubled by his sin, which inter¬
mingled an impure reflection with those primitive images
which composed the book of universal science for his still
virgin imagination.                                   '
   The astral light, depicted in ancient symbols by the ser¬
pent devouring his tail, represents alternately malice and
prudence, time and eternity, tempter and Redeemer; for
this light, being the vehicle of life, is an auxiliary alike of
good and evil, and may be taken for the fiery form of Satan
as for the body of the Holy Ghost. It is the instrument of
warfare in angelic battles, and indifferently feeds the flames
of hell and the lightnings of St. Michael. It may be com¬
pared to a horse having a nature analogous to the chame¬
leon, and ever reflecting the armour of his rider. The astral
light is the realisation or form of the intellectual light, as
the latter is the realisation or form of the divine light.
   The great initiator of Christianity, divining that the as-"
tral light was overcharged with the impure reflections of
Roman debauchery, sought to separate his disciples from
the ambient sphere of reflections, and to make them atten¬
tive only to the interior light, so that, through the medium
of a common faith and enthusiasm, they might communi¬
cate together by new magnetic chains, which he termed
grace, and thus overcome the dissolute currents, to which
he gave the names of the devil and Satan, signifying their
putrefaction. To oppose current to current is to renew the
power of fluidic life. The revealers have, therefore, scarcely
done more than divine, by the accuracy of their calculations,

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     83

   the appropriate moment for moral reactions. The law of
   realisation produces what we call magnetic breathing; places
   and objects become impregnated therewith, and this com¬
   municates to them an influence in conformity with our
   dominant desires, with those, above all, which are confirmed
   and realised by acts. As a fact, the universal agent, or
  latent astral light, ever seeks equilibrium; it fills the void
  and sucks up the plenitude, which makes vice contagious,
s like certain physical maladies, and works powerfully in the
 ^proselytism of virtue. Hence it is that cohabitation with
  antipathetic beings is a torment; hence it is that relics,
  whether of saints or of great criminals, produce the extra¬
  ordinary results of sudden conversion and perversion; hence
  it is that sexual love is often awakened by a breath or a
  touch, and this, not only by means of the contact of the
  person himself, but of objects which he has unconsciously
  touched or magnetised.
     There is an outbreathing and inbreathing of the soul, ex¬
  actly like that of the body. It breathes in the felicity which
  it believes, and it breathes forth ideas which result from its
 inner sensations. Diseased souls have an evil breath, and
 vitiate their moral atmosphere—that is, they combine im¬
 pure reflections with the astral light which permeates them,
 and establish unwholesome currents therein. We are often
 invaded, to our astonishment, in society by evil thoughts
 which would have seemed impossible, and are not aware
 that they are due to some morbid proximity. This secret
 is of high importance, for it leads to the opening of con¬
 sciences, one of the most incontestible and terrible powers
 of magical art. Magnetic respiration produces about the
 soul a radiation of which it is the centre, and surrounds it
 with the reflection of its works, creating for it a heaven or
 a hell. There are no isolated acts, and it is impossible that
there should be secret acts; whatsoever we truly will—that
is, everything which we confirm by our acts—remains reg¬
istered in the astral light, where our reflections are pre¬
served. These reflections continually influence our thought

84                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


by the mediation of the diaphane, and it is in this sense that
we become and remain the children of our works.
   The astral light, transformed at the moment of conception
into human light, is the soul’s first envelope, and, in com¬
bination with extremely subtle fluids, it forms the ethereal
body or sidereal phantom, of which Paracelsus discourses
in his philosophy of intuition—philosophic/, sagax. This sid¬
ereal body, setting itself free at death, attracts, and for a
long time preserves, through the sympathy of things ho¬
mogeneous, the reflections of the past life; if drawn along
a special current by a will which is powerfully sympathetic,
it manifests naturally, for there is nothing more natural
than prodigies. It is thus apparitions are produced. But
we shall develop this point more fully in the chapter de¬
voted to Necromancy. This fluidic body, subject, like the
mass of the astral light, to two contrary movements, at¬
tracting on the left and repelling on the right, or recipro¬
cally, between the two sexes, begets various impulses within
us and contributes to solicitudes of conscience; it is fre¬
quently influenced by reflections of other minds, and thus
are produced, on the one hand, temptations, and, on the
other, profound and unexpected graces. This is also the ex¬
planation of the traditional doctrine of two angels who
strengthen and tempt us. The two forces of the astral light
may be represented by a.balance wherein are weighed our
good intentions for the triumph of justice and the emanci¬
pation of our liberty.
    The astral body is not always of the same sex as the ter¬
restrial, that is, the proportions of the two forces, varying
 from right to left, frequently seem to gainsay the visible
 organisation, producing the seeming vagaries of human pas¬
 sions, and explaining, without in any sense morally justi¬
 fying the amorous peculiarities of Anacreon or Sappho. A
 skilful magnetiser should take all these subtle distinctions
 into account, and we shall provide in our Ritual the rules
 for their recognition.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    85

   There are two kinds of realisation, the true and the fan¬
tastic. The first is the exclusive secret of magicians, the
other belongs to enchanters and sorcerers. Mythologies are
fantastic realisations of religious dogma; superstitions are
the sorcery of mistaken piety; but even mythologies and
superstitions are more efficacious with human will than a
purely speculative philosophy apart from any practice.
Hence St. Paul opposes the conquests of the folly of the
Cross to the inertness of human wisdom. Religion realises
philosophy by adapting it to the weaknesses of the vulgar;
such is for Kabbalists the secret reason and occult explana¬
tion of the doctrines of incarnation and redemption.
   Thoughts untranslated into speech are thoughts lost for
humanity; words unconfirmed by acts are idle words, and
the idle word is not far removed from falsehood. Thought
formulated by speech and confirmed by acts constitutes a
good work or a crime. Hence, whether in vice or virtue,
there is no speech for which we are not responsible; above
all, there are no indifferent acts. Curses and blessings in¬
variably produce their consequence, and every action, what¬
soever its nature, whether inspired by love or hate, has ef¬
fects analogous to its motive, its extent, and its direction.
When that emperor whose images had been mutilated, rais¬
ing his hand to his face, exclaimed, <(I do not feel that I
am injured, ’ ’ he was mistaken in his valuation, and thereby
detracted from the merit of his clemency. What man of
honour could behold undisturbed an insult offered to his
portrait? And did such insults, inflicted even unknown to
ourselves, react on us by a fatal influence, were the effects
of bewitchment actual, as indeed an adept cannot doubt,
how much more imprudent and ill-advised would seem this
utterance of the good emperor!
   There are persons whom we can never offend with im¬
punity, and if the injury we have done them is mortal, we
forthwith begin to die. There are those also whom we never
meet in vain, whose mere glance alters the direction of our
life. The basilisk who slays by a look is no fable; it is a

86                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 magical allegory. Generally speaking, it is bad for health
 to have enemies, and we can never brave with impunity the
 reprobation of anyone. Before opposing ourselves to a
 given force or current, we must be well assured that we
 possess the contrary force, or are with the stream of the
 contrary current; otherwise, we shall be crushed or struck
 down, and many sudden deaths have no other cause than
 this. The terrible visitations of Nadab and Abiu, of Osa,
 of Ananias and Saphira, were occasioned by electric cur¬
 rents of outraged convictions; the sufferings of the
 Ursulines of Londun, of the nuns of Louviers, and of the
copivulsionaries of Jansenism, were identical in principle,
 and are explicable by the same occult natural laws. Had
not Urban Grandier been immolated, one of two things
would have occurred—either the possessed nuns would have
died in frightful convulsions, or the phenomena of diabolical
 frenzy would have so gained in strength and in influence,
epidemically, that Grandier, notwithstanding his knowledge
and his reason, would himself have become hallucinated, and
to such a degree that he would haye slandered himself, like
the unhappy Gaufridy, or would otherwise have perished
suddenly, with all the appalling characteristics of poisoning
or of divine vengeance. In the eighteenth century the un¬
fortunate poet Gilbert fell a victim to his audacity in brav¬
ing the current of opinion and actual philosophical fanati¬
cism which characterised his epoch. Guilty of philosophical
treason, he died raving mad, possessed by the most incred¬
ible terrors, as if God himself had punished him for de¬
fending his cause out of season. As a fact, he perished by
reason of a law of nature of which he could know nothing;
he set himself against an electric current, and was struck
down as by lightning. Had Marat not been assassinated by
Charlotte Corday, he would have been destroyed infallibly
by a reaction of public opinion. It was the execration of
the honest which afflicted him with leprosy, and he would
have had to succumb thereto. The reprobation excited by
the massacre of St, Bartholomew was the sole cause of the

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    87

  atrocious disease and death of Charles IX., while, had not
  Henry IV. been sustained by an immense popularity, which
 he owed to the projecting power or sympathetic force of his
 astral life, he would scarcely have outlived his conversion,
 but would have perished under the contempt of Protestants,
 combined with the suspicion and ill-will of Catholics. Un¬
 popularity may be a proof of integrity and courage, but
 never of policy or prudence; the wounds inflicted by opin¬
 ion are mortal for statesmen. We may recall the premature
 and violent end of many illustrious persons whom it would
 be inexpedient to mention here. Disgraces in public opin¬
 ion may often be great injustices, but none the less they
 are invariably occasions of ill-success, and frequently of a
 death-sentence. In return, acts of injustice done to one
 individual can and should, if they rest unrepaired, cause
 the loss of an entire nation or of a whole society; this is
 what is called the cry of blood, for at the bottom of every
 injustice there is the germ of homicide. By reason of these
terrible laws of solidarity, Christianity recommends so
strongly the forgiveness of injuries and reconciliation. He
who dies unforgiving casts himself dagger-armed into eter¬
nity, and condemns himself to the horrors of an eternal
murder. The efficacy of paternal or maternal blessings or
curses is an invincible popular tradition and belief. As a
fact, the closer the bonds which unite two persons, the more
terrible are the consequences of hatred between them. The
brand of Althaea burning the blood of Meleager is the
mythological symbol of this terrible power. Let parents
be ever on their guard, for no one can kindle hell in his own
blood, and devote his own issue to misfortune, without be¬
ing himself burnt and made wretched. To pardon is never
a crime, but to curse is always a danger and an evil action.

88                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                        INITIATION

                       JESOD     BONUM

The initiate is he who possesses the lamp of Trismegistus,
 The lamp of Trismegistus is reason illuminated by science;
the mantle of Apollonius is full and complete self-posses¬
sion, which isolates the sage from blind tendencies; and the
staff of the patriarchs is the help of the secret and everlast¬
ing forces of nature. The lamp of Trismegistus enlightens
present, past, and future, lays bare the conscience of men,
and manifests the inmost recesses of the female heart. The
lamp bums with a triple flame, the mantle is thrice-folded,
and the staff is divided into three parts.
   The number nine is that of divine reflections; it expresses
the divine idea in all its abstract power, but it also signifies
extravagance in belief, and hence superstition and idolatry.
For this reason Hermes has made it the number of initiation,
because the initiate reigns over superstition and by super¬
stition, and alone can advance through the darkness, leaning
on his staff, enveloped in his mantle, and lighted by his
lamp. Reason has been given to all men, but all do not
know how to make use of it; it is a science to be acquired.
Liberty is offered to all, but not all can be free; it is a
right that must be earned. Force is for all, but all do not
know how to rest upon it; it is a power that must be seized.
We attain nothing without more than one effort. The
destiny of man is that he should enrich himself with what
he gains, and that he should afterwards have, like God,
the glory and pleasure of dispensing it.
   Magic was called formerly the sacerdotal art and the
royal art, because initiation gave empire over souls to the
sage, and the adroitness for ruling wills. Divination is also
one of the privileges of the initiate; now, divination is sim-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     89

ply the knowledge of effects contained in causes and science
applied to the facts of the universal dogma of analogy.
Human acts are not alone written in the astral light; their
traces are left upon the face, they modify mien and car¬
riage, they change the tone of the voice. Thus every man
bears about him the history of his life, which is legible for
the initiate. Now, the future is ever the consequence of the
past, and unexpected circumstances do not appreciably alter
results reasonably calculated. The destiny of each man can
be therefore foretold him. An entire existence can be
judged by a single movement ; one piece of awkwardness
may be the presage of a long chain of misfortunes. Csesar
was assassinated because he was ashamed of being bald;
Napoleon ended his days at St Helena because he admired
the poems of Ossian; Louis Philippe abdicated the throne
as he did because he carried an umbrella. These are para¬
doxes for the vulgar, who cannot grasp the occult relations
of things, but they are causes for the adept, who under¬
stands all and is surprised at nothing.
   Initiation is a preservative against the false lights of
mysticism; it equips human reason with its relative value
and proportional infallibility, connecting it with supreme
reason by the chain of analogies. Hence the initiate knows
no doubtful hopes, no absurd fears because he has no irra¬
tional beliefs; he is acquainted with the extent of his power,
and he can dare without danger. For him, therefore, to dare
is to be able. Here, then, is a new interpretation of his
attributes; his lamp represents learning, the mantle which
enwraps him his discretion, and his taff is the emblem of
his strength and daring. He knows, he dares, and is silent.
He knows the secrets of the future, he dares in the present,
and he is silent on the past. He knows the failings of the
human heart; he dares make use of them to achieve his
work; and he is silent as to his purposes. He knows the
principle of all symbolisms and of all religions; he dares to
practise or to abstain from them without hypocrisy and
without impiety; and he is silent upon the one dogma of

90                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


supreme initiation. He knows the existence and nature of
the great magical agent; he dares perform the acts and
give utterance to the words which make it subject to human
will, and he is silent upon the mysteries of the great
arcanum.
   So may you find him often melancholy, never dejected or
despairing; often poor, never abject or miserable; perse¬
cuted often, never disheartened or conquered. He remem¬
bers the bereavement and murder of Orpheus, the exile and
lonely death of Moses, the martyrdom of the prophets, the
tortures of Apollonius, the cross of the Saviour. He knows
the desolation in which Agrippa died, whose memory is even
now slandered; he knows what labours overcame the great
Paracelsus, and all that Raymond Lully was condemned to
undergo that he might finish by a violent death. He re¬
members Swedenborg simulating madness and even losing
reason in order to excuse his science; St. Martin and his
hidden life; Cagliostro, who perished forsaken in the cells
of the Inquisition; Cazotte, who ascended the scaffold. In¬
heritor of so many victims, he does not dare the less, but he
understands better the necessity for silence. Let us follow
his example; let us learn diligently; when we know, let us
have courage, and let us be silent.

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                       91




                             10 ^ K

                      THE KABBALAH

              MALCHUTH      PRINCIPIUM     PHALLUS

All religions have preserved the remembrance of a primi¬
tive book, written in types, by the sages of the earliest ages
of the world! simplified and vulgarised in later days, its
symbols furnished letters to the art of Writing, characters
to the Word, and to occult Philosophy its mysterious signs
and pantacles. This book, attributed by the Hebrews to
 Enoch, seventh master of the world after Adam; by the
Egyptians to Hermes-Trismegistus; by the Greeks to Cad¬
mus, the mysterious builder of the Holy City; this book
was the symbolical summary of primitive tradition, called
subsequently Kabbalah or Cabala, meaning reception. The
tradition in question rests altogether on the one dogma of
magic: the visible is for us the proportional measure of the
invisible. Now the ancients, observing that equilibrium is
the universal law in physics, consequent on the apparent
opposition
   , ,L i, ~, - - . ■«
                      of two forces, argued from physical to meta-
physical equilibrium, and maintained that in God, that is,
in the prime living and active cause, there must be recog¬
nised two properties which are necessary to one another—
stability and motion, necessity and liberty, rational order
and volitional antonomy, justice and love, whence also
severity and mercy. Now, these two attributes were per¬
sonified, so to speak, by the Kabbalistic Jews under the
names of Geburah and Chesed. Above Geburah and Chesed
abides the supreme crown, the equilibrating power, princi¬
ple of the world or equilibrated kingdom, which we find
mentioned under the name of Malchuth in the occult and
kabbalistic versicle of the Pater-noster to which we have
already refered. But Geburah and Chesed, maintained in
equilibrium by the crown above and the kingdom below,

92                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


constitute two principles, which may be considered from an
abstract point of view, or in their realisation. In their
abstract or idealised sense, they take the higher names of
Chochmah, wisdom, and Binah, intelligence. Their realisa¬
tion is stability and progress, that is, eternity and victory—
Hod and Netsah.
   Such, according to the Kabbalah, is the groundwork of all
religions and all sciences—a triple triangle and a circle, the
notion of the triad explained by the balance multiplied by
itself in the domains of the ideal, then the realisation of this
conception in forms. Now, the ancients attached the first
notions of this simple and impressive theology to the very
idea of numbers, and qualified the figures of the first decade
after the following manner :—
     1. Kether.—The Crown, the equilibrating power.
  2. Chochmah.—Wisdom, equilibrated in its unchangeable
order by the initiative of intelligence.
     3. Binah.—Active intelligence, equilibrated by Wisdom.
  4. Chesed.—Mercy, which is wisdom in its secondary con¬
ception, ever benevolent because it is strong.
  5. Geburah.—Austerity, necessitated by Wisdom itself,
and by goodwill. To permit evil is to hinder good.
   6. Tiphereth.—Beauty, the luminous conception of equili¬
brium in forms, intermediary between the Crown and the
Kingdom, mediating principle between Creator and crea¬
tion.   (Sublime conception of poetry and its sovereign
priesthood!)
  7. Netsah.—Victory, that is, eternal triumph of intelli¬
gence and justice.
  8. Hod.—Eternity of the conquests achieved by mind
over matter, active over passive, life over death.
  9. Jesod.—The Foundation, that is, the basis of all belief
and all truth—what we term the absolute in philosophy.
   10. Malchuth.—The Kingdom is the universe, entire crea¬
tion, the work and mirror of God, the proof of supreme rea-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     93

son, the formal consequence which compels us to have re¬
course to virtual premisses, the enigma which has God for
its answer—supreme and absolute reason.
   These ten primary notions attached to the ten first char¬
acters of the primitive alphabet, signifying both principles
and numbers, are- called the ten Sephiroth by the masters
in Kabbalah. The sacred tetragam, drawn in the following
manner, indicates the number, source, and correspondence
of the divine names. To this name of Jotchavah, written
by these four-and-twenty signs, crowned with a triple
flower of light, must be referred the twenty-four thrones of
heaven, and the twenty-four crowned elders in the Apo¬
calypse. In the Kabbalah the occult principle is called the
Elder, and this principle, multiplied, and, as it were, re¬




flected, in secondary causes, creates images of itself—that
is to say, so many elders as there are diverse conceptions
of its unique essence. These images, less perfect in pro¬
portion as they are further removed from their source, pro¬
ject upon the darkness an ultimate reflection or glimmer,
representing a horrible and deformed elder, who is vulgarly
termed the devil. Hence an initiate has been bold enough
to say: ‘ ‘ The devil is God, as understood by the wicked; ’ ’
while another has added, in words more bizarre, but no less
energetic: “The devil is composed of God’s ruins.” We
may sum up and explain these strikingly novel definitions
by remarking that in symbolism itself the demon is an angel
cast out of heaven for having sought to usurp divinity.
This belongs to the allegorical language of prophets and
makers of legends. Philosophically speaking, the devil is

94                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


a human idea of divinity, which has been surpassed and
dispossessed of heaven by the progress of science and rea¬
son. Among primitive Oriental peoples, Moloch, Adram-
elek, Baal, were personifications of the one God, dishon¬
oured by barbarous attributes. The god of the Jansenists,
creating hell for the majority of human beings, and de¬
lighting in the eternal tortures of those he was unwilling
to save, is a conception even more barbarous than that of
Moloch; hence the god of the Jansenists is already a ver¬
itable Satan fallen from heaven in the sight of every wise
and enlightened Christian.
   In the multiplication of the divine names the kabbalists
have connected them all, either with the unity of the tetra-
gram, the figure of the triad, or the sephirotic scale of the
decad. They arrange the scale of the divine names and
numbers in a triangle, which may be presented in Roman
characters as follows:—
                              J
                             JA
                            SDI
                           JEHV
                          ELOIM
                         SABOAT
                         ARARITA
                        ELVEDAAT
                       ELIM GIBOR
                      ELIM SABAOT
   The sum of all these divine names formed from the one
tetragram is a basis of the Hebrew Ritual, and constitutes
the occult force which the kabbalistic rabbins invoke under
the title of Semhamphoras.
  We have now to concern ourselves with the Tarot from
the kabbalistic point of view, and have already indicated
the occult source of the name. This hieroglyphic book is
composed of a kabbalistic alphabet, and of a wheel or circle
of four decades, distinguished by four symbolical and typi¬
cal figures, each having for its radius a scale of four pro-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     95


gressive figures, which represent Humanity: man, woman,
youth, child—master, mistress, knight, esquire. The twen¬
ty-two figures of the alphabet represent, in the first place,
the thirteen dogmas, and secondly, the nine beliefs author¬
ised by that Jewish religion which is so strong and so firmly
established in the highest reason.
  Here follows the religious and kabbalistic key of The
Tarot, formulated in technical verses after the mode of the
ancient lawgivers:—

 1      ft A conscious, active cause in all we see.
 2      3 And number proves the living unity.
 3       2 No bound hath He who doth the whole contain.
 4       *t But, all preceding, fills life’s vast domain.
 5      r> Sole worthy worship, He, the only Lord.
 6       * Doth his true doctrine to clean hearts accord.
 7      1 But since faith’s works a single pontiff need,
 8     n One law have we, and at one altar plead;
 9          Eternal God for aye their base upholds.
10      T Heaven and man’s days alike his rule enfolds.
11     2 In mercy rich, in retribution strong,
12          His people’s King he will upraise ere long.
13     tD The tomb gives entrance to the promised land,
            Death only ends; life’s vistas still expand.

          These doctrines sacred, pure, and stedfast shine;
          And thus we close our number’s scale divine.

14     j Good angels all things temper and assuage,
15     D While evil spirits burst with wrath and rage.
16     V God doth the lightning rule, the flame subdue.
17     3 His word controls both Vesper and her dew.
18     ¥ He makes the moon our watchman through the night.
19     D And by his sun renews the world in light.
20     “l When dust to dust returns, his breath can call
 0
or ^     Life from the tomb which is the fate of all.
21

96                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


21
or ^    His crown illuminates the mercy seat,
22
          And glorifies the cherubs at his feet.
   By the help of this purely dogmatic explanation we shall
already understand the kabbalistic alphabet of the Tarot.
Thus, Figure I., entitled the Buffoon, represents the active
principle in the economy of divine and human autotelia.
Figure II., vulgarly called Pope Joan, represents dogmatic
unity based upon numbers, and is the personification of
the Kabbalah or the Gnosis. Figure III. represents divine
Spirituality under the emblem of a winged woman, holding
in one hand the apocalyptic eagle, and in the other the
world suspended from the end of her sceptre. The other
emblems are equally clear, and can be explained as easily
as the first. Turning now to the four suits, namely, Clubs,
Cups, Swords, and Circles or Pantacles, commonly called
Deniers—all these are hieroglyphics of the tetragram. Thus,
the Club is the Egyptian Phallus or Hebrew jod; the Cup
is the ctei's or primitive he; the Sword is the conjunction
of both, or the lingam, represented in Hebrew preceding the
captivity by vau; while the Circle or Pantacle, image of the
world, is the he final of the divine name. Now let us take a
Tarot and combine all its emblems one by one into the
Wheel or ROTA of William Postel; let us group the four
aces, the four twos, and so on, together; we shall then have
ten packs of cards giving the hieroglyphic interpretation of
the triangle of divine names on the scale of the denary, as
previously tabulated. By referring each number to its
corresponding Sephira, we may then read them off as
 follows:—
                            ntrv>
     Four signs present the name of every name.
                          1 Kether.
                        The four Aces.
     Four brilliant beams adorn his crown of flame.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    97


                       2 Chochmah.
                      The four Twos.
   Four rivers ever from his wisdom flow.
                         3 Binah.
                     The four Threes.
   Four proofs of his intelligence we know.
                         4 Chesed.
                    The four Fours.
  Four benefactions from his mercy come.
                        5 Geburah.
                     The four Fives.
  Four times four sins avenged his justice sum.
                       6 Tiphereth.
                    The four Sixes.
  Four rays unclouded make his beauty known.
                         7 Netsah.
                    The four Sevens.
  Four times his conquest shall in song be shewn.
                         8 Hod.
                    The four Eights.
  Four times he triumphs on the timeless plane.
                          9 Jesod.
                   The four Nines.
  Foundations four his great white throne maintain.
                      10 Malchuth.
                      The four Tens.

  One fourfold kingdom owns his endless sway.
  As from his crown there streams a fourfold ray.

   By this simple arrangement the kabbalistic meaning of
each card is exhibited. For example, the five of clubs
rigorously signifies Geburah of Jod, that is, the justice of
the creator or the wrath of man; the seven of cups signifies
the victory of mercy or the triumph of woman; the eight of
swords signifies conflict or eternal equilibrium; and so of

98                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


the others. We can thus understand how the ancient
pontiffs proceeded to make the oracle speak. The chance
dealing of the lamens invariably produced a fresh kabba-
listic meaning, exactly true in its combinations, which alone
were fortuitous; and, seeing that the faith of the ancients
attributed nothing to chance, they read the answers of
Providence in the oracles of the Tarot, which were called
Theraph or Theraphim by the Hebrews, as the erudite
kabbalist Gaffarel, one of the magicians employed by Car¬
dinal Richelieu, was the first to perceive.
  As to the figures, a final couplet will suffice to explain
them:—
         King, Queen, Knight, Esquire.
     The married pair, the youth, the child, the race;
     Thy path by these to Unity retrace.
At the end of the Ritual we shall provide further details,
together with full documents, concerning the marvellous
Tarot book, which is of all books the most primitive, the
key of prophecies and dogmas, in a word, the inspiration of
inspired works, a fact which has remained unperceived
equally by the science of Court de Gebelin and by the ex¬
traordinary intuitions of Eteilla or Alliette.
   The ten Sephiroth and the twenty-two Tarots, form what
the kabbalists term the thirty-two paths of absolute science.
With regard to particular sciences, they distinguish them
into fifty chapters, which they call the fifty gates—among
Orientals the word gate signifies government or authority.
The rabbins also divided the Kabbalah into Bereschit, or
universal Genesis, and Mercavah, or the chariot of Ezekiel;
then by means of a dual interpretation of the kabbalistic
alphabets, they formed two sciences, called Gematria and
Temurah, and so composed the notary art, which is funda¬
mentally the complete science of the Tarot signs and their
complex and varied application to the divination of all
secrets, whether of philosophy, nature, or the future itself.
We shall recur in our twentieth chapter to this work.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    99




                           11 3 L

                  THE MAGIC CHAIN

                      Manus     Force

The great magical agent, by us termed the astral light, by
others the soul of the earth, and designated by old chemists
under the names of Azoth and Magnesia, this occult, unique,
and indubitable force, is the key of all empire, the secret
of all power; it is the winged dragon of Medea, the serpent
of the Edenic mystery; it is the universal glass of visions,
the bond of sympathies, the source of love, prophecy, and
glory. To know how to avail one’s self of this agent is to
be the trustee of God’s own power; all real, effective magic,
all occult force is there, and its demonstration is the sole
end of all genuine books of science. To possess one’s self
of the great magical agent there are two operations neces-
sary—to concentrate and project, or, in other words, to
fix and to move. Fixity has been provided as the basis and
guarantee of movement by the Author of all things; the
magus must go to work in like manner.
   It is said that enthusiasm is contagious—and why? Be¬
cause it cannot be produced in the absence of collective
faith. Faith produces faith; to believe is to have a reason
for willing; to will with reason is to will with power—not,
I say, with an infinite, but with an indefinite power. What
operates in the intellectual and moral world obtains still
more in the physical, and when Archimedes was in want of a
lever to move the world, what he sought was simply the
great magical arcanum. One arm of the androgyne figure
of Henry Khunrath bore the word Coagula and the other
Solve.    To collect and diffuse are nature’s two words—
but after what manner can we accomplish these operations
with the astral light or soul of the world?   Concentration

100              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


is by isolation and distribution by the magical chain. Isola¬
tion consists in absolute independence for thought, com¬
plete liberty for the heart, and perfect continence for the
senses. Every man who is possessed by prejudices and
fears, every passionate person who is slave of his passions,
is incapable of concentrating or coagulating, according to
the expression of Khunrath, the astral light or soul of the
earth. All true adepts have been independent even amidst
torture, sober and chaste till death. The explanation of
such anomaly is this—in order to dispose of a force, you
must not be surprised by this force in a way that it may
dispose of you. But then, cry out those who seek only in
magic for a method of inordinately satisfying the lusts of
nature, what good is a power which must not be used for
our own satisfaction? Unhappy creatures who ask, if I
told you, how could you grasp it? Are pearls nothing be¬
cause they are worthless to the horde of Epicurus? Did
not Curtius prefer the government of those who had gold
 than its possession by himself? Must we not be some¬
 thing removed from the common man when we almost pre¬
 tend to be God? Moreover, I grieve to deject or discourage
 you, but I am not devising the transcendental sciences;
 I teach them, defining their immutable necessities in the
 presentation of their primary and most inexorable condi¬
 tions. Pythagoras was a free, sober, and chaste man;
 Apollonius of Tyana and Julius Caesar were both of re¬
 pellent austerity; the sex of Paracelsus was suspected, so
 foreign was he too the weakness of love; Raymond Lully
 carried the severity of life to the most exalted point of
 asceticism; Jerome Cardan exaggerted the practice of fast¬
 ing till he nearly perished of starvation, if we may accept
 tradition; Agrippa, poor and buffeted from town to town,
 almost died of misery rather than yield to the caprice of a
 princess who insulted the liberty of science. What then
 made the felicity of these men? The knowledge of great
 secrets and the consciousness of power. It was sufficient
 for those great souls. Must one be like unto them in order

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   101

to know what they knew ? Assuredly not, and the existence
of this book is perhaps a case in point; but in order to do
what they did, it is absolutely necessary to take the means
wrhich they took. But what did they actually accomplish?
They astonished and subdued the world; they reigned more
truly than kings. Magic is an instrument of divine good¬
ness or demoniac pride, but it is the annihilation of earthly
joys and the pleasures of mortal life. Why study it? ask
the luxurious. Merely to know it and possibly after to
learn mistrust of stupid unbelief or puerile credulity. Men
of pleasure, and half of these I count for so many women,
is not gratified curiosity highly pleasurable? Read there¬
fore without fear, you will not be magicians against your
will. Readiness for absolute renunciation is, moreover,
necessary only in order to establish universal currents and
transform the face of the world; there are relative magical
operations, limited to a certain circle, which do not need
such heroic virtues. We can act upon passions by passions,
determine sympathies or intipathies, hurt even and heal,
without possessing the omnipotence of the magus; in this
case, however, we must realise the risk of a reaction in pro¬
portion to the action, to which we may easily fall a victim.
All this will be explained in our Ritual.
   To make the magic chain is to establish a magnetic
current which becomes stronger in proportion to the extent
of the chain. We shall see in the Ritual how these cur¬
rents can be produced, and what are the various modes
of forming the chain. Mesmer’s trough was an exceedingly
imperfect magic chain; several great circles of illuminati
in different northern countries possess more potent chains.
Even that association of Catholic priests, celebrated for
their occult power and their unpopularity, is established
upon the plan and follows the conditions of the most potent
magical chains, and herein is the secret of their force,
which they attribute solely to the grace or will of God, a
vulgar and cheap solution for every mystery of power in
influence or attraction. In the Ritual it will be our task

102              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


to estimate the sequence of truly magical ceremonies and
evocations which make up the great work of vocation under
the name of the Exercises of St Ignatius.
   All enthusiasm propagated in a society by a series of
communications and practices in common produces a mag¬
netic current, and continues or increases by the current.
The action of the current is to carry away and often to
exalt beyond measure persons who are impressionable and
weak, nervous organisations, temperaments inclined to
hysteria or hallucination. Such people soon become power¬
ful vehicles of magical force and efficiently project the
astral light in the direction of the current itself; oppo¬
sition at such a time to the manifestations of the force is,
to some extent, a struggle with fatality. When the youthful
Pharisee Saul, or Schol, threw himself, with all the fanati¬
cism and all the determination of a sectarian, across the
aggressive line of Christianity, he unconsciously placed
himself at the mercy of a power against which he thought
to prevail, and hence he was struck down by a formidable
magnetic flash, doubtless the more instantaneous by reason
of the combined effect of cerebral congestion and sun¬
stroke. The conversion of the young Israelite, Alphonsus
of Ratisbonne, is a contemporary fact which is absolutely
of the same nature. We are acquainted with a sect of
enthusiasts whom it is common to deride at a distance,
and to join, despite one’s self, as soon as they are ap¬
proached, even with a hostile intention. I will go further,
and affirm that magical circles and magnetic currents estab¬
lish themselves, and have an influence, according to fatal
laws, upon those on whom they can act. Each one of us is
drawn within a circle of relations which constitutes his
world, and to the influence of which he is made subject.
The lawgiver of the French Revolution, that man whom the
most spiritual nation in the whole world acknowledged as
the incarnation of human reason, Jean Jacques Rousseau,
was drawn into the most lamentable action of his life, the
desertion of his children, by the magnetic influence of a

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   103

libertine circle and a magical current of table-d’hote. He
describes it simply and ingenuously in his Confessions, but
it is a fact which has remained unobserved. Great circles
very often make great men, and vice-versa. There are no
unrecognised geniuses, there are eccentric men, and the term
would seem to have been invented by an adept. The man
who is eccentric in his genius is one who attempts to form
a circle by combating the central attractive force of estab¬
lished chains and currents. It is his destiny to be broken
or to succeed. Now, what is the twofold condition of success
in such a case? A central point of stability and a per¬
severing circular action of initiative. The man of genius
is one who has discovered a real law, and is thereby pos¬
sessed of an invincible, active, and grinding power. He
may die in the midst of his work, but that which he has
willed comes to pass, in spite of his death, and is indeed
often ensured thereby, because death is a veritable assump¬
tion for genius. “When I shall be lifted up from the
earth,” said the greatest of the initiators, “I will draw
all things after me.”
   The law of magnetic currents is that of the movement of
the astral light itself, which is always double, and augments
in an opposite sense. A great action invariably paves the
way for a reaction of equal magnitude, and the secret of
phenomenal successes consists entirely in the foreknowledge
of reactions. Thus did Chateaubriand, penetrated with
disgust at the saturnalia of the revolution, foresee and pre¬
pare the immense success of his “Genius of Christianity.”
To oppose one’s self to a current at the beginning of its
revolution is to court being destroyed by that current, like
the great and unfortunate Emperor Julian; to oppose one’s
self to a current which has run its round is to take the
lead of a contrary current. The great man is he who comes
seasonably and knows how to innovate opportunely. In the
days of the apostles, Voltaire would have found no echo for
his utterances, and might have been merely an ingenious
parasite at the banquets of Trimalcyon. Now, at the

104              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


epoch wherein we live, everything is ripe for a fresh out¬
burst of evangelical zeal and Christian self-devotion, pre¬
cisely by reason of the prevailing general disillusion,
egoistic positivism, and public cynicism of the coarsest in¬
terests. The sucess of certain books and the mystical ten¬
dencies of minds are unequivocal symptoms of this wide¬
spread disposition. We restore and we build churches only
to realise more keenly that we are void of belief, only to
long the more for it; once more does the whole world await
its Messiah, and he cannot tarry in his coming. Let a man,
for example, come forward, who by rank or by fortune is
placed in an exalted position—a pope, a king, even a Jewish
millionaire—and let this man publicly and solemnly sac¬
rifice all his material interests for the weal of humanity;
let him make himself the saviour of the poor, the dis¬
seminator, and even the victim, of doctrines of renuncia¬
tion and charity, and he will draw round him an immense
following; he will accomplish a complete moral revolution
in the world. But the high place is before all things neces¬
sary for such a personage, because, in these days of mean¬
ness and trickery, any Word issuing from the lower ranks
 is suspected of interested ambition and imposture. Ye,
then, who are nothing, ye who possess nothing, aspire not
 to be apostles or messiahs. If you have faith, and would
 act in accordance therewith, get possession, in the first
 place, of the means of action, which are the influence of
 rank and the prestige of fortune. In olden times gold
 was manufactured by science; nowadays science must be
 remade by gold. We have fixed the volatile, and we must
 now volatilise the fixed—in other words, we have ma¬
 terialised spirit, and we must now spiritualise matter. The
 most sublime utterance now passes unheeded) if it goes
 forth without the guarantee of a name—that is to say,
 of a success which represents a material value. What is
 the worth of a manuscript ? That of the author’s signature
 among the booksellers ? That established reputation known
  as Alexander Dumas et Cie represents one of the literary

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   105

guarantees of our time, but the house of Dumas is in
repute only for the romances which are its exclusive pro¬
ductions. Let Dumas devise a magnificent Utopia, or dis¬
cover a splendid solution of the religious problem, and no
one will take them seriously, despite the European celebrity
of the Panurge of modern literature. We are in the age
of acquired positions, where every one is appraised ac¬
cording to his social and commercial standing. Unlimited
freedom of speech has produced such a strife of words that
no one inquires what is said, but who has said it. If it be
Rothschild, his Holiness Pius the Ninth, or even Monseig¬
neur Dupanloup, it is something; but if it be Tartempion,
it is nothing, were he even—which is possible, after all—an
unrecognised prodigy of genius, knowledge, and good sense.
Hence to those who would say to me: If you possess the
secret of great successes, and of a force which can transform
the world, why do you not make use of them? I would
answer: This knowledge has come to me too late for my¬
self, and I have spent over its acquisition the time and the
resources which might have enabled me to apply it; I
offer it to those who are in a position to avail themselves
of it. Illustrious men, rich men, great ones of this world,
who are dissatisfied with that which you have, who are
conscious of a nobler and larger ambition, will you be
fathers of a new world, kings of a rejuvenated civilisation ?
A poor and obscure scholar has found the lever of Archi-
mides, and he offers it to you for the good of humanity
alone, asking nothing whatsoever in exchange.
   The phenomena which have quite recently perturbed
America and Europe, as regards table-turning and fluidic
manifestations, are simply magnetic currents at the be¬
ginning of their formation, appeals on the part of nature
inviting us, for the good of humanity, to re-establish the
great sympathetic and religious chains. As a fact, stag¬
nation in the astral light would mean death to the human
race, and torpor in this secret agent has already been mani¬
fested by alarming symptoms of decomposition and death.

106               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


For example, cholera-morbus, the potato disease, and the
blight of the grape, are traceable solely to this cause, as the
two young shepherds of la Salette saw darkly and sym¬
bolically in their dream. The unlooked-for credit which
awaited their narrative, and the vast concourse of pilgrims
attracted by a statement so singular and at the same time
so vague as that of these two children without instruction
and almost without morality, are proofs of the magnetic
reality of the fact, and the fluidic tendency of the earth
itself to operate the cure of its inhabitants. Superstitions
are instinctive, and all that is instinctive is founded in
the very nature of things, to which fact the sceptics of
all times have given insufficient attention. We attribute,
then, all the strange phenomena of table-turning to the
universal magnetic agent in search of a chain of enthu¬
siasms with a view to the formation of fresh currents. The
force of itself is blind, but it can be directed by the will
of man, and is influenced by prevailing opinions. This
universal fluid—if we decide to regard it as a fluid—being
the common medium of all nervous organisms, and the
vehicle of all sensitive vibrations, establishes an actual
physical solidarity between impressionable persons, and
transmits from one to another the impressions of imagina¬
tion and of thought. The movement of the inert object,
determined by the undulations of the universal agent,
obeys the ruling impression, and reproduces in its revela¬
tions at one time all the lucidity of the most wonderful
visions, and at another all the eccentricity and falsehood of
the most vague and incoherent dreams. The blows re¬
sounding on furniture, the clattering of dishes, the self¬
playing of musical instruments, are illusions produced by
the same cause. The miracles of the convulsionaries of
Saint Medard were of the same order, and seemed fre¬
quently to suspend the laws of nature. On the one hand,
exaggeration produced by fascination, which is the special
quality of intoxication occasioned by congestions of the
astral light; on the other, actual oscillations or movements

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  107

impressed upon inert matter by the subtle and universal
agent of motion and life. Such is the sole foundation of
these occurrences which look so marvellous, as we may easily
demonstrate at will by reproducing, in accordance with
rules laid down in the Ritual, the most astounding of these
phenomena, establishing, as can be done quite simply, the
absence of trickery, hallucination, or error.
   It has frequently happened to me after experiments in
the magic chain, performed with persons devoid of good
intention or sympathy, that I have been awakened with a
start in the night by truly alarming impressions and sensa¬
tions. On one such occasion I felt vividly the pressure of
an unknown hand attempting to strangle me; I rose up,
lighted my lamp, and set myself calmly to work, seeking to
profit by my wakefulness and to drive away the phantoms
of sleep. The books about me were moved with much
noise, papers were disturbed and rubbed one against an¬
other, timber creaked as if on the point of splitting, and
heavy blows resounded on the ceiling. With curiosity but
also with tranquility I observed all these phenomena, which
would not have been less wonderful had they been only the
product of my imagination, so real did they seem. For the
rest, I may state that I was in no sense frightened, and
during this occurrence I was engaged upon something quite
foreign to the occult sciences. By the repetition of similar
phenomena I was led to attempt the experience of evoca¬
tion, assisted by the magical ceremonies of the ancients,
when I obtained truly astounding results, which will be set
forth in the thirteenth chapter of this work.

108               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                          12 t, M

                  THE GREAT WORK

                       DISCITE   CRUX

The great work is, before all things, the creation of man
by himself, that is to say, the full and entire conquest of
his faculties and his future; it is especially the perfect
emancipation of his will, assuring him universal dominion
over Azoth and the domain of Magnesia, in other words,
full power over the universal magical agent. This agent,
disguised by the ancient philosophers under the name of
the first matter, determines the forms of modifiable sub¬
stance, and we can really arrive by means of it at metallic
transmutation and the universal medicine. This is not a
hypothesis, it is a scientific fact already established and
rigorously demonstrable. Nicholas Flamel and Raymond
Lully, both of them poor, indubitably distributed immense
riches. Agrippa never proceeded beyond the first part of
the great work, and he died in the ordeal, fighting to pos¬
sess himself and to fix his independence.
   Now, there are two Hermetic operations, the one spiritual,
the other material, and these are mutually dependent. For
the rest, all Hermetic science is contained in the doctrine of
Hermes, which is said to have been originally inscribed
upon an emerald tablet. Its first articles have been already
expounded, and those follow which are concerned with the
operation of the great work:—“Thou shalt separate the
earth from the fire, the subtle from the gross, gently, with
great industry. It rises from earth to heaven, and again it
descends to earth, and it receives the power of things above
and of things below. By this means shalt thou obtain the
glory of the whole world, and all darkness shall depart
 from thee. It is the strong power of every power, for it
will overcome all that is subtle and penetrate all that is

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     109

   solid.   Thus was the world created.” To separate the
  subtle from the gross, in the first operation, which is wholly
   interior, is to set the soul free from all prejudice and all
   vice, which is accomplished by the use of the philosophical
   salt, that is to say, wisdom; of mercury, that is, personal
  skill and application; finally, of sulphur, representing vital
   energy and fire of will. By these are we enabled to change
   into spiritual gold things which are of all least precious,
   even the refuse of the earth. In this sense we must in¬
  terpret the parables of the choir of philosophers, Bernard
   Trevisan, Basil Valentine, Mary the Egyptian and other
   prophets of alchemy; but in their works, as in the great
. work, we must adroitly separate the subtle from the gross,
i the mystical from the positive, allegory from theory. If
   we would read them with profit and understanding, we
   must take them first of all as allegorical in their entirety,
   and then descend from allegories to realities by the way of
   the correspondences or analogies indicated in the one
   dogma:—That which is above is proportional to that which
   is below, and reciprocally. The word Art when reversed,
   or read after the manner of sacred and primitive characters
   from right to left, gives three initials which express the
  different grades of the great wrork. T signifies triad, theory,
  and travail; R, realisation; A, adaptation. In the twelfth
  chapter of the Ritual, we shall give the processes for
  adaptation, in use among the great masters, especially that
  which is contained in the Hermetic Citadel of Henry Khun-
  rath. In this place we may indicate for the researches
  of our readers an admirable treatise attributed to Hermes
  Trismegistus, entitled Minerva Mundi. It is found only in
  certain editions of Hermes, and contains, beneath allegories
  full of profundity and poetry, the doctrine of individual
  self-creation, or the creative law consequent on the ac¬
  cordance between two forces, which are termed fixed and
  volatile by alchemists, and are necessity and liberty in the
  absolute order. The diversity of the forms which abound
  in nature is explained, in this treatise, by the diversity

110              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


of spirits, and monstrosities by the divergence of efforts;
its reading and assimilation are indispensable for all adepts
who would fathom the mysteries of nature and devote them¬
selves seriously to the search after the great work.
   When the masters in alchemy say that a short time and
little money are needed to accomplish the works of science,
above all when they affirm that one vessel is alone needed,
when they speak of the great and unique athanor, which all
can use, which is ready to each man’s hand, which all
possess without knowing it, they allude to philosophical
and moral alchemy. As a fact, a strong and determined
will can arrive in a short time at absolute independence,
and we are all in possession of the chemical instrument,
the great and sole athanor which answers for the separation
of the subtle from the gross and the fixed from the volatile.
This instrument, complete as the world and precise as \
mathematics, is represented by the sages under the emblem
of the pentagram or five-pointed star, which is the absolute
sign of human intelligence. I will follow the example of
the wise by forbearing to name it; it is too easy to guess it.
   The Tarot figure which corresponds to this chapter was
misconstrued by Court de Gebelin and Etteilla, who re¬
garded it as a blunder of a German cardmaker. It repre¬
sents a man with his hands bound behind him, having two
bags of silver attached to the armpits, and being suspended
by one foot from a gibbet formed by the trunks of two
trees, each with a root of six lopped branches, and by a
crosspiece, thus completing the figure of the Hebrew tau ^;
the legs of the victim are crossed, and his head and elbows
form a triangle. Now, the triangle surmounted by a cross
signifies, in alchemy, the end and perfection of the great
work, a signification which is identical with that of the
letter tau, the last of the sacred alphabet. This hanged
man is, consequently, the adept, bound by his engagements,
and spiritualised, that is, having his feet turned towards
heaven; it is also the antique Prometheus, expiating by
everlasting torture the penalty of his glorious theft; vul-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    111

garly, it is the traitor Judas, and his punishment threatens
betrayers of the great arcanum. Finally, for Kabbalistic
Jews, the hanged man, who corresponds to their twelfth
doctrine, that of the promised Messiah, is a protestation
against the Saviour acknowledged by Christians, and they
seem to say unto him still:—How canst thou save others,
since thou canst not save thyself?
   In the Sepher-Toldos-Jeschu, an anti-christian rabinical
compilation, there occurs a singular parable. Jeschu, says
the rabbinical author of the legend, was travelling with
Simon-Barjona and Judas Iscariot. Late and weary they
came to a lonely house, and, being very hungry, could find
nothing to eat except an exceedingly lean gosling. It was
insufficient for three persons, and to divide it would be to
sharpen without satisfying hunger. They agreed to draw
lots, but as they were heavy with sleep, “Let us first of all
slumber,” said Jeschu, “whilst the supper is preparing;
when we wake we will tell our dreams, and he who has had
the most beautiful dream shall have the whole gosling to his
own share. So it was arranged; they slept and they woke.
As for me, said St Peter, I dreamed that I was the vicar of
God. And I, said Jeschu, that I was God himself. For
me, said Judas hypocritically, I dreamed that, being in
somnambulism, I arose, went softly downstairs, took the
gosling from the spit, and ate it. Thereupon they also
went down, but the gosling had completely vanished. Judas
had a waking dream.
   This anecdote is given, not in the text of the Sepher-
Toldos-Jeschu itself, but in the rabbinical commentaries on
that work. The legend is a protest of Jewish positivism
against Christian mysticism. As a fact, while the faithful
surrendered themselves to magnificent dreams, the pro¬
scribed Israelite, Judas of the Christian civilization, worked,
sold, intrigued, became rich, possessed himself of this life’s
realities, so that he became in a position to advance the
means of existence to the very forms of worship which had
so long outlawed him. The ancient adorers of the ark

112               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


remained true to the cultus of the strong box; the exchange
is now their temple, and thence they govern the Christian
world. The laugh is indeed with Judas, who can congratu¬
late himself upon not having slept like St Peter.
   In archaic writings preceding the Capacity, the Hebrew
tau was cruciform, which further confirms our interpreta¬
tion of the twelfth plate of the Kabbalistic Tarot. The
cross, which produces four triangles, is also the sacred sign
of the duodenary, and on this account it was called the
Key of heaven by the Egyptians. So Etteilla, confused by
his protracted researches for the conciliation of the ana¬
logical necessities of this symbol with his own personal
opinion, in which he was influenced by the erudite Court
de Gebelin, placed in the hand of his upright hanged
man, by him interpreted as Prudence, a Hermetic caduceus,
formed by two serpents and a Greek tau. Seeing that he
understood the necessity for the tau or cross on the twelfth
leaf of the book of Thoth, he should also have seen the
multiple and magnificent meaning of the Hermetic hanged
man, the Prometheus of science, the living man who makes
contact with earth by his thought alone, whose firm ground
is heaven, the free and immolated adept, the revealer
menaced with death, the conjuration of Judaism against
Christ, which seems to be an involuntary admission of the
secret divinity of the Crucified, lastly, the sign of the work
accomplished, the cycle terminated, the intermediary tau,
which resumes for the first time, before the final denary,
the signs of the sacred alphabet.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     113




                            13 oN
                    NECROMANCY

                        EX IPSIS   MORS

We have said that the images of persons and things are
preserved in the astral light. Therein also can be evoked
the forms of those who are in onr world no longer, and by
this means are accomplished those mysteries of necromancy
which are so contested and at the same time so real. The
Kabbalists who have discoursed concerning the world of
spirits have simply described what they have seen in their
evocations. Eliphas Levi Zahed,* who writes this book,
has evoked, and he has seen. Let us state, in the first
place, what the masters have written of their visions or
their intuitions in that which they term the light of glory.
We read in the Hebrew book concerning the Revolution of
Souls that there are three classes of souls—the daughters of
Adam, the daughters of angels, and the daughters of sin.
According to the same book, there are also three kinds of
spirits—captive spirits, wandering spirits, and free spirits.
Souls are sent forth in couples; at the same time certain
souls of men are born widowed, and their spouses are held
captive by Lilith and Naemah, the queens of the stryges;
they are souls condemned to expiate the temerity of a
celibate’s vow. Hence, when a man renounces the love
of women from his infancy, he makes the bride who was
destined for him a slave to the demons of debauch. Souls
grow and multiply in heaven as bodies do upon earth.
Immaculate souls are the daughters of the kisses of angels.
  Nothing can enter heaven save that which comes from
heaven.    Hence, after death, the divine spirit which

  * These Hebrew names translated into French are Alphonse Louis
Constant.

114               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


animated man returns alone to heaven and leaves two
corpses, one upon earth, the other in the atmosphere; one
terrestrial and elementary, the other aerial and sidereal, one
already inert, the other still animated by the universal
movement of the soul of the world, yet destined to die
slowly, absorbed by the astral forces which produced it.
The terrestrial body is visible; the other is unseen by the
eyes of earthly and living bodies, nor can it be beheld ex¬
cept by the application of the astral light to the translucid,
which conveys its impressions to the nervous system, and
thus influences the organ of sight so as to make it perceive
the forms which are preserved and the words which are
written in the book of vital light.
   When a man has lived well the astral body evaporates
like a pure incense ascending towards the upper regions;
but should he have lived in sin, his astral body, which holds
him prisoner, still seeks the objects of its passions, and
wishes to return to life. It torments the dreams of young
girls, bathes in the steam of spilt blood, and floats about
the places where the pleasures of its life elapsed; it still
watches over treasures which it possessed and buried; it
expends itself in painful efforts, to make fresh material
organs and so live again. But the stars draw it up and
absorb it; it feels its intelligence weaken, its memory grad¬
ually vanishes, all its being dissolves. ... Its former
vices rise up before it, assume monstrous shapes, and pur¬
sue it; they attack and devour it. . . . The unfortunate
creature thus successively loses all the members which
have ministered to his iniquities; then he dies a second time
and for ever, because he loses his personality and his
memory. Souls which are destined to live, but are not yet
completely purified, remain captive for a longer or shorter
period in the astral body, wherein they are burned by the
odic light, which seeks to absorb and dissolve them. It is
in order to escape from this body that suffering souls some¬
times enter the bodies of the living and therein dwell in
that state which Kabbalists term embryonic. Now, it is

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   115

these aerial bodies which are evoked by necromancy. We
enter into connection with larvae, with dead or perishing
substances, by this operation. The beings in question, for
the most part, cannot speak except by the tingling of our
ears produced by the nervous shock to which I have re¬
ferred, and commonly they can only reason by reflecting
our thoughts and our reveries. To behold these strange
forms, we must put ourselves in abnormal condition akin
to sleep or death, in other words, we must magnetise our¬
selves and enter into a kind of lucid and waking som¬
nambulism. Then necromancy has real results, and then
the evocations of magic can produce actual visions. We
 have said that in the great magical agent, which is the
 astral light, there are preserved all impressions of things,
 all images formed either by rays or reflections; in this
 same light our visions come to us, and it is this which in¬
 toxicates the insane, and leads away their dormant judg¬
 ment in pursuit of the most bizarre phantoms. To insure
 vision without illusion in this light, a powerful will must
 be with us to isolate reflections and attract rays only. To
 dream awake is to see in the astral light, and the orgies of
 the Sabbath, described by so many sorcerers in their crim¬
 inal trials, came to them solely in this manner. The
 preparations and the substances used to obtain this result
 were often horrible, as we shall see in the Ritual, but the
 result itself was never doubtful. They beheld, they heard,
 they handled the most abominable, most fantastic, most im¬
 possible things. We shall return to this subject in our
 fifteenth chapter; at the present moment we are concerned
only with the evocations of the dead.
   In the spring) of the year 1854 I had undertaken a
journey to London, that I might escape from internal dis¬
quietude, and devote myself, without interruption, to
science. I had letters of introduction to persons of emi¬
nence, who were anxious for revelations from the super¬
natural world. I made the acquaintance of several, and
discovered in them, amidst much that was courteous, a

116               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 depth of indifference or trifling. They asked me forthwith
 to work wonders, as if I were a charlatan, and I was some¬
 what discouraged, for, to speak frankly, far from being
 inclined to initiate others into the mysteries of ceremonial
 magic, I had myself shrunk all along from its illusions
 and weariness; moreover, such ceremonies necessitated an
 equipment which would be expensive and hard to collect.
 I buried myself, therefore, in the study of the transcendent
 Kabbalah, and concerned myself no further with English
 adepts, when, returning one day to my hotel, I found a
^note awaiting me. This note contained half of a card,
 divided transversely, on wThich I immediately recognised
 the seal of Solomon. It was accompanied by a small sheet
 of paper, on which these words were pencilled:—“To¬
 morrow, at three o’clock, in front of Westminster Abbey,
 the second half of this card will be given you.” I kept this
  curious assignation. At the appointed spot I found a
  carriage drawn up, and as I held unaffectedly the morsel
  of card in my hand, a footman approached, making a sign
  as he did so, and then opened the door of the equipage.
  It contained a lady in black, wearing a thick veil; she
  motioned to me to take a seat beside her, shewing me at
  the same time the other half of the card. The door closed,
  the carriage drove off, and, the lady raising her veil, I
  saw that my appointment was with an elderly person, with
  grey eyebrows and black eyes of unusual brilliance, and
  strangely fixed in expression. “Sir,” she began, with a
  strongly marked English accent, 111 am aware that the law
  of secrecy is rigorous amongst adepts; a friend of Sir
  B- L-, who has seen you, knows that you have
  been asked for phenomena, and that you have refused to
  gratify such curiosity. You are probably without the ma¬
  terials; I should like to show you a complete magical
  cabinet, but I must exact beforehand the most inviolable
  silence. If you will not give me this pledge upon your
  honour, I shall give orders for you to be driven to your
   home.” I made the required promise, and faithfully keep

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    117

it by divulging neither the name, position, nor abode of this
lady, whom I soon recognised as an initiate, not exactly of
the first order, but still of a most exalted grade. We had
a number of long conversations, in the course of which she
invariably insisted upon the necessity of practical experience
to complete initiation.      She shewed me a collection of
magical vestments and instruments, lent me some rare
books, which I needed; in short, she determined me to
attempt, at her house, the experiment of a complete evoca¬
tion, for which I prepared during a period of twenty-one
days, scrupulously observing the rules laid down in the
thirteenth chapter of the Ritual.
   The probation terminated on the 24th of July; it was
 proposed to evoke the phantom of the divine Apollonius,
 and to question it upon two secrets, one which concerned
 myself, and one which interested the lady. She had counted
 on taking part in the evocation with a trustworthy person,
 but this person proved nervous at the last moment, and,
 as the triad or unity is indispensable for magical rites,
 I was left to my own resources. The cabinet prepared for
the evocation was situated in a turret; it contained four
concave mirrors, and a species of altar having a white
marble top, encircled by a chain of magnetized iron. The
sign of the pentagram, as given in the fifth chapter of
this work, was carved and gilded on the white marble
surface; it was drawn also in various colours upon a new
white lambskin stretched beneath the altar. In the middle
of the marble table there as a small copper chafing-dish,
containing charcoal of alder and laurel wood; another
chafing-dish was set before me on a tripod. I was clothed
in a white garment, very similar to the vestments of our
catholic priests, but longer and wider, and I wore upon my
head a crown of vervain leaves, intertwined with a golden
chain. I held a new sword in one hand, and in the other
the Ritual. I kindled two fires with the required and
prepared substances, and I began reading the evocations of
the Ritual in a voice at first low, but rising by degrees.

118              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


The smoke spread, the flame caused the objects upon which
it fell to waver, then it went out, the smoke still floating
white and slow about the marble altar; I seemed to feel
a kind of quaking of the earth, my ears tingled, my heart
beat quickly. I heaped more twigs and perfumes on the
chafing-dishes, and as the flame again burst up, I beheld
distinctly, before the altar, the figure of a man of more
than normal size, which dissolved and vanished away. I
recommenced the evocations, and placed myself within a
circle which I had drawn previously between the tripod
and the altar. Thereupon the mirror which was behind
the altar seemed to brighten in its depth, a wan form was
outlined therein, which increased, and seemed to approach
by degrees. Three times, and with closed eyes, I invoked
Apollonius. When I again looked forth there was a man
in front of me, wrapped from head to foot in a species of
shroud, which seemed more grey than white; he was lean,
melancholy and beardless, and did not altogether cor¬
respond to my preconceived notion of Apollonius. I ex¬
perienced an abnormally cold sensation, and when I en¬
deavoured to question the phantom I could not articulate
a syllable. I therefore placed my hand upon the sign of
the pentagram, and pointed the sword at the figure, com¬
manding it mentally to obey and not alarm me, in virtue
of the said sign. The form thereupon became vague, and
suddenly disappeared. I directed it to return, and pres¬
ently felt, as it were, a breath close by me, something
touched my hand which was holding the sword, and the
arm became immediately benumbed as far as the elbow.
I divined that the sword displeased the spirit, and I there¬
fore placed its point downwards, close by me, within the
circle. The human figure reappeared immediately, but I
experienced such an intense weakness in all my limbs, and
a swooning sensation came so quickly over me, that I made
two steps to sit down, whereupon I fell into a profound
lethargy, accompanied by dreams, of which I had only a
confused recollection when I came again to myself. For

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  119

several subsequent days my arm remained benumbed and
painful.    The apparition did not speak to me, but it
seemed that the questions I had designed to ask answered
themselves in my mind. To that of the lady an interior
voice replied—Death!—it was concerning a man of whom
she desired information. As for myself, I sought to know
whether reconciliation and forgiveness were possible be¬
tween two persons who occupied my thoughts, and the
same inexorable echo within me also answered—Dead!
   I am stating facts as they occurred, but I would impose
faith on no one. The consequence of this experience on
myself was something inexplicable. I was no longer the
same man; something of another world had passed into
me; I was no longer either sad or cheerful, but I felt a
singular attraction towards death, unaccompanied, however,
by any suicidal tendency. I analysed my experience care¬
fully, and, notwithstanding a lively nervous repugnance, I
twice repeated the same experiment, allowing some days
to elapse between each; there was not, however, sufficient
difference between the phenomena to warrant me in pro¬
tracting a narrative which is perhaps already too long. But
the net result of these two additional evocations was for me
the revelation of two Kabbalistic secrets which might
change, in a short space of time, the foundations and
laws of society at large, if they came to be known gen¬
erally.
   Am I to conclude from all this that I really evoked,
saw, and touched the great Apollonius of Tyana? I am
not so hallucinated as to affirm or so unserious as to be¬
lieve it. The effect of the probations, the perfumes, the
mirrors, the pantacles, is an actual drunkenness of the im¬
agination, which must act powerfully upon a person other¬
wise nervous and impressionable. I do not explain the
physical laws by which I saw and touched; I affirm solely
that I did see and that I did touch, that I saw clearly and
distinctly, apart from dreaming, and this is sufficient to
establish the real efficacy of magical ceremonies. For the

120              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


rest, I regard the practice as destructive and dangerous;
if it became habitual, neither moral nor physical health
would be able to withstand it. The elderly lady whom I
have mentioned, and of whom I subsequently had reason
to complain, was a case in point; despite her asseverations
to the contrary, I have no doubt that she was addicted to
necromancy and goetia, She at times lost all self-control,
at others yielded to senseless fits of passion, for which it
was difficult to discover a cause. I left London without
bidding her adieu, and I shall faithfully adhere to my
engagement by giving no clue to her identity, which might
connect her name with practices, pursued in all probability
without the knowledge of her family, which I believe to
be large and of very considerable position.
   There are evocations of intelligence, evocations of love,
and evocations of hate; but, once more, there is no proof
whatsoever that spirits really leave the higher spheres to
communicate with us; the opposite, as a fact, is more prob¬
able. We evoke the memories which they have left in the
astral light, or common reservoir of universal magnetism.
It was in this light that the Emperor Julian once saw the
gods manifest, looking old, ill, and decrepit—fresh proof
of the influence exercised by current and accredited opinions
on the reflections of this same magical agent which makes
our tables talk and answers by taps on the walls. After
the evocation I have described, I re-read carefully the life
of Apollonius, who is represented by historians as an ideal
of antique beauty and elegance, and I then observed that
towards the end of his life he was starved and tormented
in prison. This circumstance, which may have remained
in my memory without my being aware of it, possibly de¬
termined the unattractive form of my vision, wdiich I re¬
gard solely as the voluntary dream of a waking man. I
have seen two other persons, whom there is no occasion to
name, both differing, as regards costume and appearance,
from what I had expected. For the rest, I commend the
greatest caution to those who propose devoting themselves '

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   121

to similar experiences; their result is intense exhaustion,
and frequently a shock sufficient to occasion illness.
   I must not conclude this chapter without mentioning the
curious opinions of certain Kabbalists, who distinguish be¬
tween apparent and real death, holding that the two are
seldom simultaneous. In their idea, the majority of persons
who are buried are still alive, while a number of others who
are regarded as living are in reality dead. Incurable mad¬
ness, for example, would be with them an incomplete but
real death, leaving the terrestial body under the purely in¬
stinctive control of the sidereal body. When the human
soul experiences a greater blow than it can bear, it would
thus become separated from the body, leaving the animal
soul, or sidereal body, in its place, and these human re¬
mains would be to some extent less alive really than a mere
animal. Dead persons of this kind are said to be recog¬
nised by the complete extinction of the moral and affec¬
tionate sense; they are neither bad nor good; they are
dead. Such beings, who are the poisonous fungi of the
human race, absorb the life of living beings to their fullest
possible extent, and this is why their proximity benumbs
the soul and chills the heart. If such corpse-like creatures
really existed, they would realise all that was recounted
in former times about brocalaques and vampires. Now,
are there not certain persons in whose presence one feels
less intelligent, less good, sometimes even less honest ? Are
there not some whose vicinity extinguishes all faith and all
enthusiasm, who draw you by your weaknesses, who govern
you by your evil propensities, and make you die slowly
to morality in a torment like that of Mezentius? These
are dead people whom we mistake for living beings; these
are vampires whom we regard as friends!

122              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                           14 : O

                  TRANSMUTATIONS

         SPHERA LUNAE    SEMPITERNUM      AUXILIUM

St Augustine questioned seriously whether Apuleius could
have been changed into an ass by a Thessalian sorceress,
and theologians have long debated about the transformation
of Nebuchadnezzar into a wild beast, which things merely
prove that the eloquent doctor of Hippo was unacquainted
with magical secrets and that the theologians in question
have not advanced far in exegesis. We are concerned in
this chapter with different and more incredible marvels,
which are at the same time incontestable. I refer to lycan-
thropy, or the nocturnal transformation of men into wolves,
so celebrated in rural tales of the twilight by the histories
of were-wolves. These histories are so well attested that,
with a view to their explanation, sceptical science has
recourse to furious mania and masquerading as animals.
But such hypotheses are puerile and explain nothing. Let
us seek elsewhere for the secret of the phenomena which
have been observed on this subject, and begin with estab¬
lishing;—1, That no one has ever been killed by a were¬
wolf, except by suffocation, without effusion of blood and
without wounds; 2, That were-wolves, though tracked, pur¬
sued, and even wounded, have never been killed on the
spot; 3, That persons suspected of these transformations
have always been found at home, after a were-wolf chase,
more or less maimed, sometimes dying, but invariably in
their natural form.
   Let us, next, establish phenomena of a different order.
Nothing in the world is better borne out by evidence than
the visible and real presence of P. Alphonsus Ligouri be¬
side the dying pope, whilst the same personage was simul-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  123

 taneously seen at home, far from Rome, in prayer and
 ecstasy.    Further, the simultaneous presence of the
 missionary Francis Xavier in several places at one time
 has been no less strictly demonstrated. It will be said
 that these are miracles, but we reply that miracles when
 they are genuine are simply facts for science. Apparitions
 of persons dear to us coincident with the moment of their
 death are phenomena of the same order and attributable to
 the same cause. We have spoken of the sidereal body
 which is intermediary between the soul and the physical
 body. Now, this body frequently remains awake while the
 latter sleeps, and passes through all space which universal
 magnetization opens to it. It lengthens without breaking
 the sympathetic chain which attaches it to our heart and
 brain, and it is for this reason that it is so dangerous to
 awaken dreamers suddenly. As a fact, too great a start
 may break the chain in an instant and cause death imme¬
 diately. The form of our sidereal body is conformed to
 the habitual condition of our thoughts, and it modifies,
 in the long run, the characteristics of the material body.
 This is why Swedenborg, in his somnambulistic intuitions,
 frequently beheld spirits in the shape of various animals.
   Let us now make bold to say that a were-wolf is nothing
else but the sidereal body of a man whose savage and
sanguinary instincts are typified by the wolf; who, further,
whilst his phantom wanders over the country, is sleeping
painfully in his bed, and dreams that he is actually a wolf.
What makes the were-wolf visible is the almost somnam¬
bulistic excitement caused by the fright of those who be¬
hold it, or else the tendency, more particularly in simple
country persons, to enter into direct communication with
the astral light, which is the common medium of visions
and dreams. The hurts inflicted on the were-wolf really
wound the sleeping person by the odic and sympathetic
congestion of the astral light, and by the correspondence
of the immaterial with the material body. Many persons
will believe that they are dreaming when they read such

124               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


things as these, and will ask whether we are really our¬
selves awake; but we will only request men of science to
reflect upon the phenomena of gestation, and upon the in¬
fluence of the imagination of women on the form of their
offspring. A woman who had been present at the execu¬
tion of a man who was broken upon a wheel gave birth to
a child with all its limbs shattered. Let anyone explain
to us how the impression produced upon the soul of the
mother by a horrible spectacle could so have reacted on the
child, and we in turn will explain why blows received in
dreams can really bruise and even grievously wound the
body of him who receives them in imagination, above all
when his body is suffering and subjected to nervous and
magnetic influences.
   To these phenomena and to the occult laws which govern
them must be referred the effects of bewitchment, of which
we shall speak hereafter. Diabolical obsessions, and the
majority of nervous diseases which affect the brain, are
wounds inflicted on the nervous mechanism by the astral
light when perverted, that is, absorbed or projected in
adnormal proportions. All extraordinary and extra-natural
tensions of the will predispose to obsessions and nervous
diseases; enforced celibacy, asceticism, hatred, ambition, re¬
jected love, are so many generative principles of infernal
forms and influences. Paracelsus says that the menstrua¬
tions of women beget phantoms in the air, and from this
standpoint convents would be seminaries for nightmares,
while the devils might be compared to those heads of the
hydra of Lerne which were reproduced eternally and
propagated in the very blood from their wounds. The
phenomena of possession amongst the Ursulines of Loudun,
so fatal to Urban Grandier, have been misconstrued. The
nuns were really possessed by hysteria and fanatical imita¬
tion of the secret thoughts of their exorcists, which were
transmitted to their nervous system by the astral light.
They received the impression of all the hatreds which this
unfortunate priest had conjured up against him, and this

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    125
wholly interior communication seemed diabolical and mirac¬
ulous to themselves. Hence in this tragical affair every¬
one acted sincerely, even to Laubardemont, who, in his
blind execution of the prejudged verdicts of Cardinal
Richelieu, believed that he was fulfilling at the same time
the duties of a true judge, and as little suspected himself
of being a follower of Pontius Pilate as he would have
recognised in the sceptical and libertine cure of Saint-
Pierre-du Marche, a disciple and martyr of Christ. The
possession of the nuns of Louvier is scarcely more than a
copy of those of Loudon; the devils invent little and
plagiarise one another. The process of Gaufridi and Mag¬
dalen de la Palud possesses stranger features, for in this
case the victims are their own accusers. Gaufridi con¬
fessed that he was guilty of depriving a number of women
of the power to defend themselves against his seductions
by simply breathing in their nostrils. A young and beauti¬
ful girl, of noble family, who had been thus insufflated,
described, in the greatest detail, scenes wherein the un¬
chaste seemed to vie with the monstrous and grotesque.
Such are the ordinary hallucinations of false mysticism and
ill-kept celibacy. Gaufridi and his mistress were obsessed
by their mutual chimeras, and the brain of the one reflected
the nightmares of the other. Was not the Marquis of
Sade himself infectious for certain depleted and diseased
natures ?
   The scandalous trial of Father Girard is a new proof of
the deliriums of mysticism and the singular nervous affec¬
tions which it may entail. The trances of la Cadiere, her
ecstacies, her stigmatas, were all as real as the insensate and
perhaps involuntary debauchery of her director. She ac¬
cused him, when he wished to withdraw from her, and the
conversion of this young woman was a revenge, for there is
nothing more cruel than depraved passions. An influential
body, which intervened in the trial of Grandier for the
destruction of the possible heretic, in this case rescued
Father Girard for the honour of the order. Moreover,

126               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


Grandier and Girard attained the same results by very
different means, with which we shall be specially con¬
cerned in the sixteenth chapter.
   We operate by onr imagination on the imagination of
others, by our sidereal body on theirs, by our organs on
their organs, in such a way that, by sympathy, whether of
inclination or obsession, we reciprocally possess one another,
and identify ourselves with those upon whom we wish to
act. Reactions against such dominations frequently cause
the most pronounced antipathy to succeed the keenest
sympathy. Love has a tendency to unify beings; in thus
identifying, it frequently renders them rivals, and, conse¬
quently, enemies, if in the depth of the two natures there
is an unsociable disposition, like pride. To permeate two
united souls in an equal degree with pride is to disjoin
them by making them rivals. Antagonism is the necessary
consequence of a plurality of gods.
   When we dream of a living person, either their sidereal
body presents itself to ours in the astral light, or at least
the reflection thereof, and our impressions at the meeting
often make known the secret dispositions of the person in
our regard. For example, love fashions the sidereal body
of the one in the image and likeness of the other, so that
the psychal medium of the woman is like a man, and that
of the man like a woman. It was this transfer which the
Kabbalists sought to express in an occult manner when
they said, in explanation of an obscure term of Genesis:—
“God created love by placing a rib of Adam in the breast
of the woman, and a portion of the flesh of Eve in the
breast of the man, so that at the bottom of woman’s heart
there is the bone of man, while at the bottom of man’s
heart there is the flesh of woman,”—an allegory which is
certainly not devoid of depth and beauty.
  We have referred, in the previous chapter, to what the
masters in Kabbalah call the embryonic condition of souls.
This state, completed after the death of the person who
thereby possesses another, is often commenced in life',

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     127

whether by obsession or by love. I knew a young woman,
whose parents inspired her with a great terror, who took
suddenly to inflicting upon an inoffensive person the very
acts she dreaded in them. I knew another who, after
participating in an evocation concerned with a guilty
woman suffering in the next world for certain eccentric
acts, began to imitate, without any reason, the actions of
the dead person. To this occult power must be attributed
the terrible influence resident in parental malediction,
which is feared by all nations on earth, as also the imminent
danger of magical operations when anyone has not reached
the isolation of true adepts. This virtue of sidereal trans¬
mutation, which really exists in love, explains the allegorical
marvels of the wand of Circe.          Apuleius speaks of a
Thessalian woman who changed herself into a bird; he won
the affections of her servant to discover the secrets of
the mistress, and succeeded only in transforming himself
into an ass. This allegory contains the most concealed
secrets of love. Again, the Kabbalists say that when a
man falls in love with a female elementary—undine,
sylphide, or gnomide, as the case may be—she becomes
immortal with him, or otherwise he dies with her. We
have already seen that elementaries are imperfect and as
yet mortal men. The revelation we have mentioned, which
has been regarded merely as a fable, is therefore the dogma
of moral solidarity in love, which is itself the foundation of
love, and alone explains all its sanctity and all its power.
Who, then, is this Circe, that changes her worshippers into
swine, while, so soon as she is subjected to the bond of
love, her enchantments are destroyed? She is the ancient
courtesan, the marble woman of all the ages. A woman who
is without love absorbs and degrades all who come near
her; she who loves, on the other hand, diffuses enthusiasm,
nobility, and life.
  There was much talk in the last century about an adept
accused of charlatanism, who was termed in his lifetime the
divine Cagliostro. It is known that he practised evocations,

128                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


and that in this art he was surpassed only by the illuminated
Schroepffer.# It is said also that he boasted of his power
in binding sympathies, and that he claimed to be in pos¬
session of the secret of the great work; but that which
rendered him still more famous was a certain elixir of life,
which immediately restored to the aged the strength and
vitality of youth. The basis of this composition was mal-
voisie wine, and it was obtained by distilling the sperm of
certain animals with the sap of certain plants. We are in
possession of the recipe, but our reasons for withholding it
will be readily understood.

 * See, in the Ritual, Schrcepff er’s secrets and formulas for evocation.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    129




                           15 Q P

                      BLACK MAGIC

                    SAMAEL    AUXILIATOR

We approach the mystery of black magic.        We are about
to confront, even in his own sanctuary, the black god of the
Sabbath, the formidable goat of Mendes. At this point
those who are subject to fear should close the book; even
persons who are a prey to nervous impressions will do well
to divert themselves or to abstain. We have set ourselves
a task, and we must complete it. Let us first of all address
ourselves frankly and boldly to the question: Is there a
devil? What is the devil? As to the first point, science
isi silent, philosophy denies it on chance, religion only
answers in the affirmative. As to the second point, religion
states that the devil is the fallen angel; occult philosophy
accepts and explains this definition. It will be unnecessary
to repeat what we have already said on the subject; we will
add here a further revelation:—
   In Black Magic, the devil is the great magical agent
EMPLOYED FOR EVIL PURPOSES BY A PERVERSE WILL.
   The old serpent of the legend is nothing else than the
universal agent, the eternal fire of terrestrial life, the soul
of the earth, and the living fount of hell. We have said
that the astral light is the receptacle of forms, and these
when evoked by reason are produced harmoniously, but
when evoked by madness they appear disorderly and mon¬
strous; so originated the nightmares of St Anthony and
the phantoms of the Sabbath. Do, therefore, the evoca¬
tions of goetie and demonomania possess a practical re¬
sult? Yes, certainly—one which cannot be contested, one
more terrible than could be recounted by legends! When
any one invokes the devil with intentional ceremonies, the

130               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


devil comes, and is seen. To escape dying from horror at
the sight, to escape catalepsy or idiocy, one must be al¬
ready mad. Grandier was a libertine through indevotion,
and perhaps also through scepticism; excessive zeal, fol¬
lowing on the aberrations of asceticism and blindness of
faith, depraved Girard, and made him deprave in his turn.
In the fifteenth chapter of our Ritual we shall give all the
diabolical evocations and practices of black magic, not that
they may be used, but that they may be known and judged,
and that such insanities may be put aside for ever.
   M. Eudes de Mirville, whose book upon table-turning
made a certain sensation recently, will possibly be contented
and discontented at the same time with the solution here
given of black magic and its problems. As a fact, we
maintain, like himself, the reality and prodigious nature of
the facts; with him also we assign them to the old serpent,
the secret prince of this world; but we are not agreed as to
the nature of this blind agent, which, under different direc¬
tions, is at once the instrument of all good and of all evil,
the minister of prophets and the inspirer of pythonesses.
In a word, the devil, for us, is force placed temporarily at
the disposal of error, even as mortal sin is, to our thinking,
the persistence of the will in what is absurd. M. de Mir¬
ville is therefore a thousand times right, but he is once and
one great time wrong.
   What we must exclude above all from the realm of
existences is the arbitrary. Nothing happens by chance,
nor yet by the autocracy of a good or evil will. There are
two houses in heaven, and the lower house of Satan is
                                                  «


restrained in its extremes by the senate of divine wisdom.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   131




                          16. ^ Q

                    BEWITCHMENTS

                  FONS   OCULUS     FULGUR

When    a man gazes unchastely upon any woman lie pro¬
fanes that woman, said the Great Master. What is willed
with persistence is done. Every real will is confirmed by
acts; every will confirmed by an act is action. Every
action is subject to a judgment, and such judgment is
eternal. These are dogmas and principles from which it
follows that the good or evil which we will, to others as to
ourselves, according to the capacity of our will and within
the sphere of our action, will infallibly take place, if the
will be confirmed and the determination fixed by acts.
The acts should be analogous to the will. The intent to do
harm or to excite love, in order to be efficacious, must be
confirmed by deeds of hatred or affection. Whatsoever
bears the impression of a human soul belongs to that soul;
whatsoever a man has appropriated after any manner be¬
comes his body in the broader acceptation of the term, and
anything which is done to the body of a man is felt, medi¬
ately or immediately, by his soul. It is for this reason that
every species of hostility towards one’s neighbour is re¬
garded by moral theology as the beginning of homicide.
Bewitchment is a homicide, and the more infamous because
it eludes self-defence by the victim and punishment by
law. This principle being established to exonerate our
conscience, and for the warning of the weak vessels, let us
affirm boldly that bewitchment is possible. Let us even go
further and lay down that it is not only possible, but in
some sense necessary and fatal. It is continually going on
in the social world, unconsciously both to agents and pa¬
tients. Involuntary bewitchment is one of the most terrible
dangers of human life. Passional sympathy inevitably

132               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


subjects the hottest desire to the strongest will. Moral
maladies are more contagious than physical, and there are
some triumphs of infatuation and fashion which are com¬
parable of leprosy or cholera. We may die of an evil ac¬
quaintance as well as of a contagious touch, and the fright¬
ful plague which, during recent centuries only, has
avenged in Europe the profanation of the mysteries of
love, is a revelation of the analogical laws of nature, and
at the same time offers only a feeble image of the moral
corruptions which follow daily on an equivocal sympathy.
There is a story of a jealous, and infamous man who, to
avenge himself on a rival, contracted an incurable dis¬
order, and made it the common scourge and anathema of a
divided bed. This atrocious history is that of every ma¬
gician, or rather of every sorcerer who practises bewitch¬
ments. He poisons himself in order that he may poison
others; he damns himself that he may torture others; he
draws in hell with his breath in order that he may expel it
by his breath; he wounds himself to death that he may
inflict death on others; but possessed of this unhappy
courage, it is positive and certain that he will poison and
slay by the mere projection of his perverse will. There
are some forms of love which are as deadly as hatred, and
the bewitchments of goodwill are the torment of the wicked.
The prayers offered to God for the conversion of a man
bring misfortune to that man if he will not be converted.
As we have already said, it is weariness and danger to
strive against the fluidic currents occasioned by the chains
of wills in union.
   Hence there are two kinds of bewitchment, voluntary
and involuntary; physical and moral bewitchment may be
also distinguished. Power attracts power, life attracts
life, health attracts health; this is a law of nature. If
two children live, above all, if they sleep together, and if
one be weak while the other is strong, the strong will ab¬
sorb the weak, and the latter will waste away. For this
 reason, it is important that children should always sleep

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   133

alone. In conventual seminaries certain pupils absorb the
intelligence of the others, and in every given circle of men,
an individual speedily appears who avails himself of the
wills of the rest. Bewitchment by means of currents is
exceedingly common, as we have already observed; mor¬
ally as well as physically, most of us are carried away.by
the crowd. What, however, we have proposed to exhibit
more especially in this chapter is the almost absolute power
of the human will upon the determination of its acts and
the influence of every outward demonstration upon out¬
ward things.
   Voluntary bewitchments are still frequent in our rural
places because natural forces, among ignorant and isolated
persons, operate without being diminished by any doubt
or any diversion. A frank, absolute hatred, unleavened by
rejected passion or personal cupidity is, under certain
given conditions, a death-sentence for its object. I say un¬
mixed with amorous passion or cupidity, because a desire,
being an attraction, counterbalances and annuls the power
of projection. For example, a jealous person will never
efficaciously bewitch his rival, and a greedy heir will never
by the mere fact of his will succeed in shortening the days
of a miserly and long-lived uncle.         Bewitchments at¬
tempted under such conditions reflect upon the operator
and help rather than hurt their object, setting him free
from a hostile acfion which destroys itself by excessive ex¬
aggeration.    The term envoutement (bewitchment) so
strong in its Gaelic simplicity, admirably expresses what it
means, the act of enveloping some one, so to speak, in a
formulated will. The instrument of bewitchments is the
great magic agent which, under the influence of an evil
will, becomes really and positively the demon. Witchcraft,
properly so called, that is ceremonial operation with in¬
tent to bewitch, acts only on the operator, and serves to fix
and confirm his will, by formulating it with persistence
and labour, the two conditions which make volition effica¬
cious. The more difficult or horrible the operation, the

134               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


greater is its power, because it acts more strongly on the
imagination and confirms effort in direct ratio of resist¬
ance. This explains the bizarre nature and even atrocious
character of the operations in black magic, as practised by
the ancients and in the middle ages, the diabolical masses,
administration of sacraments to reptiles, effusions of blood,
human sacrifices, and other monstrosities, which are the
very essence and reality of goetia or nigromancy. Such
are the practices which from all time have brought down
upon sorcerers the just repression of the laws.         Black
magic is really only a graduated combination of sacrileges
and murders designed for the permanent perversion of a
human will and for the realisation in a living man of the
hideous phantom of the demon. It is, therefore, properly
speaking, the religion of the devil, the cultus of darkness,
hatred of good carried to the height of paroxysm; it is the
incarnation of death, and the persistent creation of hell.
   The Kabbalist Bodin, who has been erroneously consid¬
ered of a feeble and superstitious mind, had no other
motive in writing his Demonomania than that of warning
people against dangerous incredulity. Initiated by the
study of the Kabbalah into the true secrets of magic, he
trembled at the danger to which society was exposed by
the abandonment of this power to the wickedness of men.
Hence he attempted what at the present time M. Eudes de
Mirville is attempting amongst ourselves; he gathered facts
without interpreting them, and affirmed in the face of in¬
attentive or pre-occupied science the existence of the occult
influences and criminal operations of evil magic. In his
own day Bodin received no more attention than will be
given to M. Eudes de Mirville, because it is not enough to
indicate phenomena and to prejudge their cause if we
would influence earnest men; we must study, explain, and
demonstrate such cause, and this is precisely what we are
ourselves attempting. Will better success crown our own
efforts?
   It is possible to die through the love of certain people as

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     135

by their hate; there are absorbing* passions, under the
breath of which we feel ourselves depleted like the spouses
of vampires. Not only do the wicked torment the good,
but unconsciously the good torture the wicked. The gentle¬
ness of Abel was a long and painful bewitchment for the
ferocity of Cain. Among evil men, the hatred of good
originates in the very instinct of self-preservation; more¬
over, they deny that what torments them is good, and, for
their own peace, are driven to deify and justify evil. In
the sight of Cain, Abel was a hypocrite and coward, who
abused the pride of humanity by his scandalous submis¬
sions to divinity. How much must this first murderer have
endured before making such a frightful attack upon his
brother?    Had Abel understood, he would have been
afraid. Antipathy is the presentiment of a possible be¬
witchment, either of love or hatred, for we find love fre¬
quently succeeding repulsion. The astral light warns us
of coming influences by its action on the more or less sensi¬
ble, more or less active, nervous system. Instantaneous
sympathies, electric loves, are explosions of the astral light,
which are as exactly and mathematically demonstrable as
the discharge of strong magnetic batteries. Thereby we
may see what unexpected dangers threaten an uninitiated
person who is perpetually fooling with fire in the neigh¬
bourhood of invisible powder-mines. We are saturated
with the astral light, and we project it unceasingly to make
room for and to attract fresh supplies. The nervous in¬
struments, which are specially designed either for attrac¬
tion or projection, are the eyes and hands. The polarity
of the hands is resident in the thumb, and hence, according
to the magical tradition which still lingers in rural places,
whenever anyone is in suspicious company, he should keep
the thumb doubled up and hidden in the hand, and while
in the main avoiding a fixed glance at any one, still being
the first to look at those whom we have reason to fear, so
as to escape unexpected fluidic projections and fascinating
regards.

136              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


    There are certain animals which have the power of
breaking the currents of astral light by an absorption pe¬
culiar to themselves. They are violently antipathetic to
us, and possess a certain sorcery of the eye: the toad, the
basilisk, and the tard are instances. These animals, when
tamed and carried alive on the person, or kept in occupied
rooms, are a guarantee against the hallucinations and
trickeries of astral intoxication, a term we make use of
here for the first time, one which explains all the phenom¬
ena of unbridled passions, mental exaltations, and folly.
Tame toads and tards, my dear sir, the disciple of Voltaire
will say to me; carry them about with you, and write no
more. To which I may answer, that I shall seriously think
of doing so as soon as ever I feel tempted to laugh at any¬
thing I do not understand, and to treat those whose knowl¬
edge and wisdom I fail to understand, as fools or as
madmen. Paracelsus, the greatest of the Christian magi,
opposed bewitchment by the practices of a contrary be¬
witchment. He composed sympathetic remedies, and ap¬
plied them, not to the suffering members, but to represen¬
tations of those members, formed and consecrated according
to magical ceremonial. His successes were incredible, and
never has any physician approached Paracelsus in his
marvels of healing. But Paracelsus had discovered mag¬
netism long before Mesmer, and had carried to its final
consequences this luminous discovery, or rather this initia¬
 tion into the magic of the ancients, who better than us
understood the great magical agent, and did not regard
the astral light, azoth, the universal magnesia of the sages,
 as an animal and a special fluid emanating only from par¬
 ticular creatures.    In his occult philosophy, Paracelsus
 opposes ceremonial magic, the terrible power of which he
 certainly did not ignore, but he sought to decry its prac¬
 tices so as to discredit black magic. He locates the omnipo¬
 tence of the magnus in the interior and occult magnes, and
 the most skillful magnetisers of our own day could not ex¬
 press themselves better. At the same time he counselled

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   137

the employment of magical symbols, talismans above all, in
the cure of diseases. In our eighteenth chapter we shall
have occasion to return to the talismans of Paracelsus,
while following Gaffarel upon the great question of occult
iconography and numismatics.
   Bewitchment may also be cured by substitution, when
that is possible, and by the rupture or deflection of the
astral current. The rural traditions on all these points are
admirable, and undoubtedly of remote antiquity; they are
remnants of the instruction of the Druids, who were
initiated in the mysteries of Egypt and India by wander¬
ing hierophants. Now, it is well known in vulgar magic
that a bewitchment—that is, a will persistently confirmed
in ill doing, invariably has its results, and cannot draw back
without risk of death. The sorcerer who liberates any one
from a charm must have another object for his malevo-
in ill doing, invariably has its result, and cannot draw
lence, or it is certain that he himself will be smitten, and
will perish as the victim of his own spells. The astral
movement being circular, every azotic or magnetic emis¬
sion which does not encounter its medium returns with
 force to its point of departure, thus explaining one of the
strangest histories in a sacred book, that of the demons
sent into the swine, which thereupon cast themselves into
 the sea. This act of high initiation was nothing else but
 the rupture of a magnetic current infected by evil wills.
 Our name is legion, for we are many, said the instinctive
 voice of the possessed sufferer. Possessions by the demon
 are bewitchments, and such cases are innumerable at the
 present day. A holy monk who has devoted himself to the
 service of the insane, Brother Hilarion Tissot, has suc¬
 ceeded, by long experience and incessant practice, in
 curing a number of patients, by unconsciously using the
 magnetism of Paracelsus. He attributes most of his cases
 either to disorder of the will or to the perverse influence
 of external wills: he regards all crimes as acts of madness,
 and would treat the wicked as diseased, instead of exas-

138              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


perating and making them incurable, under the pretense
of punishing them. What space of time must still elapse
ere poor Brother Hilarion Tissot shall be hailed as a man
of genius! And how many serious men, when they read
this chapter, will say that Tissot and myself should treat
one another according to our common ideas, but should re¬
frain from publishing our theories, if we do not wish to be
reckoned as physicians worthy of a hospital for incurables!
It revolves, notwithstanding, said Galileo, stamping his
foot upon the earth. Ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free, said the Saviour of men. It
might also be added: Ye shall love justice, and justice
shall make you whole men. A vice is a poison, even for the
body; true virtue is a pledge of longevity.
   The method of ceremonial bewitchments varies with
times and persons; all subtle and domineering people find
its secrets and its practice within themselves, without even
actually calculating about them or reasoning on their
sequence. Herein they follow instinctive inspirations of
the great agent, which, as we have already said, accommo¬
dates itself marvelously to our vices and our virtues; it
may, however, be generally laid down that we are subjected
to the wills of others by the analogies of our tendencies,
and above all, of our faults. To pamper the weaknesses of
an individuality is to possess ourselves of that individual¬
ity and convert it into an instrument in the order of the
same errors or depravities. Now, when two natures whose
defects are analogous become subordinated one to another,
the result is a sort of substitution of the stronger for the
weaker, an actual obsession of one mind by the other. Very
often the weaker may struggle and seek to revolt, but it only
falls deeper in servitude. So did Louis XIII. conspire
against Richelieu, and subsequently, so to speak, sought his
pardon by abandoning his accomplices. We have all a
ruling defect, which is for our soul as the umbilical cord
 of its sinful birth, and it is by this the enemy can always
seize us—for some vanity, for others idleness, for the ma-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    139

jority egotism. Let a wicked and crafty mind avail itself
of this snare and we are lost; we may not go mad or turn
idiots, but we become positively alienated, in all the force
of the expression—that is, we are subjected to a foreign
impulsion. In such a state one dreads instinctively every¬
thing that might bring us back to reason, and will not even
listen to representations that are opposed to our infatua¬
tion. Here is one of the most dangerous disorders which
can affect the moral nature. The sole remedy for such a
bewitchment is to make use of madness itself in order to
cure madness, to provide the sufferer with imaginary sat¬
isfactions in the opposite order to that wherein he is now
immersed. Endeavour, for example, to cure an ambitious
person by making him desire the glories of heaven—mystic
remedy; cure one who is dissolute by true love—natural
remedy; obtain honourable successes for a vain person;
exhibit unselfishness to the avaricious, and procure for
them legitimate profit by honourable participation in gen¬
erous enterprises, &c. Acting in this way upon the moral
nature, we may succeed in curing a number of physical
maladies, for the moral effects the physical in virtue of the
magical axiom:—“That which is above is like that which
is below. ’ ’ This is why the Master said, when speaking of
the paralysed woman: Satan has bound her. A disease
invariably originates in a deficiency or an excess, and ever
at the root of a physical evil we shall find a moral disorder.
This is an unchanging law of nature.




                                                I




                                       *, • i

140               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                            17 fi R

                       ASTROLOGY

                   STELLA    OS   INFLEXUS

Of all the arts which have originated in ancient magian
wisdom astrology is now the most misunderstood. No one
believes any longer in the universal harmonies of nature
and in the necessary interlacing of all effects with all
causes. Moreover, true astrology, that which connects with
the unique and universal dogma of the Kabbalah, became
profaned among the Greeks and among the Romans of the
decline. The doctrine of the seven spheres and the three
mobilies, primitively issuing from the sephirotic decade,
the character of the planets governed by angels, whose
names have been changed into those of Pagan divinities,
the influence of the spheres on one another, the destiny at¬
tached to numbers, the scale of proportion between the
celestial hierarchies corresponding to the human hierarchies
 all this has been materialised and degraded into supersti¬
 tion by genethliacal soothsayers and erecters of horoscopes
 during the decline and the middle ages. The restoration
 of astrology to its primitive purity would be, in a sense, the
 creation of an entirely new science; here let us attempt
 merely to indicate its first principles, with their more im¬
 mediate and approximate consequences.
    We have said that the astral light receives and preserves
 the impressions of all visible things; it follows from this
 that the daily position of the heaven is reflected in this
 light, which, being the chief agent of life, operates the con¬
 ception, gestation, and birth of children by a sequence of
  apparatuses naturally designed to this end. Now, if this
  light be sufficiently prodigal of images to impart to the
  fruit of the womb the visible imprints of a maternal fan¬
  tasy or appetite, still more will it transmit to the plastic

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     141

and indeterminate temperament of a newly-born child the
atmospheric impressions and diverse influences which, in
the entire planetary system, are consequent at a given
moment upon such or such particular aspect of the stars.
Nothing is indifferent in nature; a stone more or a stone
less upon a road may break or completely modify the des¬
tinies of the greatest men or even the largest empires; still
more must the position of this or that star in the sky have
an influence on the child who is bom, who enters by the
very fact of his birth into the universal harmony of the
sidereal world. The stars are bound to one another by the
attractions which hold them in equilibrium and cause them
to move with uniformity through space. From all spheres
unto all spheres there stretch these indestructible threads
of light, and there is no point upon any planet to which one
of them is not attached. The true adept in astrology must,
therefore, give heed to the precise time and place of the
birth which is in question; then, after an exact calculation
of the astral influences, it remains for him to compute the
chances of estate, that is to say, the advantages or hin¬
drances which the child must one day meet by reason of
position, relatives, inherited tendencies, and hence natural
proclivities, in the fulfillment of his destinies. Finally, he
will still have to take into consideration human liberty and
its initiative, should the child eventually come to be a true
man, and to isolate himself by an intrepid will from fatal
influences and from the chain of destiny. It will be seen
that we do not allow too much to astrology, but so much
as we leave it is indubitable; it is the scientific and magical
calculus of probabilities.
  Astrology is as ancient as astronomy and indeed it is
more ancient; all seers of lucid antiquity have accorded it
their fullest confidence; now, we must not condemn and
reject in a shallow manner anything which comes before us
protected and supported by such imposing authorities.
Long and patient observations, conclusive comparisons, fre¬
quently repeated experiences, must have led the old sages

142               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


to their decisions, and to refute them the same labour must
be undertaken from an opposite standpoint. Paracelsus
was perhaps the last of the great practical astrologers; he
cured diseases by talismans formed under astral influences;
he distinguished upon all bodies the mark of their dom¬
inant star; there, according to him, was the true universal
medicine, the absolute science of nature, lost by man’s own
fault, and recovered only by a small number of initiates.
To recognise the sign of each star upon men, animals, and
plants, is the true natural science of Solomon, that science
which is said to be lost, but the principles of which are pre¬
served notwithstanding, as are all other secrets, in the
symbolism of the Kabbalah. It will be readily understood
that in order to read the stars one must know the stars
themselves; now, this knowledge is obtained by the kabbal-
istic domification of the sky and by the understanding of
the celestial planisphere, recovered and explained by
 Gaffarel.    In this planisphere the constellations form
 Hebrew letters, and the mythological figures may be re¬
 placed by the symbols of the Tarot. To this same plani¬
sphere Gaffarel refers the origin of patriarchal writing,
 and in the chains of starry attraction the first lineaments
 of primitive characters may very well have been found, in
 which case the celestial book would have served as the
 model of Henoch’s, and the kabbalistic alphabet would have
 been the synopsis of the entire sky. This is not wanting in
 poetry, nor, above all, in probability, and the study of the
 Tarot, which is evidently the primitive and hieroglyphic
 work of Henoch, as was divined by the erudite William
 Ptostel, is sufficient to convince us hereof.
    The signs imprinted in the astral light by the reflection
 and attraction of the stars is reproduced, therefore, as the
 sages have discovered, on all bodies which are formed by
 the conjunction of that light. Men bear the signs of their
 star on their forehead chiefly, and in their hands; animals
 in their whole form, and in their individual signs; plants
 in their leaves and seed; minerals in their veins and their

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    143

grain. The study of these characters was the entire life-
work of Paracelsus, and the figures on his talismans are the
result of his researches; he has, however, left us no key to
them, so that the astral kabbalistic alphabet with its corre¬
spondences still remains to be done; as regards publicity,
the science of unconventional magical writing stopped with
the planisphere of Gaffarel. The serious art of divination
rests wholly in the knowledge of these signs. Chiromancy
is the art of reading the writing of the stars in the lines of
the hand, and physiognomy seeks the same or analogous
characters upon the countenance of its inquirers. As a
fact, the lines formed on the human face by nervous con¬
tractions are determined fatally, and the radiation of the
nervous tissue is absolutely analogous to those networks
which are formed between the worlds by the chains of
starry attraction. The fatalities of life are, therefore, writ¬
ten necessarily in our wrinkles, and a first glance frequently
reveals upon the forehead of a stranger either one or more
of the mysterious letters of the kabbalistic planisphere.
 Should the letter be jagged and laboriously inscribed, there
has been a struggle between will and fatality, and in his
most powerful emotions and tendencies, the individual's
entire past manifests to the magus; from this it becomes
 easy to conjecture the future, and if events occasionally
 deceive the sagacity of the diviner, he who has consulted
him will remain none the less astounded and convinced by
the superhuman knowledge of the adept.
    The human head is formed upon the model of the celes¬
tial spheres; it attracts and it radiates, and in the concep¬
tion of a child, this it is which first forms and manifests.
 Hence the head is subject in an absolute manner to astral
 influence, and evidences its several attractions by its diverse
 protuberances. The final word of phrenology is to be
 found, therefore, in scientific and purified astrology, the
 problems of which we point out to the patience and good
 faith of scholars.
    According to Ptolemy, the sun dries up and the moon

144               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


moistens ; according" to the kabbalists, the sun represents
rigorous Justice, while the moon is in sympathy with
Mercy. It is the sun which produces storms, and, by a
kind of gentle atmospheric pressure, the moon occasions
the ebb and flow, or, as it were, the respiration of the sea.
We read in the Zohar, one of the great sacred books of the
Kabbalah, that 4‘the magical serpent, the son of the Sun,
was about to devour the world, when the Sea, daughter of
the Moon, set her foot upon his head and subdued him.”
For this reason, among the ancients, Venus was the daugh¬
ter of the Sea, as Diana was identical with the Moon.
Hence also the name of Mary signifies star or salt of the
sea. To consecrate this kabbalistic doctrine in the belief
 of the vulgar, it is said in prophetic language: The woman
 shall crush the serpent’s head.
    Jerome Cardan, one of the boldest students, and, beyond
 contradiction .the most skilful astrologer of his time—
 Jerome Cardan, who, if we accept the legend of his death,
 was a martyr to his faith in astrology, has left behind him
 a calculation by means of which any one can foresee the
 good or evil fortune special to all the years of his life. His
 theory was based upon his own experiences, and he assures
 us that the calculation never deceived him. To ascertain
 the fortune of a given year, he sums up the events of those
 which have preceded it by 4, 8, 12, 19, and 30; the number
 4 is that of realisation; 8 is the number of Venus or natural
 things; 12 belongs to the cycle of Jupiter, and corresponds
 to successes; 19 has reference to the cycles of the Moon and
  of Mars; the number 30 is that of Saturn or Fatality.
  Thus, for example, I desire to ascertain what will befall me
  in this present year 1855; I pass in review the decisive
  events in the order of life and progress which occurred four
  years ago; the natural felicity or misfortune of eight years
  back; the successes or failures of twelve years since; the vi¬
  cissitudes and miseries or diseases which overtook me nine¬
  teen years from now, and my tragic or fatal experiences of
  thirty years back. Then, taking into account irrevocably ac-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    145

complished facts and the advance of time, I calculate the
chances analogous to those which I owe already to the in¬
fluence of the same planets, and I conclude that in 1851 I
had employment which was moderately but sufficiently re¬
munerative, with some embarrassment of position; in 1847
I was violently separated from my family, with great at¬
tendant sufferings for mine and me; in 1843 I travelled
as an apostle, addressing the people, and suffering the per¬
secution of ill-meaning persons; briefly, I was at once
honoured and proscribed. Finally, in 1825 family life
came to an end for me, and I engaged definitely in a fatal
path which led me to science and misfortune. I may
therefore suppose that I shall this year experience toil,
poverty, vexation, heart-exile, change of place, publicity,
and contradictions, with some eventuality which will be
decisive for the rest of my life; every indication in the
present leads me to endorse this forecast. Hence I con¬
clude that, for myself and for this year, experience com¬
pletely confirms the precision of Cardan’s astrological
calculus, which, furthermore, connects with the climacteric
years of ancient astrologers. This term signifies arranged
in scales or calculated on the degrees of a scale. Johannes
Trithemius in his book on Secondary Causes has very curi¬
ously computed the return of fortunate or calamitous years
for all the empires of the world. In the twenty-first chaper
of our Ritual we shall give an exact analysis; of this work,
one even more clear than the original, together with a
continuation of the labour of Trithemius to our own days
and the application of his magical scale to contemporary
events, so as to deduce the most striking probabilities
relative to the immediate future of France, Europe, and
the world.
  According to all the grand masters in astrology, comets
are the stars of exceptional heroes, and they only visit earth
to signalise great changes; the planets preside over collec¬
tive existences and modify the destinies of mankind in the
aggregate; the fixed stars, more remote and more feeble in

146               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


their action, attract individuals and determine their ten¬
dencies; sometimes a group of stars combine to influence
the destinies of a single man, while often a great number of
souls are drawn by the distant rays of the same sun. When
we die, our interior light in departing follows the attraction
of its star, and thus it is that we live again in other uni¬
verses. where the soul makes for itself a new garment,
analogous to the development or diminution of its beauty;
for our souls, when separated from our bodies, resemble
revolving stars; they are globules of animated light which
always seek their centre for the recovery of their equilib¬
rium and their true movement. Before all things, how¬
ever, they must liberate themselves from the folds of the
serpent, that is, the unpurified astral light which envelopes
and imprisons them, unless the strength of their will can lift
them beyond its reach. The immersion of the living star in
the dead light is a frightful torment, comparable to that of
Mezentius. Therein the soul freezes and burns at the same
time, and has no means of getting free except by re-entering
the current of exterior forms and assuming a fleshly en¬
velope, then energetically battling against instincts to
strengthen that moral liberty which will permit it at the
moment of death to break the chains of earth and wing its
flight in triumph towards the star of consolation which has
smiled in light upon it. Following this clue, we can under¬
stand the nature of the fire of hell, which is identical with
the demon or the old serpent; we can gather also wherein
consist the salvation and reprobation of men, all called and
all successively elected, but in small number, after having
risked falling into the eternal fire through their own fault.
   Such is the great and sublime revelation of the magi, a
revelation which is the mother of all symbols, of all dogmas,
of all religions. We can realise already how far Dupuis
was mistaken in regarding astronomy as the source of every
cultus. It is astronomy, on the contrary, which has sprung
from astrology, and primitive astrology is one of the
branches of the holy Kabbalah, the science of sciences, and

                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  147

the religion of religions. Hence upon the seventeenth page
of the Tarot we find an admirable allegory—a naked
woman, typifying Truth, Nature, and Wisdom at one and
the same time, turns two ewers towards the earth, and pours
out fire and water upon it; above her head glitters the
septenary, starred about an eight-pointed star, that of
Venus, symbol of peace and love; the plants of earth are
flourishing around the woman, and on one of them the
butterfly of Psyche has alighted; this emblem of the soul
is replaced in some copies of the sacred book by a bird,
which is a more Egyptian and probably a more ancient
symbol. In the modern Tarot the plate is entitled the
 Glittering Star; it is analogous to a number of Hermetic
symbols, and is also in correspondence with the Blazing
 star of Masonic initiates, which, expresses most of the
 mysteries of Rosicrucian secret doctrine.

1484
                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                          18 ^ S

               CHARMS AND PHILTRES

               JUSTITIA   MYSTERIUM    CANES

We have now to grapple with the most criminal abuse to
which magical sciences can be put, namely, venomous magic,
or, rather, sorcery. Let is be here understood that we write
not to instruct but to warn. If human justice, instead of
punishing the adepts, had only proscribed the nigromancers
and poisoning sorcerers, it is certain, as we have previously
remarked, that its severity would have been well placed,
and that the most severe penalties could never be excessive
in the case of such criminals. At the same time it must not
be supposed that the right of life and death which secretly
belongs to the magus has always been exercised to satisfy
some infamous vengeance, or some cupidity more infamous
still; in the middle ages, as in the ancient world, magical
associations have frequently struck down or destroyed
slowly the revealers or profaners of mysteries, and when the
magic sword has refrained from striking, when the spilling
of blood was dangerous, then Aqua Toffana, poisoned nose¬
gays, the shirt of Nessus, and other deadly instruments,
still stranger and still less known, were used to carry out
sooner or later the terrible sentence of the free judges. We
have said that there is in magic a great and indicible ar¬
canum, which is never mentioned among adepts, which the
profane above all must be prevented from divining; in
former times, whosoever revealed, or caused the key of this
supreme secret to be discovered by others through impru¬
dent revelations, was condemned immediately to death, and
was often driven to execute the sentence himself. The
celebrated prophetic supper of Cazotte, described by La-
harpe, has not been hitherto understood. Laharpe very
naturally yielded to the temptation of surprising his readers
by amplifying the details of his narrative.          Everyone

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   149

present at this supper, Laharpe excepted, was an initiate
and a divulger, or at least profaner, of the mysteries.
Cazotte, the most exalted of all in the scale of initiation,
pronounced their sentence of death in the name of illu-
minism, and this sentence was variously but rigorously ex¬
ecuted, even as several years and several centuries pre¬
viously had occurred in the case of similar judgments
against the Abbe de Villars, Urban Grandier, and many
others.    The revolutionary philosophers perished as did
Cagliostro deserted in the prisons of the Inquisition, as did
the mystic band of Catherine Theos, as did the imprudent
Scroepfer, constrained to suicide in the midst of his magical
triumphs and the universal infatuation, as did the deserter
Kotzebue, who was stabbed by Carl Sand, as did also so
many others whose corpses have been discovered without
any one being able to learn the cause of their sudden
and sanguinary death. The strange allocation addressed
to Cazotte when he himself was condemned by the presi¬
dent of the revolutionary tribunal will be readily called to
mind. The Gordian Knot of the terrible drama of ’93 is
still concealed in the darkest sanctuary of the secret so¬
cieties; to adepts of good faith, who sought to emancipate
the common people, were opposed adepts of another sect,
attached to more ancient traditions, who fought by means
analogous to those of their adversaries: the practice of the
great arcanum was made impossible by unmasking its
theory. The crowd understood nothing, but it mistrusted
everything, and fell lower still in its discouragement; the
great arcanum became more secret than ever; the adepts,
checkmated by each other, could exercise their power
neither to govern others nor to deliver themselves; they con¬
demned one another to the death of traitors; they aban¬
doned one another to exile, to suicide, to the knife and the
scaffold.
  I shall be asked possibly whether equally terrible dangers
threaten at this day the intruders into the occult sanctuary
and the betrayers of its secret. Why should I answer any-

150               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


thing to the incredulity of the inquisitive? If I risk a
violent death for their instruction, certainly they will not
save me; if they are afraid on their own account, let them
abstain from imprudent research—this is all I can say to
them. Let us return to venomous magic.
   In his romance of Monte Cristo, Alexandre Dumas has
revealed some practices of this ominous science. There is
no need to traverse the same ground by repeating its
melancholy theories of crime; describing how plants are
poisoned; how animals nourished on these plants have their
flesh infected, and becoming in turn the food of men, cause
death without leaving any trace of poison; how the walls
of houses are inoculated; how the air is permeated by fumes
which require the glass mask of St Croix for the operator;
let us leave the ancient Canidia her abominable mysteries,
and refrain from investigating the extent to which the in¬
fernal rites of Sagana have carried the art of Locusta. It is
enough to state that this most infamous class of malefactors
distilled in conjunction the virus of contagious diseases, the
venom of reptiles, and the sap of poisonous plants, that
they extracted from the fungus its deadly and narcotic
properties, its asphyxiating principles from datura
stramonium, from the peach and bitter almond that poison
one drop of which, placed on the tongue or in the ear, de¬
stroys, like a flash of lightning, the strongest and best
constituted living being. The white juice of sea-lettuce
was boiled with milk in which vipers and asps had been
drowned. The sap of the manchineel or deadly fruit of
Java was either brought back with them from their long
journeys, or imported at great expense; so also was the
juice of the cassada, and so were similar poisons; they pul¬
verised flint, mixed with impure ashes the dried slime of
reptiles, composed hideous philtres with the virus of mares
on heat and similar secretions of bitches; they mingled
human blood with infamous drugs, composing an oil the
mere odour of which was fatal, therein recalling the tarte
bourbonnaise of Panurge; they even concealed recipes for

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    T5l

poisoning in the technical language of alchemy, and the
secret of the powder of projection, in more than one old
book which claims to be Hermetic, is in reality that of
the powder of succession. The Grand Grimoire gives one
in particular which is very thinly disguised under the title
of Method for Making Gold; it is an atrocious decoction
of verdigris, arsenic, and sawdust, which, if properly made,
should immediately consume a branch that is plunged into
it and eat swiftly through an iron nail. John Baptista
Porta cities in his Natural Magic a specimen of Borgia
poison, but, as may be imagined, he is deceiving the vulgar,
and does not divulge the truth, which would be too dan¬
gerous in such a connection. We may therefore quote his
recipe to satisfy the curiosity of our readers.
   The toad by itself is not venomous, but it is a sponge
for poisons, and is the mushroom of the animal kingdom.
Take, then, a plump toad, says Porta, and place it with
vipers and asps in a globular bottle; let poisonous fungi,
fox-gloves, and hemlock be their sole nourishment during a
period of several days; then enrage them by beating, burn¬
ing, and tormenting them in every conceivable manner,
till they die of rage and hunger; sprinkle their bodies with
powdered spurge and ground glass; then place them in a
well-sealed retort, and extract all their moisture by fire.
Let the glass cool; separate the ash of the dead bodies from
the incombustible dust, which will remain at the bottom of
the retort. You will then have two poisons—one liquid, the
other a powder. The first will be fully as efficacious as the
terrible Aqua P off ana; the second, in a few days’ time, will
cause any person, who may have a pinch of it mixed with his
drink, to become, in the first place, wilted and old, and subse¬
quently to die amidst horrible sufferings, or in a state of
complete collapse. It must be admitted that this recipe has a
magical physiognomy of the blackest and most revolting
kind, and sickens one by its recollections of this abominable
confections of Canida and Medea. The sorcerers of the mid-
del ages pretended to receive such powders at the Sabbath,

152               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 and sold them at a high price to the malicious and ignorant.
 The tradition of similar mysteries spread terror in country
 places, and came to act as a spell. The imagination once
impressed, the nervous system once assailed, and then the
victim rapidly wasted away, the very dread of his relatives
and friends insuring his loss. The sorcerer or sorceress was
almost invariably a species of human toad, swollen with
long-enduring rancours. They were poor, repulsed by all,
and consequently full of hatred. The fear which they in¬
spired was their consolation and their revenge; poisoned
themselves by a society of which they had experienced
nothing but the refuse and the vices, they poisoned in
their turn all those who were weak enough to fear them,
and avenged upon beauty and youth their accursed old
age and their atrocious ugliness. The mere operation of
these evil works, and the fulfilment of these loathsome
mysteries, constituted and confirmed what was then called
a compact with the devil. It is certain that the worker
must have been given over body and soul to evil, and justly
 deserved the universal and irrevocable reprobation ex¬
pressed by the allegory of hell. That human souls could
descend to such an abyss of crime and madness must as¬
suredly astonish and grieve us; but is not such an abyss
needed as a basis for the exaltation of the most sublime
virtues? and does not the depth of infernus demonstrate
by antithesis the infinite height and grandeur of heaven?
   In the North, where the instincts are more repressed and
vivacious; in Italy, where the passions are more diffusive
and fiery, charms and the evil eye are still dreaded; the
jettatura is not to be braved with impunity in Naples, and
persons who are unfortunately endowed with this power
are even distinguished by certain exterior signs. In order
to guard against it, experts affirm that horns must be,
carried on the person, and the common people, who take
everything literally, hasten to adorn themselves with small
horns, not dreaming of the sense of the allegory. These
attributes of Jupiter Ammon, Bacchus, and Moses are the

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   153

 symbol of moral power or enthusiasm, so that the magicians
 mean to say that, in order to withstand the jettatura, the
 fatal current of instincts must be governed by a great in¬
 trepidity, a great enthusiasm, or a great thought. In like
 manner, almost all popular superstitions are profane in¬
 terpretations of some grand maxim or marvellous secret of
 occult wisdom.      Did not Pythagoras, in hisi admirable
 symbols, bequeath a perfect philosophy to sages, and a new
 series of vain observances and ridiculous practices to the
 vulgar ? Thus, when he said: ‘ ‘ Do not pick up what falls
 from the table; do not cut down trees on the great high¬
 way ; kill not the serpent when it falls into your garden,9 9
 —was he not inculcating the precepts of charity, either
 social or personal, under transparent allegories? When
 he said: “Do not look at yourself by torchlight in a
 mirror,” was he not ingeniously teaching true self-knowl¬
 edge which is incompatible with factitious lights and the
 prejudgments of systems? It is the same with the other
 precepts of Pythagoras, who, it is well known, was followed
 literally by a swarm of unintelligent disciples, and, in¬
 deed, amongst our provincial superstitious observances,
 there are many which indubitably belong to the primitive
 misconception of Pythagorean symbols.
    Superstition is derived from a Latin word which signifies
survival. It is the sign surviving the thought; it is the
 dead body of a religious rite. Superstition is to initiation
what the notion of the devil is to that of God. This is the
sense in which the worship of images is forbidden, and in
this sense also a doctrine most holy in its original concep¬
tion may become superstitious and impious when it has lost
its spirit and its inspiration. Then does religion, ever one,
like the supreme reason, change its vestures and abandon
old rites to the cupidity and roguery of priests dispossessed
and metamorphosed by their wickedness and ignorance into
jugglers and charlatans. We may include among supersti¬
tions those magical emblems and characters, of which the
meaning is no longer understood, which are engraved by

154   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                         ‘   rt,

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   155

chance on amulets and talismans. The magical images of
the ancients were pantacles, i.e., kabbalistic syntheses.
Thus the wheel of Pythagoras is a pantacle analogous to
the wheels of Ezekiel; the two figures contain the same
secrets, and belong to the same philosophy; they constitute
the key of all pantacles, and we have already discoursed
concerning them.
   The four beasts, or, rather, the four-headed sphinx of the
 same prophet are identical with an admirable Indian
symbol which we have reproduced in this work, as having
 reference to the great arcanum. In his Apocalypse, St
John followed and elaborated Ezekiel; indeed, the mon¬
strous figures of his wonderful book, are so many magical
pantacles, the key of which is easily discoverable by kab-
balists. On the other hand, Christians, rejecting science
in their anxiety to extend faith, sought later on to conceal
the origin of their dogmas, and condemned all kabbalistic
and magical books to the flames. To destroy originals gives
a kind of originality to copies, as was doubtless in the mind
of St Paul when, prompted beyond question by the most
laudable intention, he accomplished his scientific auto-da-fe
at Ephesus. In the same way, six centuries later, the true
believer Omar sacrificed the Library of Alexandria to the
originality of the Koran, and who knows whether in the
time to come some future Apostle will not.set fire to our
literary museums, and confiscate the printing-press in the
interest of some fresh religious infatuation, some newly
accredited legend?
   The study of talismans and pantacles is one of the most
curious branches of magic, and connects with historical
numismatics. There are Indian, Egyptian, and Greek talis¬
mans, kabbalistic medals coming from the ancient and
modem Jews, Gnostic abraxas, occult tokens in use among
the members of secret societies, and sometimes called
counters of the Sabbath; so also there are Templar medals
and jewels of Freemasonry. In his Treatise on the Won¬
ders of Nature, Coglenius describes the talismans of Solo-

156              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


mon and those of Rabbi Chael. Designs of many others
that are most ancient will be found in the magical calendars
of Tycho-Brahe and Duchentau, and should have a place
in M. Ragon’s archives of initiation, a vast and scholarly
undertaking, to which we refer our readers.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     157




                             19 ^
                                D
                                  T

      THE STONE OF THE PHILOSOPHERS—
                ELAGABALUS

                   VOCATIO    SOL     AURUM

The    ancients adored the Sun under the figure of a black
 stone, which they named Elagabalus, or Heliogabalus.
 What did this stone signify, and how came it to be the
 image of the most brilliant of luminaries? The disciples
 of Hermes, before promising their adepts the elixir of long
life, or the powder of projection, counselled them to seek
 for the philosophical stone. What is this stone, and why a
stone ? The great initiator of the Christians invites his be¬
lievers to build on the stone or rock, if they do not wish their
structures to be demolished. He terms himself the corner¬
stone, and says to the most faithful of his Apostles, i ‘ Thou
 art Peter (petrus), and upon this rock (petram) I will
build my church. ’ ’ This stone, say the masters in alchemy,
is the true salt of the philosophers, which is the third in¬
gredient in the composition of Azoth. Now, we know al¬
ready that Azoth is the name of the great Hermetic and
true philosophical agent; furthermore, their salt is repre¬
sented under the figure of a cubic stone, as may be seen in
the Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine, or in the allegories of
Trevisan. Once more, what is this stone actually? It is
the foundation of absolute philosophy, it is supreme and
immovable reason. Before even dreaming of the metallic
work, we must be fixed for ever upon the absolute prin¬
ciples of wisdom, we must possess that reason which is
the touch-stone of truth. Never will a man of prejudices
become the king of nature and the master of transmuta¬
tions. The philosophical stone is hence before all things
necessary; but how is it to be found? Hermes, informs

158               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


us in his Emerald Table. We must separate the subtle
from the fixed with great care and assiduous attention.
Thus, we must separate our certitudes from our beliefs, and
sharply distinguish the respective domains of science and
faith, understanding thoroughly that we do not know things
which we believe, and that we cease immediately to believe
anything which we come actually to know, so that the es¬
sence of the things of faith is the unknown and the in¬
definite, while it is quite the reverse with the things of
science. It must thence be inferred that science rests on
reason and experience, whilst the basis of faith is sentiment
and reason. In other words, the philosophical stone is the
true certitude which human prudence assures to conscien¬
tious researches and modest doubt, whilst religious en¬
thusiasm ascribes it exclusively to faith. Now, it belongs
neither to reason without aspirations nor to aspirations
without reason; true certitude is the reciprocal acquiescence
of the reason which knows in the sentiment which believes
and of the sentiment which believes in the reason which
knows. The permanent alliance of reason and faith will
result not from their absolute distinction and separation,
but from their mutual control and their fraternal concur¬
rence. Such is the significance of the two pillars of Solo¬
mon’s porch, one named Jakin and the other Bohas, one
black and the other white. They are distinct and seperate,
they are even contrary in appearance, but if blind force
sought to join them by bringing them close to one another,
the roof of the temple would collapse; separately, their
power is one; joined, they are two powers which destroy
one another. For precisely the same reason the spiritual
power is weakened whensoever it attempts to usurp the
temporal, while the temporal power becomes the victim of
its encroachments on the spiritual. Gregory VII. ruined
the Papacy; the schismatic kings have lost and will lose
the monarchy. Human equilibrium requires two feet, the
worlds gravitate by means of two forces, generation needs
two sexes. Such is the meaning of the arcanum of Solo-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      159

mon, represented by the two pillars of the temple, Jakin
and Bohas.
   The sun and moon of the alchemists correspond to the
same symbol and concur in the perfection and stability of
the philosophical stone. The sun is the hieroglyphic sign
of truth, because it is the visible source of light, and the
rude stone is the symbol of stability. It was for this reason
that the ancients took the stone Elagabalus as the actual
type of the sun, and for this also that the mediaeval al¬
chemists pointed to the philosophical stone as the first
means of making philosophical gold, that is to say, of trans¬
forming the vital forces represented by the six metals into
Sol, that is, into truth and light, the first and indispensable
operation of the great work, leading to the secondary
adaptations, and discovering, by the analogies of nature, the
natural and grosser gold to the possessors erf the spiritual
and living gold, of the true salt, the true mercury, and the
true sulphur of the philosophers. To find the philosophical
stone is then to have discovered the absolute, as the masters
otherwise say. Now, the absolute is that which admits of no
errors, it is the fixation of the volatile, it is the rule of the
imagination, it is the very necessity of being, it is the im¬
mutable law of reason and truth; the absolute is that which
is. Now that which is in some sense precedes he who is.
God himself cannot be in the absence of a reason of being,
and can exist only in virtue of a supreme and inevitable
reason. It is this reason which is the absolute; it is this in
which we must believe if we desire a rational and solid
foundation for our faith. It may be said in these days that
God is merely a hypothesis, but the absolute reason is not
a hypothesis; it is essential to being.
   St Thomas once said: “A thing is not just because God
wills it, but God wills it because it is just.” Had St
Thomas logically deduced all the consequences of this beau¬
tiful thought, he would have found the philosophical stone,
and besides being the angel of the school, he would have
been its reformer. To believe in the reason of God and

160               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


in the God of reason is to render atheism impossible.
When Voltaire said: “If God did not exist, it would be
necessary to invent Him, ” he felt rather than understood
the reason which is in God. Does God really exist? There
is no knowing, but we desire it to be so, and hence we be¬
lieve it. Faith thus formulated is reasonable faith, for
it admits the doubt of science, and, as a fact, we believe
only in things which seem to us probable, though we do not
know them. To think otherwise is delirium; to speak other¬
wise is to talk like the illuminated or fanatical. Now, it
is not to such persons that the philosophical stone is prom¬
ised. The ignoramuses who have turned primitive Chris¬
tianity from its path by substituting faith for science, dream
for experience, the fantastic for the real; inquisitors who,
during so many ages, have waged a war of extermination
against magic; have succeeded in enveloping with darkness
the ancient discoveries of the human mind, so that we are
now groping for the key to the phenomena of nature. Now,
all natural phenomena depend upon a single and immutable
law, represented by the philosophical stone, and especially
by its cubic form. This law, expressed by the tetrad in the
Kabbalah, furnished the Hebrews with all the mysteries of
their divine Tetragram. It may be said therefore that the
philosophical stone is square in every sense, like the heav¬
enly Jerusalem of St John; that one of its sides is in¬
scribed with the name            and the other with that of
God; that one of its facets bears the name of Adam, a
second that of Heva, and the two others those of Azot and
Inri.   At the beginning of the French translation of a
book by the Sieur de Nuiserqent on the philosophical salt,
the spirit of the earth is represented standing on a cube
over which tongues of flame are passing; the phallus is re¬
placed by a caduceus; the sun and moon figure on the
right and left breast; he is bearded, crowned, and holds
a sceptre in his hand. This is the Azoth of the sages on his
pedestal of salt and sulphur. The symbolic head of the
goat of Mendes is occasionally given to this figure, and it is

                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  161

then the Baphomet of the Templars and the Word of the
Gnostics—bizarre images which became scarecrows for the
vulgar after affording food for thought to the sages, inno¬
cent hieroglyphs of thought and faith which have been a
pretext for the rage of persecutions. How pitiable are men
in their ignorance, but how they would despise themselves
if once they came to know!

162               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                          20 ^ U

            THE UNIVERSAL MEDICINE

             CAPUT    RESURRECTIO     CIRCULUS

The majority of our physical complains come from our
moral diseases, according to the one and universal dogma,
and by reason of the law of analogies. A great passion to
which we abandon ourselves always corresponds to a great
malady in store for us. Mortal sins are so named because
they, physically and positively, cause death. Alexander the
Great died of pride; he was naturally temperate, and it was
through pride that he yielded to the excess which occasioned
his death. Francis I. died of an adultery. Louis XV. died
of h.is deer-park. When Marat was assassinated he was
perishing of rage and envy. He was a monomaniac of
pride, who believed himself to be the only just man, and
would have slain everything that was not Marat. Several
of our contemporaries died of deceived ambition after the
revolution of February. So soon as any will is irrevocably
confirmed in a tendency towards the absurd, the man is
dead, and the rock on which he will break is not distant.
It is, therefore, true to say that wisdom preserves and pro¬
longs life. The great Master told us: “My flesh is meat
indeed, and My blood is drink indeed. He that eateth My
flesh and drinketh My blood hath everlasting life.” And
when the crowd murmured, He added: “Here the flesh
profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you are
spirit and life.” So also, when He was about to die, He
attached the remembrance of His life to the sign of bread,
and that of His spirit to the symbol of wine, thus institut¬
ing the communion of faith, hope, and charity. Now, it is
in the same sense that the Hermetic masters have said:
Make gold potable, and you will have the universal medi-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    163

cine—that is to say, appropriate truth to your needs, let
it become the source at which you daily drink, and you will
in yourself have the immortality of the sages. Temper¬
ance, tranquillity of soul, simplicity of character, calmness
and rationality of will, these things not only make man
happy, but strong and well-seeming. By growth in reason
and goodness man becomes immortal. We are the authors
of our own destiny, and God does not save us apart from
our own concurrence. There is no death for the sage;
death is a phantom, made horrible by the weakness and
ignorance of the vulgar. Change is the sign of motion, and
motion reveals life; if the corpse itself were dead, its de¬
composition would be impossible; all its composing mole¬
cules are living, and working for their liberation. And you
dream that the spirit is set free the first so that it may
cease to live! You believe that thought and love can die
when the grossest matter is imperishable! If change ought
to be called death, we die and are reborn daily, because our
forms change daily. Fear, therefore, to soil or tear our
garments, but do not fear to lay them by when the hour
of sleep approaches.
   The embalming and preservation of bodies is a supersti¬
tion which is against nature; it is an attempt to create
death; it is the forcible petrifaction of a substance which is
needed by life. But, on the other hand, we must not be
quick to destroy or make away with bodies; there is no
abruptness in the operations of nature, and we must not
risk the violent rupture of the bonds of a departing soul.
Death is never instantaneous; it is, like sleep, gradual.
So long as the blood has not become absolutely cold, so long
as the nerves can quiver, a man is not wholly dead, and, if
none of the vital organs are destroyed, the soul can be re¬
called, either by accident or by a strong will. A philosopher
has declared that he would discredit universal testimony
rather than believe in the resurrection of a dead person, but
his speech was rash, for it is on the faith of universal testi¬
mony that he believed in the impossibility of resurrection.

164               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


Supposing such an occurrence were proved, what would
follow? Must we deny evidence or renounce reason? It
would be absurd to say so. We should simply infer that
we were wrong in supposing resurrection to be impossible.
Ah actu ad posse valet consecutio.
   Let us now make bold to affirm that resurrection is pos¬
sible and occurs oftener than might be thought. Many
persons whose deaths have been legally and scientifically
attested have been subsequently found in their coffins dead
indeed, but having evidently come to life and having bitten
through their clenched hands so as to open the arteries and
escape from their horrible agonies. A doctor would tell us
that such persons were in a lethargy, and not dead. But
what is lethargy? It is the name which we give to an un¬
completed death, a death which is falsified by return to life.
It is easy by words to escape from a difficulty when it is
impossible to explain facts. The soul is joined to the body
by means of sensibility, and when sensibility ceases it is a
sure sign that the soul is departing. The magnetic sleep is
a lethargy or factitious death which is curable at will. The
etherisation or torpor produced by chloroform is a real
lethargy which ends sometimes in absolute death, when the
soul, ravished by its temporary liberation, makes an effort
of will to become free altogether, which is possible for those
who have conquered hell, that is to say, whose moral
strength is superior to that of astral attraction. Hence
resurrection is possible only for elementary souls, and it is
these above all who run the risk of involuntary revival in
the tomb. Great men and true sages are never buried
alive. The theory and practice of resurrection will be given
in our Ritual; to those, meanwhile, who may ask me whether
I have raised the dead, I w^ould say that if I replied in the
affirmative they would not believe me.
   It now remains for us to examine whether the abolition
of pain is possible, and whether it is wholesome to employ
chloroform or magnetism for surgical operations. We
think, and science will acknowledge it later on, that by

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   165

diminishing sensibility we diminish life, and what we sub¬
tract from pain under such circumstances turns to the
profit of death. Pain bears witness to the struggle for life,
and hence we observe that the dressing of the wound is ex¬
cessively painful in the case of persons who are operated
on under anaesthetics. Now, if chloroform were resorted
to at each dressing, one of two things would happen—either
the patient would die, or the pain would return and con¬
tinue between the dressings. Nature is not violated with
impunity.

166               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                           21 ^ X

                       DIVINATION

                  DENTES   FURCA    AMENS

The author of this book has dared many things in his life,
and never has any fear retained his thought a prisoner. It
is not at the same time without legitimate dread that he
approaches the end of the magical doctrine. It is a ques¬
tion now of revealing, or rather reveiling, the Great Secret,
the terrible secret, the secret of life and death, expressed
in the Bible by those formidable and symbolical words of
the serpent, who was himself symbolical: I. Nequaquam
MORIEMINI; II. Sed ERITIS; III. SlCUT Dll; IV. SciENTES
bonum et malum.       One of the privileges which belong to
the initiate of the Great Arcanum, and that which sums
them all, is Divination. According to the vulgar compre¬
hension of the term, to divine signifies to conjecture what
is unknown, but its true sense is ineffable to the point of
sublimity. To divine (divinari) is to exercise divinity.
The word divinus, in Latin, signifies something far different
from dimes, which is equivalent to the man-god. Devin, in
French, contains the four letters of the word Dieu (God),
plus the letter n, which corresponds in its form to the
Hebrew aleph        and kabbalistically and hieroglyphically
expresses the Great Arcanum, of which the Tarot symbol is
the figure of the Juggler. Whosoever understands perfectly
the aboslute numeral value of ^ multiplied by n final in
words which signify science, art, or force, who subsequently
adds the five letters of the word Devin, in such a way
as to make five go into four, four into three, three into two,
and two into one, such a person, by translating the re¬
sultant number into primitive Hebrew characters, will write
the occult name of the Great Arcanum, and will possess a

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   167

 word of which the sacred Tetragram itself is only the
  equivalent and the image.
     To be a diviner, according to the force of the term, is
 hence to be divine, and something more mysterious still.
 Now, the two signs of human divinity, or of divine hu¬
 manity, are prophecies and miracles. To be a prophet is to
 see beforehand the effects which exist in causes, to read
 in the astral light; to work miracles is to act upon the
 universal agent, and subject it to our will. The author of
 this book will be asked whether he is a prophet and
 thaumaturge. Let inquirers recur to all that he wrote be¬
 fore certain events took place in the world; and as to any¬
 thing else that he may have said or done, would anyone be¬
 lieve his mere word if he made any unusual statement?
 Furthermore, one of the essential conditions of divination
 is to be never constrained, never suffer temptation—in other
 words, being put to the test. Never have the masters of
 science yielded to the curiosity of anyone.        The sibyls
burned their books when Tarquin refused to appraise them
at their proper value; the great Master was silent when
He was asked for a sign of His divine mission; Agrippa
perished of want rather than obey those who demanded
a horoscope. To furnish proofs of science to those who
suspect the very existence of the science is to initiate the
unworthy, to profane the gold of the sanctuary, to deserve
the excommunication of sages, and the fate of betrayers.
    The essence of divination, that is to say, the Great
Magical Arcanum, is represented by all symbols of the
science, and is intimately connected with the one and
primeval doctrine of Hermes. In philosophy, it gives ab¬
solute certitude; in religion, the universal secret of faith;
in physics, the composition, decomposition, recomposition,
realisation, and adaptation of philosophical Mercury, called
Azoth by the alchemists; in dynamics it multiplies our
forces by those of perpetual motion; it is at once mystical,
metaphysical, and material, with correspondent effects in
the three worlds; it procures charity in God, truth in

168                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 science, and gold in riches, for metallic transmutation is at
 once an allegory and reality, as all the adepts of true
 science are perfectly well aware. Yes, gold can really and
 miaterially be made by means of the stone of the sages,
 which is an amalgam of salt, sulphur, and mercury, thrice
 combined in Azoth by a triple sublimation and a triple
 fixation. Yes, the operation is often easy, and may be ac¬
 complished in a day, an instant; at other times it requires
 months and years. But to succeed in the great work, one
 must be divinus—a diviner, in the kabbalistic sense of the
 term—and it is indispensable that one should have re¬
 nounced, in respect of personal interest, the advantage of
 wealth, so as to become its dispenser. Raymund Lully
 enriched sovereigns, planted Europe with institutions, and
remained poor. Nicholas Flamel, who, in spite of his
legend, is really dead, only attained the great work when
asceticism had completely detached him from riches. He
was initiated by a suddenly imparted understanding of the
book Asch Mezareph, written in Hebrew by the kabbalist
Abraham, possibly the compiler of the Sepher Jetzirah.
Now, this understanding was, for Flamel, an intuition
deserved, or, rather, rendered possible, by the personal
preparations of the adept. I believe I have spoken
sufficiently.
   Divination is, therefore, an intuition, and the key of
this intuition is the universal and magical doctrine of
analogies. By means of these analogies, the magus in¬
terprets visions, as did the patriarch Joseph in Egypt, ac¬
cording to Biblical history. The analogies in the reflections
of the astral light are as exact as the shades of colour in
the solar spectrum, and can be calculated and explained
with great exactitude. It is, however, indispensable to
know the dreamer’s degree of intellectual life, which, in¬
deed, he will himself completely reveal by his own dreams
in a manner that will profoundly astonish himself.
   Somnambulism, presentiments, and second sight are
simply an accidental or induced disposition to dream in a

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      169

voluntary or awakened sleep—that is, to perceive the an¬
alogous reflections of the astral light, as we shall explain to
demonstration in our Ritual, when providing the long-
sought method of regularly producing and directing mag¬
netic phenomena. As to divinatory instruments, they are
simply a means of communication between diviner and
consulter, serving merely to fix the two wills upon the
same sign. Vague, complex, shifting figures help to focus
the reflections of the astral fluid, and it is thus that lucidity
is procured by coffee-grouts, mists, the white of egg, &c.,
which evoke fatidic forms, existing only in the translucid—
that is, in the imagination of the operators. Vision in
water is worked by the dazzlement and tiring of the optic
nerve, which then resigns its functions to the translucid,
and produces a brain illusion in which the reflections of the
astral light are taken for real images. Hence nervous
persons, of weak sight and lively imagination, are most
fitted for this species of divination, which, indeed, is most
successful when performed by children. Let us not here
misinterpret the function which we attribue to imagination
in divinatory arts. It is by imagination assuredly that we
see, and this is the natural aspect of the miracle, but we
see true things, and in this consists the marvellous aspect
of the natural work. We appeal to the experience of all
veritable adepts. The author of this book has tested all
kinds of divination, and has invariably obtained results in
proportion to the exactitude of his scientific operations and
the good faith of his consulters.
   The Tarot, that miraculous work which inspired all the
sacred books of antiquity, is, by reason of the analogical pre¬
cision of its figures and numbers, the most perfect instru¬
ment of divination, and can be employed with complete
confidence. Its oracles are always rigorously true, at least
in a certain sense, and even when it predicts nothing it
reveals secret things and gives the most wise counsel to its
consulters. Alliette, who, in the last century, from a hair¬
dresser becaihe a kabbalist, and kabbalistically called him-

170               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


self Etteilla, reading his name backwards after the manner
 of Hebrew, Alliette, I say, after thirty years of meditation
 over the Tarot, came very near to recovering everything
that is concealed in this extraordinary work; however, he
ended only by misplacing the keys, through want of their
 proper understanding, and inverted the order and char¬
 acter of the figures without, at the same time, entirely
destroying their analogies, so great are the sympathy and
correspondence which exist between them. The writings of
Etteilla, now very rare, are obscure, wearisome, and in
style barbarous ; they have not all been printed, and some
manuscripts of this father of modern cartomancers are in
the hands of a Paris bookseller who has been good enough
to shew them us. Their most remarkable points are the
obstinate opinions and incontestible good faith of the
author, who all his life perceived the grandeur1 of the
occult sciences, but was destined to die at the gate of the
sanctuary without ever penetrating behind the veil. He
had little esteem for Agrippa, made much of Jean Belot,
and knew nothing of the philosophy of Paracelsus, but he
possessed a highly-trained intuition, a volition most per¬
severing, though his fancy exceeded his judgment. His
endowments were insufficient for a magus and more than
were needed for a skilful and accredited diviner of the
vulgar order. Hence Etteilla had a fashionable success
which a more accomplished magician would perhaps have
been wrong to waive, but would certainly not have claimed.
   When uttering at the end of our Ritual a last word upon
the Tarot, we shall show the-complete method of reading
and hence of consulting it, not only on the probable chances
of destiny, but also, and above all, upon the problems of
philosophy and religion, concerning which it provides a
solution which is invariably certain and also admirable in
its precision, when explained in the hierarchic order of the
analogy of the three worlds with the three colours and the
four shades which compose the sacred septenary. All this
belongs to the positive practice of magic, and can only be

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  171

summarily indicated and established theoretically in the
present first part, which is concerned exclusively with the
doctrine of transcendent magic, and the philosophical and
religious key of the transcendent sciences, known, or rather
not known, under the name of occult.

172               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




  SUMMARY AND GENERAL KEY OF THE FOUR
                  SECRET SCIENCES

                    SIGNA   THOT   PAN

Let us   now sum up the entire science by its principles.
Analogy is the final word of science and the first word of
faith. Harmony consists in equilibrium, and equilibrium
subsists by the analogy of contraries. Absolute unity is
the supreme and final reason of things. Now, this reason
can neither be one person nor three persons; it is a reason,
and reason eminently. To create equilibrium, we must
separate and unite—separate by the poles, unite by the
centre. To reason upon faith is to destroy faith; to create
mysticism in philosophy is to assail reason. Reason and
faith, by their nature, mutually exclude one another, and
they unite by analogy. Analogy is the sole possible media¬
tor between the finite and infinite. Dogma is the ever
ascending hypothesis of a presumable equation. For the
ignorant, it is the hypothesis which is the absolute affirma¬
tion, and the absolute affirmation which is hypothesis.
Hypotheses are necessary in science, and he who seeks to
realise them enlarges science without decreasing faith, for
on the further side of faith is the infinite. We believe
in what we do not know, but what reason leads us to
admit. To define and circumscribe the object of faith is,
therefore, to formulate the unknown. Professions of faith
are formulations of the ignorance and aspirations of man.
The theorems of science are monuments of his conquests.
The man who denies God is not less fanatical than he who
defines him with pretended infallibility. God is commonly
defined by the enumeration of all that He is not. Man
makes God by an analogy from the lesser to the greater,
whence it results that the conception of God by man is ever

TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC   173

174                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


that of an infinite man who makes man a finite God. Man
 can realise that which he believes in the measure of that
which he knows, and by reason of that which he does not
know, and he can accomplish all that he wills in the measure
of that which he believes and by reason of that which he
knows. The analogy of contraries is the connection of light
and shade, of height and hollow, of plenum and void.
Allegory, the mother of all dogmas, is the substitution of
impressions for seals, of shadows for realities. It is the fable
of truth and the truth of fable. One does not invent a
dogma, one veils a truth, and a shade for weak eyes is
produced.     The initiator is not an impostor, he is a
revealer, that is, following the meaning of the Latin word
revelare, a man who veils afresh. He is the creator of a
new shade.                                 "V


   Analogy is the key of all secrets of nature and the sole
fundamental reason of all revelations. This is why religions
seem to be written in the heavens and in all nature; this is
just as it should be, for the work of God is the book of God,
and in what He writes should be discerned the expression of
His thought, and consequently of His being, since we^con-
ceive Him only as the supreme thought. Dupuis and Vol-
ney saw only a plagiarism in this splendid analogy, which
should have led them to acknowledge the catholicity, that
is, the universality of the primeval, one, magical, kab-
balistic, and immutable doctrine of revelation by analogy.
Analogy yields all the forces of nature to the magus;
analogy is the quintessence of the philosophical stone, the
secret of perpetual motion, the quadrature of the circle, the
temple resting on the two pillars Jakin and Bohas, the
key of the great arcanum, the root of the tree of life, the
science of good and evil. To find the exact scale of analogies
in things appreciable by science is to fix the bases of faith
and thus become possessed of the rod of miracles. Now,
there is a principle and rigorous formula, which is the great
arcanum. Let the wise man seek it not, since he has al-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    175

ready found it; let the profane seek for ever, and they will
never find it.
   Metallic transmutation takes place spiritually and ma¬
terially by the positive key of analogies. Occult medicine
is simply the exercise of the will applied to the very source
of life, to that astral light the existence of which is a fact,
which has a movement conformed to calculations having
the great magical arcanum for their ascending and descend¬
ing scale. This universal arcanum, the final and eternal
secret of transcendent initiation, is represented in the Tarot
by a naked girl, who touches the earth only by one foot,
has a magnetic rod in each hand, and seems to be running
in a crown held up by an angel, an eagle, a bull, and a
lion. Fundamentally, the figure is analogous to the cherub
of Jekeskiel, of which a representation is here given, and
to the Indian symbol of Addhanari, which again is anal¬
ogous to the ado-nai" of Jekeskiel, who is vulgarly called
Ezekiel. The comprehension of this figure is the key of all
the occult sciences. Readers of my book must already un¬
derstand it philosophically if they are at all familiar with
the symbolism of the Kabbalah. It remains for us now to
realise what is the second and more important operation of
the great work. It is something undoubtedly to find the
philosophical stone, but how is at to be ground into the
powder of projection? What are the uses of the magical
rod? What is the real power of the divine names in the
Kabbalah ? The initiates know, and those who are deserv¬
ing of initiation will know in turn if they discover the great
                       *                                      »


arcanum by means of the very numerous and precise indica¬
tions which we have given them. Why are these simple
and pure truths for ever and of necessity concealed? Be¬
cause the elect of the understanding are always few on
earth, and are encompassed by the foolish and wicked like
Daniel in the den of lions. Moreover, analogy instructs us
in the laws of the hierarchy, and absolute science, being an
omnipotence, must be the exclusive possession of the most
worthy. The confusion of the hierarchy is the actual de-

176                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


struction of societies, for then the blind become leaders of
the blind, according to the word of the Master. Give back
initiation to priests and kings and order will come forth
anew. So, in my appeal to the most worthy, and in expos¬
ing myself to all the dangers and anathemas which threaten
revealers, I believe myself to have done a great and useful
thing, directing the breath of God living in humanity upon
the social chaos, and creating priests and kings for the
world to come.
   A thing is not just because God wills it, but God wills
it because it is just, said the angel of the schools. It is as
if he said: The absolute is reason. Reason is self-existent;
it is because it is, and not because we suppose it; it is or
nothing is; could you wish anything to exist without reason ?
Madness itself does not occur without it. Reason is neces¬
sity, is law, is the rule of all liberty and the direction of all
initiative. If God exists, it is by reason. The conception
of an absolute God outside or independent of reason is the
idol of black magic and the phantom of the fiend. The
demon is death masquerading in the cast-off garments of
life, the spectre of Hirrenkesept throned upon the rubbish
of ruined civilisations, and concealing a loathsome naked¬
ness by the rejected salvage of the incarnations of Vishnu.




      HERE ENDS THE DOCTRINE OF TRANSCENDENT MAGIC.

THE RITUAL OF TRANSCENDENT
          MAGIC

A



               INTRODUCTION

Knowest thou that old queen of the world who is on the
march always and wearies never ? Every uncurbed passion,
every selfish pleasure, every licentious energy of humanity,
and all its tyrannous weakness, go before the sordid mistress
of our tearful valley, and, scythe in hand, these indefatig¬
able labourers reap their eternal harvest. That queen is old
as time, but her skeleton is concealed in the wreckage of
women’s beauty, which she abstracts from their youth and
their love. Her skull is adorned with dead tresses that are
not her own. Spoliator of crowned heads, she is embel¬
lished with the plunder of queens, from the star-begemmed
hair of Berenice to that, white without age, which the execu¬
tioner sheared from the brow of Marie Antoinette. Her
livid and frozen body is clothed in polluted garments and
tattered winding-sheets. Her bony hands, covered with
rings, hold diadems and chains, sceptres and crossbones,
jewels and ashes. When she goes by, doors open of them¬
selves; she passes through walls; she penetrates to the
cabinets of kings; she surprises the extortioners of the poor
in their most secret orgies; she sits down at their board,
pours out their wine, grins at their songs with her gumless
teeth, takes the place of the lecherous courtesan hidden be¬
hind their curtains. She delights in the vicinity of sleeping
voluptuaries ; she seeks their caresses as if she hoped to
grow warm in their embrace, but she freezes all those whom
she touches and herself never kindles. At times, notwith¬
standing, one would think her seized with frenzy; she no
longer stalks slowly; she runs; if her feet are too slow, she
spurs a pale horse, and charges all breathless through mul-

                              181

182               TRANSCENDENTAL ]\IAGIC


titudes. Murder rides with her on a red charger; shaking
his mane of smoke, fire flies before her with wings of scarlet
and black; famine and plague follow on diseased and
emaciated steeds, gleaning the few sheaves which remain to
complete her harvest.
   After this funereal procession come two little children,
radiating with smiles and life, the intelligence and love of
the coming century, the dual genius of a new-born hu¬
manity. The shadows of death fold up before them, as does
night before the morning star; with nimble feet they skim
the earth, and sow with full hands the hope of another year.
But death will come no more, impiteous and terrible, to
mow like dry grass the ripe blades of the new age; it will
give place to the angel of progress, who will gently liberate
souls from mortal chains, so that they may ascend to God.
When men know how to live they will no longer die; they
will transform like the chrysalis, which becomes a splendid
butterfly. The terrors of death are daughters of ignorance,
and death herself is only hideous by reason of the rubbish
which covers her, and the sombre hues with which her
images are surrounded. Death, truly, is the birth-pang of
life. There is a force in nature which dieth not, and this
force perpetually transforms beings to preserve them. This
force is the reason of word of nature. In man also there is
a force analogous to that of nature, and it is the reason or
word of man. The word of man is the expression of his
will directed by reason, and it is omnipotent when reason¬
able, for then it is analogous to the word of God himself.
By the word of his reason man becomes the conqueror of
life, and can triumph over death. The entire life of man is
either the parturition or miscarriage of his word. Human
beings who die without having understood or formulated the
word of reason, die devoid of eternal hope. To withstand
successfully the phantom of death, we must be identified
with the realities of life. Does it signify to God if an abor¬
tion wither, seeing that life is eternal? Does it signify to
Nature if unreason perish, since reason which never perishes

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    183

still holds the keys of life? The first and terrible force
which destroys abortions eternally was called by the He¬
brews Samael; by other easterns, Satan; and by the Latins,
Lucifer. The Lucifer of the Kabbalah is not an accursed
and stricken angel; he is the angel who enlightens, who
regenerates by fire; he is to the angels of peace what the
comet is to the mild stars of the spring-time constellations.
The fixed star is beautiful, radiant, and calm; she drinks the
celestial perfumes and gazes with love upon her sisters;
clothed in her glittering robe, her forehead crowned with
diamonds, she smiles as she chants her mornnig and even¬
ing canticle; she enjoys an eternal repose which nothing can
disturb, and solemnly moves forward without departing
from the rank assigned her among the sentinels of light.
But the wandering comet, dishevelled and of sanguinary
aspect, comes hurriedly from the depths of heaven and
flings herself athwart the path of the peaceful spheres, like
a chariot of war between the ranks of a procession of ves¬
tals ; she dares to face the burning spears of the solar guar¬
dians, and, like a bereft spouse who seeks the husband of
her dreams during widowed nights, she penetrates even
unto the inmost sanctuary of the god of day; again she
escapes, exhaling the fires which consume her, and trailing
a long conflagration behind her; the stars pale at her ap¬
proach; constellate flocks, pasturing on flowers of light in
the vast meadows of the sky, seem to flee before her terrible
breath. The grand council of spheres assembles, and there
is universal consternation; at length the loveliest of the
fixed stars is commissioned to speak in the name of all the
firmament and offer peace to the headlong vagabond.
   “My sister,” she thus commences, “why dost thou disturb
the harmony of the spheres? What evil have we wrought
thee? And why, instead of wandering wilfully, dost thou
not fix thy place like us in the court of the sun ? Why dost
thou not chant with us the evening hymn, clothed like our¬
selves in a white garment, fastened at the breast with a
diamond clasp? Why float thy tresses, adrip with fiery

184               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


sweat, through the mists of the night? Ah, wouldst thou
but take thy place among the daughters of heaven, how
much more beautiful wouldst thou be! Thy face would
bum no longer with the toil of thine incredible flights;
thine eyes would be pure, thy smiling countenance white
and red like that of thy happy sisters ; all the stars would
know thee, and, far from fearing thy flight, would rejoice at
thine approach; for then thou wouldst be made one with
us by the indestructible bonds of universal harmony, and
thy peaceful existence would be one voice more in the
canticle of infinite love.”
    And the comet replies to the fixed star: * ‘ Believe not, 0
my sister, that I am permitted to wander at will and vex
the harmony of the spheres! God hath appointed my path,
even as thine, and if it appear to thee uncertain and ram¬
bling, it is because thy beams cannot penetrate far enough
to take in the circumference of the ellipse which has been
 given me for my course. My fiery hair is God’s beacon; I
 am the messenger of the suns, and I immerse myself con¬
 tinually in their burning heat, that I may dispense it to
young worlds on my journey which have not yet sufficient
 warmth, and to ancient stars which have grown cold in their
 solitude. If I weary in my long travellings, if my beauty
 be less mild than thine own, and if my garments are less
 unspotted, yet am I a noble daughter of heaven, even as
 thou art. Leave me the secret of my terrible destiny, leave
 me the dread which surrounds me, curse me even if thou
 canst not comprehend; I shall none the less accomplish my
 work, and continue any career under the impulse of the
 breath of God! Happy are the stars which rest, which shine
 like youthful queens in the peaceful society of the uni¬
 verse ! I am the proscribed, the eternal wanderer, who has
 infinity for domain. They accuse me of setting fire to the
 planets, the heat of which I renew; they accuse! me of
 terrifying the stars which I enlighten; they chide me with
 breaking in upon universal harmony, because I do not
 revolve about their particular centres, because I join them

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      185

one with another, directing my gaze towards the sole centre
of all the suns. Be reassured, therefore, 0 beauteous fixed
star! I shall not impoverish thy peaceful light; rather I
shall expend in thy service my own life and heat. I shall
disappear from heaven when I shall have consumed myself,
and my doom will have been glorious enough! Know that
various fires bum in the temple of God, and do all give
Him glory; ye are the light of golden candelabra; I am
the flame of sacrifice. Let us each fulfil our destinies.’’
   Having uttered these words, the comet tosses back her
burning hair, uplifts her fiery shield, and plunges into
infinite space, seeming to be lost for ever.
   Thus Satan appeared and disappeared in the allegorical
narratives of the Bible. “Now there was a day,” says the
book of Job, “when the sons of God came to present them¬
selves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them.
And the Lord said unto Satan, ‘Whence comest thou?’
Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, ‘From going to
and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down
in it.’ ”
   A Gnostic gospel, discovered in the east by a learned
traveller of our acquaintance, explains the genesis of light
to the profit of Lucifer, as follows:—The self-conscious
truth is the living thought. Truth is thought as it is in
itself, and formulated thought is speech. When eternal
thought desired a form, it said: ‘ ‘ Let there be light. ’ ’ Now,
this thought which speaks is the Word, and the Word said:
“Let there be light,” because the Word itself is the light of
minds. The uncreated light, which is the divine Word,
shines because it desires to be seen; when it says: “Let
there be light! ” it ordains that eyes shall open; it creates
intelligences. When God said: “Let there be light!” In¬
telligence was made, and the light appeared. Now the In¬
telligence which God diffused by the breath of His mouth,
like a star given off from the sun, took the form of a splen¬
did angel, who was saluted by heaven under the name of
Lucifer. Intelligence awakened, and comprehended its na-

186               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


ture completely by the understanding of that utterance of
the Divine Word: “Let there be light!” It felt itself to
be free because God had called it into being, and, raising up
its head, with both wings extended, it replied: “ I will not
be slavery.” “Then shalt thou be suffering,” said the
Uncreated Voice. “I will be liberty,” replied the light.
“Pride will seduce thee,” said the Supreme Voice, “and
thou wilt bring forth death.” “I needs must strive with
death to conquer life,” again responded the created light.
Thereupon God loosened from his bosom the shining cord
which restrained the superb angel, and beholding him
plunge through the night, which he furrowed with glory.
He loved the offspring of His thought, and said with an
ineffable smile: “How beautiful was the light!”
   God has not created suffering; intelligence has accepted
it to be free. And suffering has been the condition imposed
upon freedom of being by Him who alone cannot err, be¬
cause He is infinite. For the essence of intelligence is
judgment, and the essence of judgment is liberty. The
eye does not really possess light except by the faculty of
closing or opening. Were it forced to be always open, it
would be the slave and victim of the light, and would cease
to see in order to escape the torment. Thus, created Intel-,
ligence is not happy in affirming God, except by its liberty
to deny Him. Now, the Intelligence which denies, invari¬
ably affirms something, since it is asserting its liberty. It
is for this reason that blasphemy glorifies God, and that hell
was indispensable to the happiness of heaven. Were the
light unrepelled by shadow, there would be no visible forms.
If the first angel had not encountered the depths of dark¬
ness, the child-birth of God would have been incomplete,
and there could have been no separation between the
created and essential light. Never would Intelligence have
known the goodness of God if it had never lost Him. Never
would God’s infinite love have shone forth in the joys of
His mercy had the prodigal Son of Heaven remained in the
house of His Father.    When all was light, there was light

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     187

nowhere; it filled the breast of God, who was labouring to
bring forth. And when He said: “Let there be light!”
He permitted the darkness to repel the light, and the
universe issued from chaos. The negation of the angel
who, at birth, refused slavery, constituted the equilibrium
of the world, and the motion of the spheres commenced.
The infinite distances admired this love of liberty, which
was vast enough to fill the void of eternal light, and strong
enough to bear the hatred of God. But God could hate not
the noblest of His children, and He proved him by His
wrath only to confirm him in His power. So also the Word
of God Himself, as if jealous of Lucifer, willed to come
down from heaven and pass triumphantly through the
shadows of hell. He willed to be proscribed and con¬
demned ; He pre-mediated the terrible hour when He should
cry, in the extreme of His agony: ‘ ‘ My God, My God, why
hast Thou forsaken Me?” As the star, of the morning
goes before the sun, the rebellion of Lucifer announced to
new-born nature the coming incarnation of God. Possibly
Lucifer, in his fall through night, carried with him a rain
of suns and stars by the attraction of his glory. Possibly
our sun is a demon among the stars, as Lucifer is a star
among the angels. Doubtless it is for this reason that it
lights so calmly the horrible angiush of humanity and the
long agony of earth—because it is free in its solitude, and
possesses its light.
   Such were the tendencies of the heresiarchs in the early
centuries. Some, like the Ophites, adored the demon under
the figure of the serpent; others, like the Cainites, justified
the rebellion of the first angel like that of the first mur¬
derer. All these errors, all these shadows, all these mon¬
strous idols of anarchy which India opposes in its symbols
to the magical Trimourti, have found priests and wor¬
shippers in Christianity. The demon is nowhere mentioned
in Genesis; an allegorical serpent deceives our first parents.
Here is the common translation of the sacred text: 11 Now,
the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field

188                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


which the Lord God had made.”       But this is what Moses
says:

        0vita n\T nsry   m&yn ;vn      any .vn prum
Wha-Nahash haiah haroum mi-chol haiaht ha-shadeh asher
               hashah Jhoah HHohim.

This signifies, according to the version of Fabre d ’Olivet:
“Now, original attraction (cupidity) was the entrianing
passion of all elementary life (the interior active power)
of nature, the work of Jhoah, the Being of beings.” But
herein Fabre d’Olivet is beside the true interpretation, be¬
cause he was unacquainted with the grand keys of the Kab¬
balah. The word Nahasch, explained by the symbolical let¬
ters of the Tarot rigorously signifies:

14 j Nun.—The power which produces combinations.
 5 pj He.—The recipient and passive producer of forms.
21 ^ Schin.—The natural and central fire equilibrated by
         double polarization.

   Thus, the word employed by Moses, read kabbalistically,
gives the description and definition of that magical uni-
versalagent, represented in all theogonies by the serpent;
to this agent the Hebrews applied the name of Od when
it manifested its active force, of Ob when it exhibited its
passive force, and of Aour when it wholly revealed itself in
its equilibrated power, producer of light in heaven and gold
among metals. It is therefore that old serpent which en¬
circles the world, and places his devouring head beneath
the foot of a Virgin, the type of initiation—that virgin who
presents a little new-born child to the adoration of three
magi, and receives from them, in exchange for this favour,
gold, myrrh, and frankincense. So does doctrine serve in
all hieratic religions to veil the secret of those forces of
nature which the initiate has at his disposal; religious
formulae are the summaries of those words full of mystery
and power which make the gods descend from heaven and
yield themselves to the will of men. Judea borrowed its

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   189

secrets from Egypt; there Greece sent her hierophants, and
later her theosophists, to the school of the great prophets;
the Rome of the Caesars, mined by the initiation of the
catacombs, collapsed one day into the Church, and a sym¬
bolism was reconstructed with the remnants of all the
worships which had been absorbed by the queen of the
world. According to the Gospel narrative, the inscription
which set forth the spiritual royalty of Christ was written
in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin; it was the expression
of the universal synthesis. Hellenism, in fact, that grand
and beauteous religion of form, announced the coming of the
Saviour no less than the prophets of Judaism; the fable of
Psyche was an ultra-Christian abstraction, and the cultus
of the Pantheons, by rehabilitating Socrates, prepared the
altars for that unity of God, of which Israel had been the
mysterious preserver. But the synagogue denied its Mes¬
siah, and the Hebrew letters were effaced, at least in the
blinded eyes of the Jews. The Roman persecutors dis¬
honoured Hellenism, and it could not be restored by the
false moderation of the philosopher Julian, sumamed per¬
haps unjustly the Apostate, since his Christianity was never
sincere. The ignorance of the middle ages followed, oppos¬
ing saints and virgins to gods, goddesses, and nymphs; the
deep sense of the Hellenic mysteries became less understood
than ever; Greece herself did not only lose the traditions of
her ancient cultus, but separated from the Latin Church;
and thus, for Latin eyes, the Greek letters were blotted out,
as the Latin letters disappeared for Greek eyes. So the in¬
scription on the Cross of the Saviour vanished entirely, and
nothing except mysterious initials remained. But when
science and philosophy, reconcilated with faith, shall unite
all the various symbols, then shall all the magnificences of
the antique worships again blossom in the memory of men,
proclaiming the progress of the human mind in the intui¬
tion of the light of God. But of all forms of progress the
greatest will be that which, restoring the keys of nature
to the hands of science, shall enchain for ever the hideous

190               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


spectre of Satan, and, explaining all exceptional phenomena
of nature, shall destroy the empire of superstition and
idiotic credulity. To the accomplishment of this work we
have consecrated our life, and do still devote it, to the most
toilsome and difficult researches. We would emancipate
altars by overthrowing idols; we desire the man of intelli¬
gence to become once more the priest and king of nature,
and we would preserve by explanation all images of the
universal sanctuary.
    The prophets spoke in parables and images, because ab¬
stract language was wanting to them, and because prophetic
perception, being the sentiment of harmony or of universal
analogies, translates naturally by images. Taken literally
by the vulgar, these images become idols or impenetrable
mysteries. The sum and succession of these images and
mysteries constitute what is called symbolism. Symbolism,
therefore, comes from God, though it may be formulated
by men. Revelation has accompanied humanity in all ages,
has transfigured with human genius, but has ever expressed
the same truth. True religion is one; its dogmas are simple,
 and within the reach of all. At the same time, the multi¬
 plicity of symbols has been a book of poesy indispensable to
the education of human genius. The harmony of outward
 beauties and the poetry of form had to be revealed by God
 to the infancy of man; but soon Venus had Psyche for her
 rival, and Psyche enchanted Love. Thus the cultus of the
 form perforce yielded to those ambitious dreams which
 already adorned the eloquent wisdom of Plato. The advent
 of Christ was prepared, and for this reason was expected;
 it came because the world awaited it, and to become popular
 philosophy transformed into belief. Emancipated by this
 belief itself, the human mind speedily protested against the
 school which sought to materialise its signs, and the work
 of Roman Catholicism was solely the unconscious prepara¬
 tion for the emancipation of consciences and the establish¬
 ment of the bases of universal association. All these things
 were the regular and normal development of divine life in

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    191

humanity; for God is the great soul of all souls, the im¬
movable centre about which gravitate all intelligence like
a cloud of stars.
   Human intelligence has had its morning; its noon will
come, and the decline follow, but God will ever be the same.
It seems, however, to the dwellers on the earth that the sun
rises youthful and timid in the morning, shines with all its
power at mid-day, and goes wearied to rest in the evening.
Nevertheless, it is earth which revolves while the sun is
motionless. Having faith, therefore, in human progress,
and in the stability of God, the free man respects religion in
its past forms, and no more blasphemes Jupiter than
Jehovah; he still salutes lovingly the radiant image of
the Pythian Apollo, and discovers its fraternal resemblance
to the glorified countenance of the risen Redeemer. He
believes in the great mission of the Catholic hierarchy, and
finds satisfaction in observing the popes of the middle ages
who opposed religion as a check upon the absolute power of
kings; but he protests with the revolutionary centuries
against the servitude of conscience which would enchain the
pontifical keys; he is more protestant than Luther, since he
does not even believe in the infallibility of the Augsbourg
Confession, and more catholic than the Pope, for he has no
fear that religious unity will be broken by the ill-will of
the courts. He trusts in God rather than Roman policy for
the salvation of the unity idea; he respects the old age of
the Church, but he has no fear that she will die; he knows
that her apparent death will be a transfiguration and a
glorious assumption.
   The author of this book makes a fresh appeal to the
eastern magi to come forward and recognise once again that
divine Master whose cradle they saluted, the great initiator
of all the ages. All His enemies have fallen; all those who
condemned Him are dead; those who persecuted Him have
passed into sleep for ever; He is for ever alive. The en¬
vious have combined against Him, agreeing on a single
point; the sectaries have united to destroy Him; they have

192               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


crowned themselves kings and proscribed Him; they have
become hypocrites and accused Him; they have constituted
themselves judges and pronounced His sentence of death;
they have turned headsmen and executed Him; they have
forced Him to drink hemlock, they have crucified Him, they
have stoned Him, they have burned Him and cast His ashes
to the wind; then they have turned scarlet with terror, for
He still stood erect before them, impeaching them by His
wounds and overwhelming them by the brightness of His
scars. They believed that they had slain Him in His cradle
at Bethlehem, but He is alive in Egypt! They carry Him
to the summit of the mountain to cast Him down; the mob
of His murderers encircles Him, and already triumphs in
His certain destruction; a cry is heard; is not that He who
is shattered on the rocks of the abyss? They whiten and
look at one another; but He, calm and smiling with pity,
passes through the midst of them and disappears. Behold
another mountain which they have just dyed with His
blood! Behold a cross, a sepulchre, and soldiers guarding
His tomb! Madmen! The tomb is empty, and He whom
they regard as dead is walking peaceably between two
travellers, on the road to Emmaiis. Where is He ? Whither
does He go? Warn the masters of the world! Tell the
Caesars that their power is threatened! By whom ? By a
pauper who has no stone on which to lay His head, by a
man of the people condemned to the death of slaves. What
insult or what madness! It matters not. The Caesars mar¬
shal all their power; sanguinary edicts proscribe the fugi¬
tive, everywhere scaffolds rise up, circuses open arrayed
with lions and gladiators, pyres are lighted, torrents of
blood flow, and the Caesars, believing themselves victorious,
dare add another name to those they rehearse on their
trophies; then they die, and their own apotheosis dishonours
the gods whom they defended. The hatred of the world
confounds Jupiter and Nero in a common contempt.
Temples transformed into tombs are cast down over the
proscribed ashes, and above the debris of idols, above the

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     193

ruins of empires, He only, He whom the Caesars proscribed,
whom so many satellites pursued, whom so many execu¬
tioners tortured, He only lives, alone reigns, alone triumphs!
   Notwithstanding, His own disciples speedily misuse His
name; pride enters the sanctuary; those who should pro¬
claim His resurrection seek to immortalise His death, that
they may feed, like the ravens, on His ever-renewing flesh.
In place of imitating Him by His sacrifice and shedding
their blood for their children in the faith, they claim Him
 in the Vatican as upon another Caucasus, and become the
vultures of this divine Prometheus. But what signifies their
 evil dream ? They can only imprison His image; He Him¬
 self is free and erect, proceeding from exile to exile and
 from conquest to conquest; it is possible to bind a man, but
 not to make captive the Word of God; speech is free, and
 nothing can repress it; this living speech is the condemna¬
 tion of the wicked, and hence they seek to destroy it, but it
 is they only who die, and the word of truth remains to
 judge their memory! Orpheus may have been rent by
 bacchantes, Socrates may have quaffed the poisoned cup,
 Jesus and His apostles have perished in the utmost tor¬
 tures, John Hus, Jerome of Prague, and innumerable others,
 have been burned; St Bartholomew and the massacres of
 September may have had in turn their victims; cossacks,
 knouts, and Siberian deserts are still at the disposal of the
 Russian Emperor, but the spirit of Orpheus, of Socrates,
 of Jesus, and of all martyrs will live for ever in the midst
 of their dead persecutors, will stand erect amidst failing in¬
 stitutions and collapsing empires. It is this divine spirit,
 the spirit of the only Son of God, which St John represents
 in his apocalypse, standing between golden candlesticks,
 because He is the centre of all lights; having seven stars in
 His hand, like the seed of a new heaven; and sending down
 His speech upon the earth under the symbol of a two-edged
 sword. When the wise in their discouragement sleep
 through the night of doubt, the spirit of Christ is erect
 and vigilant. When the nations, weary of the labour which

194               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


emancipates them, lie down and dream over their chains,
the spirit of Christ is erect and protesting. When the
blind partisans of sterilised religions cast themselves in the
dust of old temples, the spirit of Christ is erect and pray¬
ing. When the strong become weak, when virtues are cor¬
rupted, when all things bend and sink down in search of a
shameful pasture, the spirit of Christ is erect, gazing up to
heaven, and awaiting the hour of His Father.
   Christ signifies priest and king by excellence. The Christ
initiator of modern times came to form new priests and new
kings by science, and, above all, by charity. The ancient
magi were priests and kings, and the Saviour’s advent was
proclaimed to them by a star. This star was the magical
pentagram, having a sacred letter at each point. It is the
symbol of the intelligence which rules by unity of force
over the four elementary potencies; it is the pentagram of
the magi, the blazing star of the children of Hiram, the
prototype of equilibrated light; to each of its points a ray
of light ascends, and from each a ray goes forth; it repre¬
sents the grand and supreme athanor of nature, which is
the body of man. The magnetic influence issues in two
beams from the head, from either hand, and from either
foot. The positive ray is balanced by the negative. The
head corresponds with the two feet, each hand with a hand
and foot, each of the two feet with the head and one hand.
This ruling sign of equilibrated light represents the spirit
of order and harmony; it is the sign of the omnipotence of
the magus, and hence, when broken or incorrectly drawn, it
represents astral intoxication, abnormal and ill-regulated
projections of the astral light, and, therefore, bewitchments,
perversity, madness, and it is what the magi term the
signature of Lucifer. There is another signature which
also symbolises the mysteries of light, namely, the sign of
 Solomon, whose talismans bear on one side the impression
of his seal which we have given in our Doctrine, and on
the other the following signature (p. 189), which is the

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  195

hieroglyphic theory of the composition of magnets, and
represents the circulatory law of the lightning.
   Rebellious spirits are enchained by the exhibition of the
blazing five-pointed star or the seal of Solomon, because
each gives them proof of their folly and threatens them with
a sovereign power capable of tormenting them by their
recall to order. Nothing tortures the wicked so much as
goodness. Nothing is more odious to madness than reason.
But if an ignorant operator should make use of these signs
without knowing them, he is a blind man who discourses of
light to the blind, an ass who would teach children to read.
   4‘If the blind lead the blind,” said the great and divine
Hierophant, “both fall into the pit.”
   And now a final word to sum this entire introduction.




If you be blind like Samson when you cast down the pillars
of the temple, its ruins will crush you. To command nature
we must be above nature by resistance of her attractions.
If your mind be perfectly free from all prejudice, super¬
stition, and incredulity, you will command spirits. If you
do not obey blind forces, they will obey you. If you be wise

  196              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


  like Solomon, you will perform the works of Solomon; if
  you be holy like Christ, you will accomplish the works of
  Christ. To direct the currents of the inconstant light, we
\ must be established in the constant light. To command the
  elements, we must have overcome their hurricanes, their
  lightnings, their abysses, their tempests. In order to dare
  we must know ; in order to will, we must dare ; we must
  will to possess empire, and to reign we must be silent.

               THE RITUAL
                             OF



TRANSCENDENT MAGIC

                     CHAPTER I

                       PREPARATIONS

Every intention which does not assert itself by deeds is a
vain intention, and the speech which expresses it is idle
speech. It is action which proves life and establishes will.
Hence it is said in the sacred and symbolical books that
men will be judged, not according to their thoughts and
their ideas, but according to their works. We must act in
order to be.
   We have, therefore, to treat in this place of the grand
and terrific question of magical works; we are concerned no
longer with theories and abstractions; we approach realities,
and we are about to place the rod of miracles in the hands
of the adept, saying to him at the same time: “Be not
satisfied with what we tell you; act for yourself. * ’ We
have to deal here with works of relative omnipotence, with
the means of seizing upon the greatest secrets of nature and
compelling them into the service of an enlightened and
inflexible will.
   Most known magical rituals are either mystifications or
enigmas, and we are about to rend for the first time, after

                             197

198               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


so many centuries, the veil of the occult sanctuary. To
reveal the holiness of mysteries is to provide a remedy for
their profanation. Such is the thought which sustains our
courage and enables us to face all the perils of this enter¬
prise, possibly the most intrepid which it has been permitted
the human mind to conceive and carry out.
   Magical operations are the exercise of a natural power,
but one superior to the ordinary forces of nature. They
are the result of a science and a practice which exalt human
will beyond its normal limits. The supernatural is only the
natural in an extraordinary grade, or it is the exalted
natural; a miracle is a phenomenon which strikes the multi¬
tude because it is unexpected; the astonishing is that which
astonishes; miracles are effects which surprise those who are
ignorant of their causes, or assign them causes which are
not in proportion to such effects. Miracles exist only for
the ignorant, but, as there is scarcely any absolute science
among men, the supernatural can still obtain, and does so
indeed for the whole world. Let us set out by saying that
we believe in all miracles because we are convinced and
certain, even from our own experience, of their entire possi¬
bility. There are some which we do not explain, though
we regard them as no less explicable. From the greater to
the lesser, from the lesser to the greater, the consequences
are identically related and the proportions progressively
rigorous. But in order to work miracles we must be out¬
side the ordinary conditions of humanity; we must either
be abstracted by wisdom or exalted by madness, either
superior to all passions or beyond them through ecstasy or
frenzy. Such is the first and most indispensable prepara¬
tion of the operator. Hence, by a providential or fatal law,
the magician can only exercise omnipotence in inverse pro¬
portion to his material interest; the alchemist makes so
much the more gold as he is the more resigned to priva¬
tions, and the more esteems that poverty which protects
the secrets of the magnum opus. Only the adept whose
heart is passionless will dispose of the love and hate of

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    199

those whom he would make instruments of his science;
the myth of Genesis is eternally true, and God permits the
tree of science to be approached only by those men who are
sufficiently strong and self-denying not to covet its fruits.
Ye, therefore, who seek in science a means to satisfy your
passions, pause in this fatal way; you will find nothing but
madness or death.       This is the meaning of the vulgar
tradition that the devil ends sooner or later by strangling,
sorcerers. The magus must hence be impassible, sober and
chaste, disinterested, impenetrable, and inaccessible to any
kind of prejudice or terror. He must be without bodily
defects, and proof against all contradictions and all diffi¬
culties. The first and most important of magical opera¬
tions is the attainment of this rare pre-eminence.
   We have said that impassioned ecstasy may produce the
same results as absolute superiority, and this is true as to
 the issue, but not as to the direction of magical operations.
 Passion forcibly projects the astral light and impresses un¬
 foreseen movements on the universal agent, but it cannot
 check with the facility that it impels, and its destiny then
 resembles Hippolytus dragged by his own horses, or Phalaris
 himself victimised by the instrument of torture which he
 had invented for others. Human volition realised by action
 is like a cannon-ball, and recedes before no obstacle. It
 either passes through it or is buried in it, but if it advance
 with patience and perseverance, it is never lost; it is like
 the wave which returns incessantly and wears away iron in
the end.
   Man can be modified by habit, which becomes, according
to the proverb, his second nature. By means of persevering
and graduated athletics, the powers and activity of the body
can be developed to an astonishing extent. It is the same
with the powers of the soul. Would you reign over your¬
selves and others ? Learn how to will. How can one
learn to will? This is the first arcanum of magical initia¬
tion, and it was to make it understood fundamentally that
the ancient depositaries of priestly art surrounded the

200                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


approaches of the sanctuary with so many terrors and
illusions. They did not believe in a will until it had pro¬
duced its proofs, and they were right. Power is justified by
victories. Indolence and forgetfulness are enemies of will,
and for this reason all religions have multiplied their
observances and made their worship minute and difficult.
The more we restrain ourselves for an idea, the greater is
the strength we acquire within the scope of that idea. Are
not mothers more partial to the children who have caused
them most suffering and cost them most anxieties? So
does the power of religions reside exclusively in the inflexible
will of those who practise them. So long as there is one
faithful person to believe in the holy sacrifice of the Mass,
there will be a priest to celebrate it for him; and so long
as there is a priest who daily recites his breviary, there will
be a pope in the world. Observances, apparently most in¬
significant and most foreign in themselves to the proposed
end, lead, notwithstanding, to that end by education and
exercise of will. If a peasant rose up every morning at two
or three o’clock, and went daily a long distance from home
to gather a sprig of the same herb before the rising of the
sun, he would be able to perform a great number of prod¬
igies by merely carrying this herb upon his person, for it
would be the sign of his will, and would become by his will
itself all that he required it to become in the interest of his
desires. In order to do a thing we must believe in the
possibility of our doing, and this faith must forthwith be
translated into acts. When a child says: “I cannot,” his
mother answers: ‘ ‘ Try.9 9 Faith does not even try; it begins
with the certitude of completing, and it proceeds calmly, as
if omnipotence were at its disposal and eternity before it.
What seek you, therefore, from the science of the magi?
Dare to formulate your desire, then set to work at once,
and do not cease acting after the same manner and for the
same end; what you will shall come to pass, and for you
and by you it has indeed already begun. Sixtus V. said,
while watching his'flocks: “I desire to be pope.” You are

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   201


a beggar, and you desire to make gold; set to work and
never leave off. I promise you, in the name of science, all
the treasures of Flamel and Raymond Lully. 4‘What is
the first thing to do?” Believe in your power, then act.
“But how act?” Rise daily at the same hour, and that
early; bathe at a spring before daybreak’ and in all seasons;
never wear dirty clothes, rather wash them yourself if need¬
ful; accustom yourself to voluntary privations, that you
may be better able to bear those which come without seek¬
ing; then silence every desire which is foreign to the ful¬
filment of the great work.
  “What! By bathing daily in a spring, I shall make
gold?” You will work in order to make it. “It is a
mockery!” No, it is an arcanum. “How can I make use
of an arcanum which I fail to understand?” Believe and
act; you will understand later.
    One day a person said to me: “I would that I could be
 a fervent Catholic, but I am a Yoltairean. What would I
 not give to have faith!” I replied: “Say, ‘I would’ no
 longer; say ‘I will,’ and I promise you that you will be-
 lieve. You tell me you are a Yoltairean, and of all the
various presentations of faith that of the Jesuits is most
 repugnant to you, but at the same time seems the most
powerful and desirable.        Perform the exercises of St
Ignatius again and again, without allowing yourself to be
discouraged, and you will attain the faith of a Jesuit. The
result is infallible, and should you then have the simplicity
to ascribe it to a miracle, you deceive yourself now in think¬
ing that you are a Yoltairean. ”
    An idle man will never become a magician. Magic is an-
exercise of all hours and all moments. The operator of
great works must be absolute master of himself; he must
know how to conquer the allurements of pleasure, appetite,
and sleep; he must be insensible to success and to indignity.
His life must be that of a will directed by one thought, and
served by entire nature, which he will have made subject to
mind in his own organs, and by sympathy in all the uni-

202               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


versal forces which are their correspondents. All faculties
and all senses should share in the work; nothing in the
priest of Hermes has the right to remain idle; intelligence
must be formulated by signs and summed by characters or
pantacles; will must be determined by words, and must
fulfil words by deeds; the magical idea must be rendered
into light for the eyes, harmony for the ears, perfumes for
the sense of smell, savours for the palate, objects for the
touch; the operator, in a word, must realise in his whole
life what he wishes to realise in the world without him; he
must become a magnet to attract the desired thing; and
when he shall be sufficiently magnetic, he must be con¬
vinced that the thing will come of itself, and without think¬
ing of it.
    It is important for the magus to be acquainted with the
secrets of science, but he may know them by intuition, and
without formal learning. Solitaries, living in the habitual
 contemplation of nature, frequently divine her harmonies,
 and are more instructed in their simple good sense than
 doctors, whose natural discernment is falsified by the
 sophistries of the schools. True practical magicians are
 almost invariably found in the country, and are frequently
 uninstructed persons and simple shepherds. Furthermore,
 certain physical organisations are better adapted than others
 for the revelations of the occult world; there are sensitive
 and sympathetic natures, with whom intuition in the astral
 light is, so to speak, inborn; certain afflictions and certain
 complaints can modify the nervous system, and, indepen¬
 dently of the concurrence of the will’ may convert it into a
 divinatory apparatus of less or more perfection; but these
 phenomena are exceptional, and generally magical power
 should, and can, be acquired by perseverance and labour.
 There are also some substances which produce ecstasy, and
 dispose towards the magnetic sleep; there are some which
 place at the service of imagination all the most lively and
 highly coloured reflections of the elementary light; but the
 use of such substances is dangerous, for they commonly

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   203

occasion stupefaction and intoxication. They are used, not¬
withstanding, but in carefully calculated quantities, and
under wholly exceptional circumstances.
  He who decides to devote himself seriously to magical
works, after fortifying his mind against all danger of hal¬
lucination and fright, must purify himself without and
within for forty days. The number forty is sacred, and its
very figure is magical. In Arabic numerals it consists of
the circle, which is the type of the infinite, and of the 4,
which sums the triad by unity. In Roman numerals, ar¬
ranged after the following manner, it represents the sign
of the fundamental doctrine of Hermes, and the character
of the Seal of Solomon:—


               X
              / \                       X
              XX                       XX
              \ /                       X
               X
   The purification of the magus consists in abstinence from
coarse enjoyments, in a temperate and vegetable diet, in re¬
fraining from intoxicating drink, and in regulating the
hours of sleep. This preparation has been indicated and
represented in all forms of worship by a period of penitence
and trials preceding the symbolical feasts of life-renewal.
   As already said, the most scrupulous external cleanliness
must be observed; the poorest person can find spring water.
All clothes, furniture, and vessels made use of must also be
carefully washed, whether by ourselves or others. All dirt
is evidence of negligence, and negligence is deadly in magic.
The atmosphere must be purified at rising and retiring with
a perfume composed of the juice of laurels, salt, camphor,
white resin, and sulphur, repeating at the same time the
four sacred names, while turning successively towards the

204               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 four cardinal points. We must divulge to no one the works
 that we accomplish, for, as already said in the Doctrine,
mystery is the exact and essential condition of all the ope¬
 rations of science. The inquisitive must be misled by the
pretence of other occupations and other researches, such as
chemical experiments for industrial purposes, hygienic pre¬
scriptions, the investigation of some natural secrets, and so
 on; but the forbidden name of magic must never be pro¬
nounced.
    The magus must be isolated at the beginning and difficult
to approach, so that he may concentrate his power and se¬
lect his points of contact, but in proportion as he is austere
and inaccessible at first, so will he be popular and sought
after when he shall have magnetised his chain and chosen his
place in a current of ideas and of light. A laborious and
poor existence is so favourable to practical initiation that
the greatest masters have preferred it, even when the wealth
of the world was at their disposal. Then it is that Satan,
that is, the spirit of ignorance, who scorns, suspects, and
detests science because at heart he fears it, comes to tempt
the future master of the world by saying to him: ‘£ If thou
are the Son of God, command these stones to become bread. ’ ’
Then it is that mercenary men seek to humiliate the prince
of knowledge by perplexing, depreciating, or sordidly ex¬
ploiting his labour; the slice of bread that he deigns to need
is broken into ten fragments, so that he may ten times
stretch forth his hand. But the magus does not even smile
at the absurdity, and calmly pursues his work.
   So far as may be possible, we must avoid the sight of
hideous objects and uncomely persons, must decline eating
with those whom we do not esteem, and must live in the
most uniform and studied manner. We must hold ourselves
in the highest respect, and must consider that we are de¬
throned sovereigns who consent to existence in order to
reconquer our crowns. We must be mild and considerate
to all, but in social relations must never permit ourselves to
be absorbed, and must withdraw from circles in which we

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    205

cannot acquire some initiative. Finally, we may and should
fulfil the duties and practise the rites of the cultus to which
we belong. Now, of all forms of worship the most magical
is that which most realises the miraculous, which bases the
most inconceivable mysteries upon the highest reasons, which
has lights equivalent to its shadows, which popularises
miracles, and incarnates God in all mankind by faith. This
religion has existed always in the world, and under many
names has been ever the one and ruling religion. It has
now among the nations of the earth three apparently hostile
forms, which are, however, destined to unite before long for
the constitution of one universal Church. I refer to the
Greek orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism, and a final trans¬
figuration of the religion of Buddha,
   We have now made it plain, as we believe, that our magic
is opposed to the goetic and necromantic kinds; it is at once
an absolute science and religion, which should not indeed
destroy and absorb all opinions and all forms of worship,
but should regenerate and direct them by reconstituting the
circle of initiates, and thus providing the blind masses with
wise and clear-seeing leaders.
   We are living at a period when nothing remains to
destroy and everything to remake. “Remake what? The
past?” No one can remake the past. “What, then, shall
we reconstruct? Temples and thornes?” To what pur¬
 pose, since the former ones have been cast down? “You
 might as well say: my house has collapsed from age, of
 what use is it to build another?’’ But will the house that
 you contemplate erecting be like that which has fallen?
 No, for the one was old and the other will be new. “Not¬
 withstanding, it will be always a house.” What more can
you wish?

206               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                       CHAPTER II

                    MAGICAL EQUILIBRIUM

Equilibrium is the consequence of two forces. If two forces
are absolutely and invariably equal, the equilibrium will be
immobility, and therefore the negation of life. Movement
is the result of an alternate preponderance. The impulsion
given to one of the sides of a balance necessarily determines
the motion of the other. Thus contraries act on one another,
throughout all nature, by correspondence and analogical
connection. All life is composed of an aspiration and a
respiration; creation is the assumption of a shadow to serve
as a bound to light, of a void to serve as space for the
plenitude, of a passive fructified principle to sustain and
realise the power of the active generating principle. All
nature is bisexual, and the movement which produces the
appearances of death and life is a continual generation.
 God loves the void which he made in order to fill it; science
loves the ignorance which it enlightens; strength loves the
weakness which it supports; good loves the apparent evil
 which glorifies it; day is desirous of night, and pursues it
 unceasingly round the world; love is at once a thirst and a
 plenitude which must diffuse itself. He who gives receives,
 and he who receives gives; movement is a continual inter¬
 change. To know the law of this change, to be acquainted
 with the alternative or simultaneous proportion of these
 forces, is to possess the first principles of the great magical
 arcanum, which constitutes true human divinity. Scien¬
 tifically, we can appreciate the various manifestations of the
 universal movement through electric or magnetic phe¬
 nomena. Electrical apparatuses above all materially and
 positively reveal the affinities and antipathies of certain
 substances. The marriage of copper with zinc, the action of
 all metals in the galvanic pile, are perpetual and unmis-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    207

takable revelations. Let physicists seek and find out; ever
will the kabbalists explain the discoveries of science!
   The human body is subject, like the earth, to a dual law;
it attracts and it radiatesj it is magnetised by an androgyne
magnetism, and reacts on the two powers of the soul, the
intellectual and the sensitive, inversely, but in proportion to
the alternating preponderances of the two sexes in their
physical organism.      The art of the magnetiser consists
wholly in the knowledge and use of this law. To polarise
the action and impart to the agent a bisexual and alternated
force is the method still unknown and sought vainly for
directing the phenomena of magnetism at will, but tact
most experienced and great precision in the interior move¬
ments are required to prevent the confusion of the signs of
magnetic aspiration with those of respiration j we must also
be perfectly acquainted with occult anatomy and the special
temperament of the persons on whom we are operating.
Bad faith and bad will in subjects constitute the gravest
hindrance to the direction of magnetism. Women above all
—who are essentially and invariably actresses, who take
pleasure in impressing others so that they may impress
themselves, and are themselves the first to be deceived when
playing their neurotio melodramas—are the true black
magic of magnetism. So is it for ever impossible that mag-
netisers who are uninitiated in the supreme secrets, and un¬
assisted by the lights of the Kabbalah, should govern this
refractory and fugitive element. To be master of woman,
we must distract and deceive her skilfully by allowing her
to suppose that it is she who is deceiving us. This advice,
which we offer chiefly to magnetising physicians, might also
find its place and application in conjugal polity.
  Man can produce two breathings at his pleasure, one
warm and the other cold; he can also project either the
active or passive light at will; but he must acquire the
consciousness of this power by habitually dwelling thereon.
The same manual gesture may alternately aspire and respire
what we are accustomed to call the fluid, and the magnetiser

208               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


will himself be warned of the result of his intention by an
alternative sensation of warmth and cold in the hand, or
in both hands when both are being used, which sensation
the subject should experience at the same time, but in a
contrary sense, that is, with a wholly opposed alternative.
   The pentagram, or sign of the microcosmos, represents,
among other magical mysteries, the double sympathy of the
human extremities with each other and with the circulation
of the astral light in the human body. Thus, when a man is
represented in the star of the pentagram, as may be seen in
the 1‘ Occult Philosophy ’ ’ of Agrippa, it should be observed
that the head corresponds in masculine sympathy with the
right foot and in feminine sympathy with the left foot;
that the right hand corresponds in the same way with the
left hand and left foot, and reciprocally of the other hand.
This must be borne in mind when making magnetic passes,
if we seek to govern the whole organism and bind all mem¬
bers by their proper chains of analogy and natural sym¬
pathy. The same knowledge is necessary for the use of the
pentagram in the conjuration of spirits, and in the evoca¬
tion of errant spirits in the astral light, vulgarly called
necromancy, as we shall explain in the fifth chapter of this
 Ritual. But it is well to observe here that every action
 promotes a reaction, and that in magnetising others, or
influencing them magically, we establish between them and
 ourselves a current of contrary but analogous influence
which may subject us to them instead of subjecting them to
 us, as happens frequently enough in those operations which
 have the sympathy of love for their object. Hence it is
 highly essential to be on our defence while we are attacking,
 so as not to aspire on the left while we respire on the right.
 The magical androgyne depicted in the frontispiece of the
 Ritual has solve inscribed upon the right and cogula on
 the left arm, which corresponds to the symbolical figure of
 the architects of the second temple, who bore their sword in
 one hand and their trowel in the other. While building
 they had also to defend their work and disperse their

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      209

enemies; nature herself does likewise, destroying and re¬
generating at the same time. Now, according to the alle¬
gory of Duchentau’s Magical Calendar, man, that is to say,
the initiate, is the ape of nature, who confines him by a
chain, but makes him act unceasingly, imitating the proceed¬
ings and works of his divine mistress and imperishable
model.
   The alternate use of contrary forces, warmth after cold,
mildness after severity, -love after anger, &c., is the secret of
perpetual motion and the permanence of power; coquettes
feel this instinctively, and hence they make their admirers
pass from hope to fear, from joy to despondency. To
operate always on the same side and in the same manner is
to overweight one plate of the balance, and the complete
destruction of equilibrium is the speedy result. Continual
caressings beget satiety, disgust, and antipathy, just as con¬
stant coldness and severity in the long run alienate and dis¬
courage affection. An unvarying and ardent fire in al¬
chemy calcines the first matter and not seldom explodes the
hermetic vessel; the heat of lime and mineral manure must
be substituted at regular intervals for the heat of flame.
And so also in magic; the works of wrath or severity must
be tempered by those of beneficence and love, and if the
will of the operator be always at the same tension and
directed along the same line, great weariness will ensue, to¬
gether with a species of moral impotence.
   Thus, the magus should not live altogether in his labora¬
tory, among his athanor, elixirs, and pantacles. However
devouring be the glance of that Circe who is called occult
power, we must know how to confront her on occasion with
the sword of Ulysses, and how to withdraw our lips for a
time from the chalice which she offers us. A magical opera¬
tion should always be followed by a rest of equal length and
a distraction analogous but contrary in its object. To strive
continually against nature in order to her rule and con¬
quest is to risk reason and life. Paracelsus dared to do so,
but even in the warfare itself he employed equilibrated

210               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


forces and opposed the intoxication of wine to that of in¬
telligence. So was Paracelsus a man of inspiration and
miracles; yet his life was exhausted by this devouring ac¬
tivity, or rather its vestment was rapidly rent and worn
out; but men like Paracelsus can use and abuse fearlessly;
they well know that they can no more die than grow old
here below.
   Nothing induces us towards joy so effectually as sorrow;
nothing is nearer to sorrow than joy. Hence the unin¬
structed operator is astounded by attaining the very op¬
posite of his proposed results, because he does not know
how to cross or alternate his action; he seeks to bewitch
his enemy, and himself becomes ill and miserable; he de¬
sires to make himself loved, and he consumes himself for
women who deride him; he endeavours to make gold, and
he exhausts all his resources; his torture is that of Tantalus
eternally; ever does the water flow back when he stoops
down to drink. The ancients in their symbols and magical
 operations multiplied the signs of the duad, so that its law
 of equilibrium might be remembered. In their evocations
they invariably constructed two altars, and immolated two
victims, one white and one black; the operator, whether
male or female, holding a sword in one hand and a wand
 in the other, had one foot shod and the other bared. At the
 same time, either one or three persons were required for
 magical works, because the duad would be immobility or
 death in the absence of the equilibrating motor; and when
 a man and a woman participated in the ceremony, the
 operator was either a virgin, a hermaphrodite, or a child.
 I shall be asked whether the eccentricity of these rites is
 arbitrary, and whether its one end is the exercise of the
 will by the mere multiplication of difficulties in magical
 work? I answer that in magic there is nothing arbitrary,
 because everything is ruled and predetermined by the one
 and universal dogma of Hermes, that of analogy in the
 three worlds. Each sign corresponds to an idea, and to
 the special form of an idea; each act expresses a volition

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    211

corresponding to a thought, and formulates the analogies of
that thought and that will. The rites are, therefore, pre¬
arranged by the science itself. The uninstructed person
who is not acquainted with the three powers is subject to
their mysterious fascination; the sage understands those
powers, and makes them the instrument of his will, but
when they are accomplished with exactitude and faith,
they are never ineffectual.
   All magical instruments must be duplicated; there must
be two swords, two wands, two cups, two chafing-dishes,
two pantacles, and two lamps; two vestments must be
worn, one over the other, and they must be of contrary
colours, a rule still followed by Catholic priests; and either
no metal, or two at the least, must be worn. The crowns
of laurel, rue, mugwort, or vervain must, in like manner, be
double; one of them is used in evocations, while the other
is burnt, the crackling which it makes and the curls of the
smoke which it produces being observed like an augury.
Nor is the observance vain, for in the magical work all the
instruments of art are magnetised by the operator; the air
is charged with his perfumes, the fire which he has conse¬
crated is subject to his will, the forces of nature seem to
hear and answer him; he reads in all forms the modifica¬
tions and complements of his thought. He perceives the
water agitated, and, as it were, bubbling of itself, the fire
blazing up or extinguishing suddenly, the leaves of the gar¬
lands, rustling, the magical rod moving spontaneously, and
strange, unknown voices passing through the air. It was
in such evocations that Julian beheld the beloved phantoms
of his dethroned gods, and was appalled at their decrepitude
and pallor.
   I am aware that Christianity has for ever suppressed
ceremonial magic, and that it severely proscribes the evoca¬
tions and sacrifices of the old world. It is not, therefore,
our intention to give a new ground for their existence by
revealing the antique mysteries after the lapse of so many
centuries. Even in this very order of phenomena, our ex-

212                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


periences have been scholarly researches and nothing more.
We have confirmed facts that we might appreciate causes,
and it has never been our pretension to restore rites which
are for ever destroyed. The orthodoxy of Israel, that re¬
ligion which is so rational, so divine, and so ill known, con¬
demns, no less than Christianity, the mysteries of cere¬
monial magic. From the standpoint of the tribe of Levi,
the exercise of transcendent magic must be considered as an
usurpation of the priesthood; and the same reason has
caused the proscription of operative magic by every official
cultus.   To demonstrate the natural foundation of the
marvellous, and to produce it at will, is to annihilate for the
vulgar mind that conclusive evidence from miracles which
is claimed by each religion as its exclusive property and
its final argument. Respect for established religions, but
room also for science! We have passed, thank God, the
days of inquisitions and pyres; unhappy men of learning
are no longer murdered on the faith of a few distraught
fanatics or hysterical girls. For the rest, let it be clearly
understood that our undertaking is concerned with studies
of the curious, and not with an impossible propaganda.
Those who may blame us for daring to term ourselves magi¬
cian have nothing to fear from the example, it being wholly
improbable that they will ever become sorcerers.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    213




                       CHAPTER III

                 THE TRIANGLE OF PANTACLES

The Abbot Trithemius, who in magic was the master of
Cornelius Agrippa, explains, in his ‘ ‘ Steganography, ’ ’ the
secret of conjurations and evocations after a very natural
and philosophical manner, though possibly* for that very
reason, too simply and too easily. He tells us that to evoke
a spirit is to enter into the dominant thought of that spirit,
and if we raise ourselves morally higher along the same line,
we shall draw the spirit away with us, and it will certainly
serve us. To conjure is to oppose the resistance of a cur¬
rent and a chain to an isolated spirit—cum jurare, to swear
together, that is, to make a common act of faith. The
greater the strength and enthusiasm of this faith, the more
efficacious is the conjuration. This is why new-born Chris¬
tianity silenced the oracles; it only possessed inspiration, it
only force. Later on, when St Peter grew old, that is, when
the world believed that it had a legal case against the
Papacy, the spirit of prophecy came to replace the oracles;
Savonarola, Joachim of Flores, John Hus, and so many
others, by turns influenced the minds of men, and inter¬
preted, by lamentations and menaces, the secret anxieties
and rebellions of all hearts.
   We may act individually when evoking a spirit, but to
conjure we must speak in the name of a circle or an associa¬
tion ; this is the significance of the hieroglyphical circle
traced round the magus who is operating, and out of which
he must not pass unless he wishes at the same moment to
be stripped of all his power. Let us grapple at this point
with the vital and palmary question, whether the real evoca¬
tion and real conjuration of spirits are things possible, and
whether such possibility can be scientifically demonstrated.
To the first part of the question it may be replied out of
hand that everything which is not an evident impossibility

214               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


can and must be admitted as provisionally possible. As to
the second part, we affirm that in virtue of the great magical
dogma of the hierarchy and of universal analogy, the kab-
balistic possibility of real evocations can be demonstrated;
concerning the phenomenal reality consequent upon magical
operations accomplished with sincerity, this is a matter of
experience; as already described, we have established it in
our own persons, and by means of this Ritual we shall place
our readers in a position to renew and confirm our ex¬
periences.
   Nothing in nature perishes; whatsoever has lived goes
on living always under new forms; but even the anterior
forms are not destroyed, since they persist in our memory.
Do we not still see in imagination the child we once knew,
though now he is an old man? The very traces which we
believe to be effaced from our memory are not in reality
blotted out, for a fortuitous circumstance may evoke and
recall them. But after what manner do we see them? As
we have already said, it is in the astral light, which trans¬
mits them to our brain by the mechanism of the nervous
system. On the other hand, all forms are proportional and
analogical to the idea which has determined them; they are
the natural character, the signature of that idea, as the magi
term it, and so soon as the idea is actively evoked, the
form is realised and bodied forth. Sehroepffer, the famous
illumine of Leipsic, terrified all Germany with his evoca¬
tions, and his audacity in magical experiments was so great
that his reputation became an insupportable burden; he
 allowed himself to be carried away by the immense current
 of hallucinations which he had produced; the visions of the
 other world disgusted him with this, and he killed himself.
 His story should be a warning to those who are fascinated
 by ceremonial magic. Nature is not outraged with im¬
 punity, and no one can safely play with unknown and in¬
 calculable forces. It is this consideration which has led,
 and will ever lead, us to withstand the vain curiosity of
 those who would see in order that they may believe, and

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    215

we reply to them in the same words as we replied to an
eminent Englishman who threatened us with his scepticism:
“You are perfectly within your right in refusing to be¬
lieve ; for our own part, it will not make us more discour¬
aged or less convinced.9 ’ To those who may assure us that
they have scrupulously and boldly fulfilled all the rites, and
that there has been no result, we would recommend that
they should stay their hand, as it is possibly a warning of
nature, who will not lend herself for them to these anoma¬
lous works; but if they persist in their curiosity, they have
only to start afresh.
   The triad, being the foundation of magical doctrine, must
necessarily be observed in evocation, so is it the sym¬
bolical number of realisation and effect. The letter        is
commonly traced upon kabbalistic pantacles which have the
fulfilment of a desire for their object. It is also the sign
of the scapegoat in mystic kabbalah, and Saint Martin
observes that inserted in the incommunicable tetragram it
forms the name of the Redeemer pntSTP        It is this which
the mystagogues of the middle ages represented in their
nocturnal assemblies by the exhibition of a symbolical goat,
carrying a lighted torch between its two horns. In the
fifteenth chapter of the Ritual we shall describe the alle¬
gorical forms and strange cultus of this monstrous animal,
which represented nature doomed to anathema but ran¬
somed by the sign of light. The gnostic agapae and pagan
priapic orgies which followed in its honour sufficiently re¬
vealed the moral consequence which the adepts drew from
the exhibition. All this will be explained together with the
rites, decried and now regarded as fabulous, of the great
Sabbath and of Black Magic.
   Within the grand circle of evocations a triangle was
usually traced, and the side towards which the upper point
must be directed was a matter for careful observation. If
the spirit were supposed to be from heaven, the operator
placed himself at the top, and set the altar of fumigations
at the bottom; but if the spirit came from the abyss this

216               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


method was reversed. Moreover, the sacred symbol of two
interlaced triangles, forming the six-pointed star, known in
magic as the pantacle or Seal of Solomon, must be worn
upon the forehead and the breast, and graven in the right
hand. Independently of these signs, the ancients, in their
evocations, made use of those mystical combinations of
divine names which we have reproduced in our Doctrine
from the Hebrew kabbalists. The magic triangle of Papan
theosophists was the celebrated ABRACADABRA, to
which they attributed extraordinary virtues, and repre¬
sented as follows:—
                    ABRACADABRA
                    ABRACADABR
                     ABRACADAB
                     ABRACADA
                      ABRACAD
                       ABRACA
                        ABRAC
                        ABRA
                         ABR
                          AB
                          A
   This combination of letters is a key of the pentagram.
The initial A is repeated five and reproduced thirty times,
thus giving the elements and numbers of the two following
figures:—




  The isolated A represents the unity of the first principle,
otherwise, the intellectual or active agent. A united to B

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     217

represents the fertilisation of the duad by the monad. R is
the sign of the triad, because it represents hieroglyphically
the emission which results from the union of the two
principles. The number 11, which is that of the letters of
the word, combines the unity of the initiate with the denary
of Pythagoras, and the number 66, the added total of all
the letters, kabbalistically forms the number 12, which is
the square of the triad, and consequently the mystic quad¬
rature of the circle. We may remark, in passing, that the au¬
thor of the Apocalypse, that key of the Christian Kabbalah,
composed the number of the beast, that is to say, of idolatry,
by adding a 6 to the double senary of ABRACADABRA,
which gives 18 kabbalistically, the number attributed in the
Tarot to the hieroglyphic sign of night and of the profane
—the moon, together with the towers, dog, wolf, and crab
—a mysterious and obscure number, the kabbalistic key of
which is 9, the number of initiation. On this subject the
sacred kabbalist says expressly: “He that hath under¬
standing (that is, the key of kabbalistic numbers), let him
count the number of the beast, for it is the number of a
man, and the number of him is 666.” It is, in fact, the
decade of Pythagoras multiplied by itself and added to the
sum of the triangular Pantacle of Abracadabra; it is thus
the sum of all magic of the ancient world, the entire pro¬
gramme of human genius which the divine genius of the
Gospel sought to absorb or transplant.
   These hieroglyphical combinations of letters and numbers
belong to the practical part of the kabbalah, which, from
this point of view, is divided into Gematriah and Temurah.
Such calculations, which now seem to us arbitrary or devoid
of interest, then belonged to the philosophical symbolism of
the East, and were of the highest importance in the teaching
of holy things emanating from the occult sciences. The
absolute kabbalistic alphabet, which connected primitive
ideas with allegories, allegories with letters, and letters with
numbers, was then called the keys of Solomon. We have
already stated that these keys, preserved to our own day,

218               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


but wholly misconstrued, are nothing else than the game of
Tarot, the antique allegories of which were remarked and
appreciated for the first time in the modem world by the
learned archaeologist, Court de Gebelin.
   The double triangle of Solomon is explained by St John
in a remarkable manner. He says, ‘ ‘ There are three which
give testimony in heaven—the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Spirit; and there are three which give testimony on
earth—the spirit, the water, and the blood.” Thus, St John
agrees with the masters of Hermetic philosophy, who attri¬
bute to their sulphur the name of ether, to their mercury
that of philosophical water, and to their salt the qualifica¬
tion of the dragon’s blood or menstruum of the earth ; blood
or salt corresponds by opposition with the Father, azotic or
mercurial water with the Word or Logos, and the ether with
the Holy Spirit. But the things of transcendent symbolism
can only be rightly understood by the true children of
science.
   The threefold repetition of names with varied intona¬
tions was united to triangular combinations in magical cere¬
monies. The magic rod was frequently surmounted with a
small magnetised fork, which Paracelsus replaced by the
trident represented below.




   This trident is a pantacle expressing the synthesis of the
triad in the monad, thus completing the sacred tetrad. He
ascribed to this figure all the virtues which kabbalistic
Hebrews attribute to the name of Jehovah, and the thauma-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    219

turgic properties of the Abracadabra used by the hiero¬
phants of Alexandria. Let us here recognise that it is a
pantacle, and consequently a concrete and an aboslute sign
of an entire doctrine which has been that of an immense
magnetic circle, not only for ancient philosophers, but also
for adepts of the middle ages. The restoration in our own
day of its original value by the comprehension of its mys¬
teries, might not that also restore all its miraculous virtue
and all its power against human diseases?
   The old sorceresses, when they spent the night at the
meeting-place of three cross-roads, yelled three times in
honour of the triple Hecate. All these figures, all these
dispositions of numbers and of characters, are, as we have
already said, so many instruments for the education of the
will, by fixing and determining its habits. They serve,
furthermore, to conjoin all the powers of the human soul in
action, and to increase the creative force of the imagination;
it is the gymnastics of thought in training for realisation;
so the effect of these practices is infallible, like nature,
when they are fulfilled with absolute confidence and in¬
domitable perseverance. The Grand Master tells us that
faith could transplant trees into the sea and remove moun¬
tains.   Even a superstitious and insensate practice is
efficacious because it is a realisation of the will. Hence a
prayer is more powerful if we go to church to say it than
when it is said at home, and it will work miracles if we
fare to a famous sanctuary for the purpose, in other words,
to one wdiich is strongly magnetised by the enormous num¬
ber of its frequenters, traversing two or three hundred
leagues with bare feet, and asking alms by the way. Men
laugh at the simple woman who denies herself a penny¬
worth of milk in the morning that she may carry a penny
taper to bum on the magic triangle in a chapel; but they
who laugh are ignorant, and the simple woman does not
pay too dearly for what she thus purchases of resignation
and of courage. Great minds with great pride pass by,
shrugging their shoulders; they rise up against superstition

                         (




220               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


with a din which shakes the world; and what happens?
The towers of the great minds topple over, and their ruins
revert to the providers and purchasers of penny tapers, who
are content to hear it everywhere proclaimed that their
reign is for ever ended, povided that they rule always.
   The great religions have never had more than one serious
rival, and this rival is ma£ic. Magic produced the occult
associations which brought about the revolution termed the
Renaissance; but it has been the doom of the human mind,
blinded by insensate passions, to realise literally the alle¬
gorical history of the Hebrew Hercules; by overthrowing
the pillars of the temple, it has itself been buried under the
ruins. The masonic associations of the present time are no
less ignorant of the high meaning of their symbols than are
the rabbins of the Sepher Jetzirah and the Zohar upon the
ascending scale of the three degrees, with the transverse
progression from right to left and from left to right of the
kabbalistic septenary. The compass of the G.*.A.\ and
the square of Solomon have become the gross and material
level of unintelligent Jacobinism, realised by a steel tri¬
angle ; this obtains both for heaven and earth. The initiated
divulgers to whom the illuminated Cazotte predicted a vio¬
lent death have, in our own days, exceeded the sin of Adam;
having rashly gathered the fruits of the tree of knowledge,
which they did not know how to use for their nourishment,
they have cast it to the beasts and reptiles of the earth.
 So was the reign of superstition inaugurated, and it must
 persist until the period when true religion shall be again
 constituted on the eternal foundations of the hierarchy of
 three degrees, and of the triple power which the hierarchy
 exercises blindly or providentially in the three worlds.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  221




                      CHAPTER IV

              THE CONJURATION OF THE FOUR.

The   four elementary forms roughly separate and distin¬
guish the created spirits which the universal movement
disengages from the central fire. The spirit everywhere
toils and fructifies matter by life; all matter is animated;
thought and soul are everywhere. By possessing ourselves
of the thought which produces diverse forms, we become
the master of forms, and make them serve our purposes.
 The astral light is saturated with such souls, which it
disengages in the unceasing generation of beings. These
souls have imperfect wills, which can be governed and em¬
ployed by more powerful wills; then great invisible chains
 form, and may occasion or determine great elementary com¬
motions. The phenomena established by the criminal trials
of magic, and quite recently by M. Eudes de Mirville, have
no other cause. Elementary spirits are like children: they
chiefly torment those who trouble about them, unless, in¬
deed, they are controlled by high reason and great severity.
We designate these spirits under the name of occult ele¬
ments, and it is these who frequently occasion our bizarre
or disturbing dreams, who produce the moveemnts of the
divining rod and rappings upon walls or furniture, but they
can manifest no thought other than our own, and when we
are not thinking, they speak to us with all the incoherence
of dreams. They reproduce good and evil indifferently,
for they are without free will, and are hence irresponsible;
they exhibit themselves to ecstatics and somnambulists
under incomplete and fugitive forms. This explains the
nightmares of St Anthony, and most probably the visions of
Swedenborg.      Such creatures are neither damned nor
guilty, they are curious and innocent. We may use or abuse
them like animals or children. Therefore the magus who

222               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


makes use of them assumes a terrible responsibility, for
he must expiate all the evil which he causes them to ac¬
complish, and the intensity of his punishment will be in
proportion to the extent of the power which he may have
exercised by their mediation.
   To govern elementary spirits, and thus become the king
of the occult elements, we must first have undergone the
four ordeals of ancient initiations; and seeing that these
initiations exist no longer, we must have substituted analo¬
gous experiences, such as exposing ourselves boldly in a
fire, crossing an abyss by means of the trunk of a tree or a
plank, scaling a perpendicular mountain during a storm,
swimming through a dangerous whirlpool or cataract. A
man who is timid in the water will never reign over the
undines; one who is afraid of fire will never command sala¬
manders; so long as we are liable to giddiness we must
leave the sylphs in peace, and forbear from irritating the
gnomes; for inferior spirits will only obey a power which
has overcome them in their own element. When this in¬
contestable faculty has been acquired by exercise and dar¬
ing, the word of our will must be imposed on the elements
by special consecrations of air, fire, water, and earth. This
is the indispensable preliminary of all magical operations.
The air is exercised by breathing towards the four cardinal
points, saying:—
   The Spirit of God moved upon the waters, and breathed
into the face of man the breath of life. Be Michael, my
leader, and Sabtabiel, my servant, in and by the light.
May my breath become a word, and I will rule the spirits
of this creature of air; I will curb the steeds of the sun by
the will of my heart, and by the thought of my mind, and
by the apple of the right eye. Therefore I do exorcise thee,
creature of air, by Pentagrammaton, and in the name
Tetragrammaton, wherein are firm will and true faith.
Amen. Sela: Fiat. So be it.
   The prayer of the sylphs must next be recited, after
tracing their sign in the air with the quill of an eagle.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  223

                  Prayer of the Sylphs.

    Spirit of Light, Spirit of Wisdom, whose breath gives and
takes away the form of all things; Thou before whom the
life of every being is a shadow which transforms and a
vapour which passes away; Thou who ascendest upon the
clouds and dost fly upon the wings of the wind; Thou who
breathest out and the limitless immensities are peopled;
Thou who breathest in and all which came forth from Thee
unto Thee returneth; endless movement in the eternal
stability, be Thou blessed for ever! We praise Thee and
we bless Thee in the fleeting empire of created light, of
shadows, reflections, and images, and we aspire without
ceasing towards Thine immutable and imperishable splen¬
dour. May the ray of Thine intelligence and the warmth
of Thy love descend on us; then what is volatile shall be
fixed, the shadow shall become body, the spirit of the air
 shall receive a soul, and the dream be a thought. We shall
 be swept away no more before the tempest, but shall bridle
 the winged steeds of the morning, and guide the course of
 the evening winds, that we may flee into Thy presence. 0
 Spirit of Spirits, 0 eternal Soul of Souls, 0 imperishable
 Breath of Life, 0 Creative Sigh, O Mouth which dost
 breathe forth and withdraw the life of all beings in the ebb
 and flow of Thine eternal speech, which is the divine ocean
 of movement and of truth! Amen.
    Water is exorcised by imposition of hands, breathing, and
 speech; consecrated salt, and a little of the ash which re¬
 mains in the pan of incense, are also mingled with it. The
 aspergillus is formed of twigs of vervain, periwinkle, sage,
 mint, ash, and basil, tied by a thread taken from a virgin’s
 distaff, and provided with a handle of hazelwood from a tree
  which has not yet fruited; the characters of the seven
  spirits must be graven thereon with the magic bodkin. The
  salt and ash must be separately consecrated, saying:

                       Over the Salt.
   May wisdom abide in this salt, and may it preserve our

224               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


minds and bodies from all corruption, by Hochmael, and
in the virtue of Ruach-Hochmael! May the phantoms of
Hyle depart herefrom, that it may become a heavenly salt,
salt of the earth and earth of salt, that it may feed the
threshing ox, and strengthen our hope with the horns of
the flying bull! Amen.

                       Over the Ash.                        \


   May this ash return unto the fount of living waters, may
it become a fertile earth, and may it bring forth the tree of
life, by the Three Names, which are Netsah, Hod, and
Jesod, in the beginning and in the end, by Alpha and
Omega, which are in the spirit of Azoth ! Amen.

           Mingling the Water, Salt, and Ash.
   In the salt of eternal wisdom, in the water of regenera¬
tion, and in the ash whence the new earth springeth, be all
things accomplished by Eloi'm, Gabriel, Raphael, and Uriel,
through the ages and aeons! Amen.

                  Exorcism of the Water.
   Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and
let it divide the waters from the waters; the things which
are above are like unto things which are below, and things
below are like unto things above, for the performance of the
wonders of one thing. The sun is its father, the moon its
mother, the wind hath carried it in the belly thereof; it
ascendeth from earth to heaven, and again it descendeth
from heaven to earth. I exorcise thee, creature of water,
that thou mayest become unto men a mirror of the living
God in His works, a fount of life, and ablution of sins.

                   Prayer of the TJndines.
   Dread King of the Sea, who hast the keys of the flood¬
gates of heaven, and dost confine the waters of the under¬
world in the caverns of earth; King of the deluge and the
floods of the springtime; Thou who dost unseal the sources
of rivers and fountains; Thou who does ordain moisture,

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   225

which is like the blood of earth, to become the sap of
plants: Thee we adore and Thee we invoke! Speak unto
us, Thine inconstant and unstable creatures, in the great
tumults of the sea, and we shall tremble before Thee;
Speak unto us also in the murmur of limpid waters, and we
shall yearn for Thy love! O Immensity into which flow
all the rivers of life, to be continually reborn in Thee! O
ocean of infinite perfections! Height which reflects Thee
in the depth, depth which exhales Thee to the height, lead
us unto true life by intelligence and love! Lead us to im¬
mortality by sacrifice, that we may be found worthy one
day to offer Thee water, blood, and tears, for the remission
of sins! Amen.
  Fire is exorcised by the sprinkling of salt, incense, white
resin, camphor, and sulphur, by thrice pronouncing the
three names of the genii of fire: Michael, king of the sun
and the lightning; Samuel, king of volcanoes; and Anael,
prince of the astral light; and, finally, by reciting the

                Prayer of the Salamanders.

   Immortal, eternal, ineffable, and uncreated Father of all
things, who art borne upon the ever-rolling chariot of worlds
which revolve unceasingly; Lord of the ethereal immen¬
sities, where the throne of Thy power is exalted, from
which height Thy terrible eyes discern all things, and Thy
holy and beautiful ears unto all things hearken, hear Thou
Thy children, whom Thou didst love before the ages began;
for Thy golden, Thy grand, Thine eternal majesty shines
above the world and the heaven of stars! Thou art exalted
over them, 0 glittering fire! There dost thou shine, there
dost Thou commune with Thyself by Thine own splendour,
and inexhaustible streams of light pour from Thine essence
for the nourishment of Thine infinite spirit, which itself
doth nourish all things, and forms that inexhaustible
treasure of substance ever ready for generation, which
adapts it and appropriates the forms Thou hast impressed
on it from the beginning! From this spirit the three most

226                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


holy kings who surround Thy throne and constitute Thy
court, derive also their origin, O universal Father! 0 sole
and only Father of blessed mortals and immortals! In
particular Thou hast created powers which are marvellously
like unto Thine eternal thought and Thine adorable essence;
Thou hast established them higher than the angles, who pro¬
claim Thy will to the world; finally, Thou hast created us
third in rank within our elementary empire. There our un¬
ceasing exercise is to praise Thee and adore Thy good
pleasure; there we burn continually in our aspiration to
possess Thee. 0 Father! 0 Mother, most tender of all
mothers! 0 admirable archetype of maternity and of pure
love! 0 son, flower of sons! 0 form of all forms, soul, spirit,
harmony, and number of all things! Amen.
   The earth is exorcised by aspersion of water, by breah-
ing, and by fire, with the perfumes proper for each day,
and the
                   Prayer of the Gnomes.
   King invisible, who, taking the earth as a support, didst
furrow the abysses to fill them with Thine omnipotence;
Thou whose name doth shake the vaults of the world, Thou
who causest the seven metals to flow through the veins of
the rock, monarch of the seven lights, rewarder of the sub¬
terranean toilers, lead us unto the desirable air, and to the
realm of splendour. We watch and we work unremittingly,
we seek and we hope, by the twelve stones of the Holy
City, by the hidden talismans, by the pole of loadstone
which passes through the centre of the world! Saviour,
Saviour, Saviour, have pity on those who suffer, expand our
hearts, detach and elevate our minds, enlarge our entire
being!    0 stability and motion!      O day clothed with
night! 0 darkness veiled by light! 0 master who never
keepest back the wages of Thy labourers! 0 silver white¬
ness! 0 golden splendour! O crown of living and melo¬
dious diamonds! Thou who wearest the heaven on Thy
finger like a sapphire ring, Thou who concealest under the
earth, in the stone kingdom, the marvellous seed of stars,

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    227

live, reign, be the eternal dispenser of the wealth whereof
Thou hast made us the warders! Amen.
   It must be borne in mind that the special kingdom of
the gnomes is at the north, that of the salamanders at the
south, that of the sylphs at the east, and that of the undines
at the west. These beings influence the four temperaments
of man, that is to say, the gnomes affect the melancholy,
salamanders the sanguine, undines the phlegmatic, and
sylphs the bilious. Their signs are—the hieroglyphs of the
bull for the gnomes, who are commanded with the sword;
those of the lion for the salamanders, who are commanded
with the bifurcated rod or the magic trident; those of the
eagle for the sylphs, who are commanded by the holy pan-
tacles; finally, those of the water-carrier for the undines,
who are commanded by the cup of libations. Their respec¬
tive sovereigns are Gob for the gnomes, Djm for the sala¬
manders, Paralda for the sylphs, and Nicksa for the un¬
dines.
   When an elementary spirit torments, or, at least, vexes,
the inhabitants of this world, it must be conjured by air,
water, fire, and earth, by breathing, sprinkling, burning of
perfumes, and by tracing on the earth the star of Solomon
and the sacred pentagram. These figures must be perfectly
correct, and drawn either with the charcoal of consecrated
fire, or with a reed dipped in various colours, mixed with
powdered loadstone. Then, holding the pantacle of Solomon
in one hand and taking up successively the sword, rod, and
cup, the conjuration of the four should be recited with a
loud voice, after the following manner:—Caput mortuum,
the Lord command thee by the living and votive serpent!
Cherub, the Lord command thee by Adam Jotchavah!
Wandering Eagle, the Lord command thee by the wings of
the Bull! Serpent, the Lord Tetragrammaton command
thee by the angel and the lion! Michael, Gabriel, Raphael,
and Anael!      Flow, moisture, by the spirit of Eloim.
Earth, be established by Adam Jotchavah.               Spread,
firmament, by Jahuvehu Zebaoth. Fulfil, judgment, by

228               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


fire in the virtue of Michael. Angel of the blind eyes,
obey, or pass away with this holy water! Work, winged
bull, or revert to the earth, unless thou wilt that I should
pierce thee with this sword. Chained eagle, obey my sign,
or fly before this breathing! Writhing serpent, crawl at
my feet, or be tortured by the sacred fire, and give way
before the perfumes that I bum in it! Water return to
water, fire burn, air circulate, earth revert to earth, by
virtue of the pentagram, which is the morning star, and by
the name of the Tetragram, which is written in the centre of
the cross of light! Amen.
   The sign of the cross adopted by Christians does not
belong to them exclusively. It is also kabbalistic, and
represents the oppositions and tetradic equilibrium of the
elements. We see by the occult versicle of the Lord’s
Prayer, which we have cited in our Doctrine, that it was
originally made after two manners, or at least that it was
characterized by two entirely different formulas, one re¬
served for priests and initiates, the other imparted to
neophytes and the profane. For example, the initiate said,
raising his hand to his forehead, “For thine,” then added
“is,” and continuing as he brought down his hand to his
breast, “the kingdom,” then to the left shoulder, “the
justice,” afterwards to the right shoulder, “and the mercy”
—then clasping his hands, he added, “in the generating
ages.” Tibi sunt Malchut et Geburah et Chesed per ceonas
—a sign of the cross which is absolutely and magnificently
kabbalistic, which the profanations of Gnosticism have com¬
pletely lost to the official and militant Church. This sign,
made after this manner, should precede and terminate the
conjuration of the four.
   To overcome and subjugate the elementary spirits, we
must never yield to their characteristic defects. Thus, a
shallow and capricious mind will never rule the sylphs; an
irresolute, cold, and fickle nature will never master the
undines; passion irritates the salamanders, and avaricious
greed makes its slaves the sport of the gnomes. But we

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   229

must be prompt and active, like the sylphs; pliant and
attentive to images, like the undines; energetic and strong,
like the salamanders; laborious and patient like the gnomes;
in a word, we must overcome them in their strength with¬
out ever being overcome by their weaknesses. Once we are
well established in this disposition, the whole world will be
at the service of the wise operator. He will pass through
the storm, and the rain will not moisten his head; the wind
will not move even a fold of his garments; he will go
through fire and not be burned; he will walk upon the
water, and will behold diamonds within the crust of the
earth. These promises may appear hyperbolic, but only
to vulgar understanding, for if the sage do not materially
and actually perform these things, he accomplishes others
which are much greater and more admirable. At the same
time, it is indubitable that we may direct the elements by
our will up to a certain point, and can really change or
hinder their effects. For example, if it be established that
persons in an ecstatic state lose their weight for the time
being, why should it be impossible to walk upon the water ?
The convulsionaries of Saint Medard felt neither fire nor
steel, and begged for the most violent blows and incredible
tortures as a relief.     The extraordinary climbings and
miraculous equilibrium of some somnambulists are a revela¬
tion of these concealed forces of nature. But we live in a
century when no one has the courage to confess the wonders
he has witnessed, and did any one say: “I have myself
beheld or performed the things which I am describing, ”
he would be answered: “You are amusing yourself at our
expense, or, otherwise, you are ill.” It is far better to be
silent and to act.
   The metals which correspond to the four elementary
forms are gold and silver for the air, mercury for water,
iron and copper for fire, lead for earth. Talismans are
composed from these, relative to the forces which they
signify and to the effects which it is designed to obtain
from them. Divination by the four elementary forms, re-

230                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


spectively known as seromancy, hydromancy, pyromancy,
and geomancy, is performed after various manners, which
all depend on the will and the translucid, or imagination, of
the operator. In fact, the four elements are only instru¬
ments which assist second sight. Now, second sight is the
faculty of seeing in the astral light, and it is natural as the
first or sensible and ordinary sight, but it can only operate
by the abstraction of the senses.        Somnambulists and
ecstatics enjoy second sight naturally, but this sight is more
lucid when the abstraction is more complete. Abstraction
is produced by astral intoxication, that is, by an excess of
light which completely saturates, and hence stupefies, the
nervous system.
   Sanguine temperaments are disposed to agromancy, the
bilious to pyromancy, the phlegmatic to hydromancy, and
the melancholic to geomancy. ^Eromancy is confirmed by
oneiromancy, or divination by dreams; pyromancy is sup¬
plemented by magnetism; hydromancy by crystallomancy;
and geomancy by cartomancy. These are transpositions and
completement of methods.          But divination, however
operated, is dangerous, or, to say the least, useless, for it
disheartens will, as a consequence, impedes liberty, and tires
the nervous system.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   231




                       CHAPTER V

                 THE BLAZING PENTAGRAM.

We proceed to the explanation and consecration of the
sacred and mysterious pentagram. At this point, let the
ignorant and superstitious close the book; they will either
see nothing but darkness, or they will be scandalised. The
pentagram, which, in gnostic schools, is called the blazing
star, is the sign of intellectual omnipotence and autocracy.
It is the star of the magi; it is the sign of the Word made
flesh; and, according to the direction of its points, this
absolute magical symbol represents order or confusion, the
divine lamb of Ormuz and St John, or the accursed goat of
Mendes. It is initiation or profanation; it is Lucifer or
Vesper, the star of the morning or the evening. It is Mary
or Lilith, victory or death, day or night. The pentagram
with two points in the ascendant represents Satan as the
goat of the Sabbath; when one point is in the ascendant, it
is the sign of the Saviour. The pentagram is the figure of
the human body, having the four limbs, and a single point
representing the head. A human figure, head downwards,
naturally represents a demon; that is, intellectual subver¬
sion, disorder, or madness. Now, if magic be a reality, if
occult science be really the true law of the three worlds,
this absolute sign, this sign ancient as history, and more
ancient, should and does actually exercise an incalculable
influence upon spirits set free from their material envelope.
   The sign of the pentagram is called also the sign of the
microcosm, and it represents what the Kabbalists of the
book of Zohar term the microprosopus. The complete com¬
prehension of the pentagram is the key of the two worlds.
It is the absolute philosophy and natural science. The
sign of the pentagram should be composed of the seven
metals, or at least traced in pure gold upon white marble.

232               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


It may also be drawn with vermilion upon an unblemished
lambskin—the symbol of integrity and light. The marble
should be virgin, that is, should never have been used for
another purpose; the lambskin should be prepared under
the auspices of the sun. The lamb must have been slain at
Paschal time, with a new knife, and the skin must be salted
with salt consecrated by magical operations. The omis¬
sion of even one of these difficult and apparently arbitrary
ceremonies makes void the entire success of the great works
of science.
   The pentagram is consecrated with the four elements;
the magical figure is breathed on five times; it is sprinkled
with consecrated water; it is dried by the smoke of five
perfumes, namely, incense, myrrh, aloes, sulphur, and
camphor, to which a little white resin and ambergris may
be added. The five breathings are accompanied by the
utterance of the names attributed to the five genii, who are
Gabriel, Raphael, Anael, Samael, and Oriphiel; afterwards
the pentacle is placed successively at the north, south, east,
wTest, and centre of the astronomical cross, pronouncing at
the same time, one after another, the letters of the sacred
tetragram, and then, in an undertone, the blessed names of
Aleph and the mysterious Thau, united in the Kabbalistic
name of Azoth.
   The pentagram should be placed upon the altar of per¬
fumes, and under the tripod of evocations. The operator
should also wear the sign as well as that of the macrocosm,
which is composed of two crossed and superposed triangles.
When a spirit of light is evoked, the head of the star—that
is, one of its points—should be directed towards the tripod
of evocations, and the two inferior points towards the altar
of perfumes. In the case of a spirit of darkness, the
opposite course is pursued, but then the operator must be
careful to set the end of the rod or the point of the sword
upon the head of the pentagram. We have already said
that signs are the active voice of the verb of will. Now,
the word of will must be given in its completeness, so that

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   233

it may be transformed into action; and a single negligence,
representing an idle speech or a doubt, falsifies and para¬
lyses the whole operation, turning back upon the operator
all the forces thus expended in vain. We must, therefore,
absolutely abstain from magical ceremonies or scrupulously
and exactly fulfil them all.
   The pentagram, engraved in luminous lines upon glass by
the electrical machine, also exercises a great influence upon
spirits, and terrifies phantoms. The old magicians traced
the sign of the pentagram upon their door-steps, to prevent
evil spirits from entering and good spirits from departing.
This constraint followed from the direction of the points of
the star. Two points on the outer side drove away the
evil; two points on the inner side imprisoned them; one
only on the inner side held good spirits captive. All these
magical theories, based upon the one dogma of Hermes and
on the analogical deductions of science, have been invariably
confirmed by the visions of ecstatics and by the convulsions
of cataleptics saying that they are possessed with spirits.
The G which Freemasons place in the middle of the blazing
star signifies Gnosis and Generation, the two sacred words
of the ancient Kabbalah. It signifies also Grand Archi¬
tect, for the pentagram on every side represents an A. By
placing it in such a way that two of its points are in the
ascendant and one is below, we may see the horns, ears and
beard of the hierarchic goat of Mendes, when it becomes the
sign of infernal evocations.
   The allegorical star of the magi is no other than the
mysterious pentagram; and those three kings, sons of
Zoroaster, conducted by the blazing star to the cradle of
the microcosmic God, are enough in themselves to demon¬
strate the wholly kabbalistic and truly magical beginnings
of Christian doctrine. One of these kings is white, another
black, and the third brown. The white king offers gold,
symbol of light and life; the black king presents myrrh,
image of death and of darkness; the brown king sacrifices
incense, emblem of the conciliating doctrine of the two

234               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


principles. Then they return into their own land by an¬
other road, to show that a new cultus is only a new path,
conducting man to the one religion, that of the sacred triad
and the radiant pentagram, the sole eternal Catholicism.
St John, in the Apocalypse, beholds this same star fall from
heaven to earth. It is then called absynth or wormwood,
and all the waters of the sea become bitter—striking image
of the materialisation of dogma, which produces fanaticism
and the acridities of controversy. Then unto Christianity
itself may be applied those words of Isaiah: 4‘How hast
thou fallen from heaven, bright star, which wast so
splendid in thy prime! ’ ’ But the pentagram, profaned
by men, burns ever unclouded in the right hand of the
Word of Truth, and the inspired voice promises to him that

                         1      2




overcometh the possession of the morning star—solemn
restitution held out to the star of Lucifer.
  As will be seen, all mysteries of magic, all symbols of the
gnosis, all figures of occultism, all kabbalistic keys of
prophecy, are summed up in the sign of the pentagram,
which Paracelsus proclaims to be the greatest and most
potent of all signs. Is there any cause now for astonish-

                  TRxiNSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   235

ment at the conviction of the magus as to the real influence
exercised by this sign over the spirits of all hierarchies?
Those who defy the sign of the cross tremble before the star
of the microcosm. On the contrary, when he is conscious
of failing will, the magus turns his eyes towards this symbol,
takes it in his right hand, and feels armed with intellectual
omnipotence, provided that he is truly a king, worthy to be
conducted by the star to the cradle of divine realisation;
provided that he knows, dares, wills, and keeps silent; pro¬
vided that he is familiar with the usages of the pantacle, the
cup, the wand, and the sword; provided, finally, that the
intrepid gaze of his; soul corresponds to those two eyes
which the ascending point of our pentagram ever presents
open.

236               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                      CHAPTER VI.

                THE MEDIUM AND MEDIATOR.

Two things, as we have already said, are necessary for the
acquisition of magical power—the emancipation of the will
from all servitude, and its instruction in the art of domina¬
tion. The sovereign will is represented in our symbols by
the woman who crushes the serpent’s head, and by the
radiant angel who restrains and constrains the dragon with
lance and heel. In this place let us affirm without evasions
that the great magical agent—the dual current of light, the
living and astral fire of the earth—was represented by the
serpent with the head of an ox, goat, or dog, in ancient
theogonies. It is the double serpent of the caduceus, the
old serpent of Genesis, but it is also the brazen serpent
of Moses, twisted round the tau, that is, the generating
lingam. It is, further, the goat of the Sabbath and the
Baphomet of the Templars; it is the Hyle of the Gnostics;
it is the double tail of the serpent which forms the legs of
the solar cock of Abraxas. In fine, it is the devil of
M. Eudes de Mirville, and is really the blind force which
souls must overcome if they would be free from the chains
of earth; for, unless their will can detach them from this
fatal attraction, they will be absorbed in the current by the
force which produced them, and will return to the central
and eternal fire. The whole magical work consists, there¬
fore, in our liberation from the folds of the ancient serpent,
then in setting a foot upon its head, and leading it where
we will. “I will give thee all the kingdoms of the earth,
if thou wilt fall down and adore me,” said this serpent in
the evangelical mythos. The initiate should make answer:
“I will not fall down, and thou shalt crouch at my feet;
nothing shalt thou give me, but I will make use of thee, and
will take what I require, for I am thy lord and master”—

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   237

a reply which, in a veiled manner, is contained in that of
the Saviour.
   We have already said that the devil is not a person. It
is a misdirected force, as its name indicates. An odic or
magnetic current, formed by a chain of perverse wills, con¬
stitutes this evil spirit, which the Gospel calls legion, and
this it is which precipitated the swine into the sea—another
allegory of the attraction exercised on beings of inferior in¬
stincts by the blind forces that can be put in operation by
error and evil will. This symbol may be compared with
that of the comrades of Ulysses transformed into swine by
the sorceress Circe. Remark what was done by Ulysses to
preserve himself and deliver his associates: he refused the
cup of the enchantress, and commanded her with the sword.
Circe is nature, with all her delights and allurements—to
enjoy her we must overcome her. Such is the significance
of the Homeric fable, for the poems of Homer, the true
sacred books of ancient Hellas, contain all the mysteries of
high oriental initiation.
   The natural medium is, therefore, the serpent, ever active
and ever seducing, of idle wills, which we must continually
withstand by their subjugation. Amorous, gluttonous, pas¬
sionate, or idle magicians are impossible monstrosities. The
magus thinks and wills; he loves nothing with desire; he
rejects nothing in rage. The word passion signifies a pas¬
sive state, and the magus is invariably active, invariably
victorious. The attainment of this realisation is the crucial
difficulty of the transcendent sciences; so when the magus
accomplishes his own creation, the great work is fulfilled, at
least as concerns cause and instrument. The great agent or
natural mediator of human omnipotence cannot be overcome
or directed save by an extra-natural mediator, which is an
emancipated 'wall. Archimedes postulated a fulcrum outside
the world in order to raise the world. The fulcrum of the
magus is the intellectual cubic stone, the philosophical stone
of Azoth—that is, the doctrine of aboslute reason and
universal harmonies by the sympathy of contraries.

238                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


    One of our most fertile writers, and one of those who are
the least fixed in their ideas, M. Eugene Sue, has founded a
vast romance-epic upon an individuality whom he strives to
render odious, who becomes interesting against the will of
the novelist, so abundantly does he gift him with patience,
audacity, intelligence, and genius. We are in the presence
of a kind of Sixtus V.—poor, temperate, passionless, hold¬
ing the entire world entangled in the web of his skilful com¬
binations. This man excites at will the passions of his ene¬
mies, destroys them by means of one another, invariably
reaches the point he has kept in view, and this without noise,
without ostentation, and without imposture. His object is
to free the world of a society which the author of the book
believes to be dangerous and malignant, and to attain it no
cost is too great; he is ill lodged, ill clothed, nourished like
the refuse of humanity, but ever fixed upon his work. Con¬
sistently with his intention, the author depicts him as
wretched, filthy, hideous, repulsive to the touch, and hor¬
rible to the sight. But supposing this very exterior is a
means of disguising the enterprise, and so of more surely
attaining it, is it not proof positive of sublime courage?
When Rodin becomes pope, do you think that he will still be
ill clothed and dirty? Hence M. Eugene Sue has missed his
point; his object was to deride superstition and fanaticism,
but what he attacks is intelligence, strength, genius, the most
signal human virtues. Were there many Rodins among the
Jesuits, were there one even, I would not give much for the
success of the opposite party, in spite of the brilliant and
maladroit special pleadings of its illustrious advocates.
   To will well, to will long, to will always, but never to
lust after anything, such is the secret of power, and this
is the magical arcanum which Tasso brings forward in
the persons of the two knights who come to deliver Rinaldo
and to destroy the enchantments of Armida. They with¬
stand equally the most charming nymphs and the most
terrible wild beasts. They remain without desires and
without fear, and hence they attain their end. Does it

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     239

follow from this that a true magician inspires more fear
than love? I do not deny it, and while abundantly recog¬
nising how sweet are the allurements of life, while doing
full justice to the gracious genius of Anacreon, and to all
youthful efflorescence of the poetry of love, I seriously in¬
vite the estimable votaries of pleasure to regard the trans¬
cendental sciences merely as a matter of curiosity, and
never to approach the magical tripod; the great works of
science are deadly for pleasure.
   The man who has escaped from the chain of instincts
will first of all realise his omnipotence by the submissive¬
ness of animals. The history of Daniel in the lions’ den is
no fable, and more than once, during the persecutions of
infant Christianity this phenomenon recurred in the pres¬
ence of the whole Roman people. A man seldom has any¬
thing to fear from an animal of which he is not afraid.
The bullets of Jules Gerard, the lion-killer, are magical and
intelligent. Once only did he run a real danger; he allowed
a timid companion to accompany him, and, looking upon
this imprudent person as lost beforehand, he also was afraid,
not for himself but for his comrade. Many persons will say
that it is difficult and even impossible to attain such resolu¬
tion, that strength in volition and energy in character, are
natural gifts. I do not dispute it, but I would point out
also that habit can reform nature; volition can be per¬
fected by education, and, as I have before said, all magical,
like all religious, ceremonial has no other end but thus to
test, exercise, and habituate the will by perseverance and by
force. The more difficult and laborious the exercises, the
greater their effect, as we have now advanced far enough
to see.
   If it have been hitherto impossible to direct the phe¬
nomena of magnetism, it is because an initiated and truly
emancipated operator has not yet appeared.        Who can
boast that he is such ? Have we not ever new self-conquests
to make? At the same time, it is certain that nature will
obey the sign and the word of one who feels himself strong

240               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


enough to be convinced of it. 1 say that nature will obey;
I do not say that she will bely herself or disturb the order
of her possibilities. The healing of nervous diseases by
word, breath, or contact; resurrection in certain cases; re¬
sistance of evil wills sufficient to disarm and confound mur¬
derers; even the faculty of making one’s self invisible by
troubling the sight of those whom it is important to elude;
all this is a natural effect of projecting or withdrawing: the
astral light. Thus was Valentius dazzled and terror-struck
on entering the temple of Cesarea, even as Heliodorus of old,
overcome by a sudden madness in the temple of Jerusalem,
believed himself scourged and trampled by angels. Thus
also the Admiral de Coligny imposed respect on his assassins,
and could onty be despatched by a madman who fell upon
him with averted head. What rendered Joan of Arc in¬
variably victorious was the fascination of her faith and the
miracle of her audacity; she paralysed the arms of those
who would have assailed her, and the English may have very
well been sincere in regarding her as a witch or a sorceress.
As a fact, she was a sorceress unconsciously, herself believ¬
ing that she acted supernaturally, while she was really dis¬
posing of an occult force wThich is universal and invariably
governed by the same laws.
    The magus-magnetiser should have command of the
natural medium, and, consequently, of the astral body by
which our soul communicates with our organs. He can say
to the material body, ‘ ‘ Sleep! ’ ’ and to the sidereal body,
‘ ‘ Dream! ’ ’ Thereupon, the aspect of visible things changes,
as in haschish-visions. Cagliostro is said to have possessed
this power, and he increased its action by means of fumiga¬
tions and perfumes; but true magnetic ability should tran¬
scend these auxiliaries, all more or less inimical to reason
and destructive of health. M. Ragon, in his learned work
on Occult Masonry, gives the recipe for a series of medica¬
ments suitable for the exaltation of somnambulism. It is
by no means a* knowledge to be despised, but prudent
magists should avoid its practice.

                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   241

   The astral light is projected by glance, by voice, and by
the thumb and palm of the hand. Music is a potent
auxiliary of the voice, and hence comes the word enchant¬
ment. No musical instrument has more enchantment than
the human voice, but the far away notes of a violin or
harmonica may augment its power. The subject whom it is
proposed to overcome is in this way prepared; then, when
he is half-deadened and, as it were, enveloped by the charm,
the hands should be extended towards him, he should be
commanded to sleep or to see, and he will obey despite
himself. Should he resist, a fixed glance must be directed
 towards him, one thumb must be placed between his eyes
 and the other on his breast, touching him lightly with a
 single and swift contact; the breath must be slowly drawn
 in and again breathed gently and warmly forth, repeating
 in a low voice, ‘ ‘ Sleep ! ” or ‘ ‘ See! ’ ’

242               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                     CHAPTER VII.

              THE SEPTENARY OF TALISMANS.

Ceremonies,   vestments, perfumes, characters and figures,
being, as we have stated, necessary to enlist the imagination
in the education of the will, the success of magical works
depends upon the faithful observation of all the rites, which
are in no sense fantastic or arbitrary, having been trans¬
mitted to us by antiquity, and permanently subsisting by
the essential laws of analogical realisation and of the cor¬
respondence which inevitably connects ideas and forms.
Having spent many years in consulting and comparing all
the most authentic grimoires and magical rituals, we have
succeeded, not without labour, in reconstituting the cere¬
monial of universal and primeval magic. The only serious
books which we have seen upon this subject are in manu¬
script, written in conventional characters which we have
deciphered by the help of the polygraphy of Trithemius.
The importance of others consists wholly in the hieroglyphs
and symbols which adorn them, the truth of the images being
disguised under the superstitious fictions of a mystifying
text. Such, for example, is the “Enchiridion” of Pope Leo
III., which has never been printed with its true figures, and
we have reconstructed it for our own use after an ancient
manuscript. The rituals known under the name of the
“Clavicles of Solomon” are very numerous. Many have
been printed, while others remain in manuscripts, tran¬
scribed with great care. An exceedingly fine and elegantly
written example is preserved in the Imperial Library; it is
enriched with pantacles and characters most of which have
been reproduced in the magical calendars of Tycho-Brahe
and Duchentau. Lastly, there are printed clavicles and
grimoires which are catch-penny mystifications and impos¬
tures of dishonest publishers. The book so notorious and

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     243

decried formerly under the name of * ‘ Little Albert ’ ’ belongs
mainly to the latter category; some talismanic figures, and
some calculations borrowed from Paracelsus, are its only
serious parts.
   In any matter of realisation and ritual, Paracelsus is an
imposing magical authority. No one has accomplished
works greater than his, and for that very reason he conceals
the virtue of ceremonies and merely teaches in his occult
philosophy the existence of the magnetic agent of the om¬
nipotence of will; he also sums the whole science of char¬
acters in two signs, the macrocosmic and microcosmic stars.
It wras sufficient for the adepts, and it was important not to
initiate the vulgar. Paracelsus, therefore, did not teach the
ritual, but he practised, and his practice was a sequence of
miracles.
   We have spoken of the magical importance of the triad
and tetrad. Their combination constitutes the great re¬
ligious and kabbalistic number which represents the uni¬
versal synthesis and comprises the sacred septenary. In
the belief of the ancients, the world is governed by seven
secondary causes—secundcei, as Trithemius calls them—
which are the universal forces designated by Moses under
the plural name of Elo'im, gods. These forces, analogous
and contrary to one another, produce equilibrium by their
contrasts, and rule the motion of the spheres. The He¬
brews termed them the seven great archangles, giving them
the names of Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Anael, Samael,
Zadkiel, and Oriphiel. The Christian Gnostics named the
four last Uriel, Barachiel, Sealtiel, and Jehudiel. Other
nations attributed to these spirits the government of the
seven chief planets, and gave them the names of their chief
divinities. All believed in their relative influence; as¬
tronomy divided the antique heaven between them, and
allotted the seven days of the week to their successive gov¬
ernment. Such is the reason of the various ceremonies of
the magical week and the septenary cultus of the planets.
We have already observed that here the planets are signs

244               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


and nothing else; they have the influence which universal
faith attributes because they are more truly the stars of the
human mind than the orbs of heaven. The sun, which
antique magic always regarded as fixed, could only be a
planet for the vulgar; hence it represents the day of repose
in the week, which we term Sunday without knowing why,
the day of the sun among the ancients.
   The seven magical planets correspond to the seven colours
of the prism and the seven notes of the musical octave;
they represent also the seven virtues, and, by opposition,
the seven vices of Christian ethics. The seven sacraments
correspond equally to this great universal septenary. Bap¬
tism, which consecrates the element of water, corresponds
to the moon; ascetic penance is under the auspices of
Samael, the angel of Mars; confirmation, which imparts the
spirit of understanding and communicates to the true be¬
liever the gift of tongues, is under the auspices of Raphael,
the angel of Mercury; the Eucharist substitutes the sacra¬
mental realisation of God made man for the empire of
Jupiter; marriage is consecrated by the angel Anael, the
purifying genius of Venus; extreme unction is the safe¬
guard of the sick about to fall under the scythe of Saturn,
and orders, consecrating the priesthood of light, is marked,
more especially by the characters of the sun. Almost all
these analogies were observed by the learned Dupuis, who
thence concluded that all religions were false, instead of
recognising the sanctity and perpetuity of a single dogma,
ever reproduced in the universal symbolism of successive
religious forms. He failed to understand the permanent
revelation transmitted to human genius by the harmonies of
nature, and beheld only a catalogue of errors in that chain
of ingenious images and eternal truths.
   Magical works are also seven in number: 1, works of
light and riches, under the auspices of the sun; 2, works of
divination and mystery, under the invocation of the moon;
3, works of skill, science, and eloquence, under the protec¬
tion of Mercury; 4, works of wrath and chastisement, con-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    245

secrated to Mars; 5, works of love, favoured by Venus;
6, works of ambition and intrigue, under the auspices of
Jupiter; 7, works of malediction and death, under the
patronage of Saturn. In theological symbolism, the sun
represents the word of truth; the moon, religion itself;
Mercury, the interpretation and science of mysteries; Mars,
justice; Venus, mercy and love; Jupiter, the risen and
glorious Saviour; Saturn, God the Father, or the Jehovah
of Moses. In the human body, the sun is analogous to the
heart, the moon to the brain, Jupiter to the right hand,
Saturn to the left, Mars to the left foot, Venus to the right,
Mercuryr to the generative organs, whence an androgyne
figure is sometimes attributed to this planet. In the human
face, the sun governs the forehead, Jupiter the right and
Saturn the left eye; the moon rules between both at the
root of the nose, the two phlanges of which are governed
by Mars and Venus; finally, the influence of Mercury is
exercised on mouth and chin. Among the ancients these
notions constituted the occult science of physiognomy, after¬
wards imperfectly recovered by Lavater.
   The magus who intends undertaking the works of light
must operate on a Sunday, from midnight to eight in the
morning, or from three in the afternoon to ten in the
evening. He should wear a purple vestment, with tiara
and bracelets of gold. The altar of perfumes and the tripod
of sacred fire must be encircled by wreaths of laurel, helio¬
trope, and sunflowers; the perfumes are cinnamon, strong
incense, saffron, and red sandal; the ring must be of gold,
with a chrysolith or ruby; the carpet must be of lion skins,
the fans of sparrow-hawk feathers. On Monday the robe is
white, embroidered with silver, and having a triple collar of
pearls, crystals, and selenite; the tiara must be covered with
yellow silk, emblazoned with silver characters forming the
Hebrew monogram of Gabriel, as given in the “Occult
Philosophy’’ of Agrippa; the perfumes are white sandal,
camphor, amber, aloes, and pulverised seed of cucumber;
the wreaths are mugwort, moonwort, and yellow ranun*

246               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


culuses. Tapestries, garments, and objects of a black colour
must be avoided; and no metal except silver should be worn
on the person. On Tuesday, a day for the operations of
vengeance, the colour of the vestment should be that of
flame, rust, or blood, with belt and bracelets of steel. The
tiara must be bound with gold; the rod must not be used,
but only the magical dagger and sword; the wreaths must
be of absynth and rue, the ring of steel, with an amethyst
for precious stone. On Wednesday, a day favourable for
transcendent science, the vestment should be green, or shot
with various colours, the necklace of pearls in hollow glass
beads containing mercury, the perfumes benzoin, mace, and
storax, the flowers, narcissus, lily, herb mercury, fumitory,
and marjolane; the jewel should be the agate. On Thurs¬
day, a day of great religious and political operations, the
vestment should be scarlet, and on the forehead should be
worn a brass tablet with the character of the spirit of
Jupiter and the three words: Giarar, Bethor, Samgabiel;
the perfumes are incense, ambergris, balm, grain of para¬
dise, macis, and saffron; the ring must be enriched with
an emerald or sapphire; the wreaths and crowns should be
oak, poplar, fig and pomegranate leaves. On Friday, the
day for amorous operations, the vestment should be of sky
blue, the hangings of green and rose, the ornaments of
polished copper, the crowns of violets, the wreaths of roses,
myrtle, and olive; the ring should be enriched with a tur-
clasps; the fans must be of swan’s feathers, and the op-
quoise; lapis-lazuli and beryl will answer for tiara and
erator must wear upon his breast a copper talisman with
the character of Anael and the words: Aveeva Yadelilith.
On Saturday, a day of funeral operations, the vestment
must be black or brown, with characters embroidered in
black or orange coloured silk; on the neck must be worn a
leaden medal with the character of Saturn and the words:
Almalec, Aphiel, Zarahiel ; the perfumes should be dia-
gridrium, scammony, alum, sulphur, and assafoetida; the
ring should be adorned with an onyx, the garlands should

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    247

be of ash, cypress, and hellebore; on the onyx of the ring,
during the hours of Saturn, the double head of Janus
should be engraved with the consecrated awl.
   Such are the antique magnificences of the secret cultus
of the magi. With similar appointments the great magi¬
cians of the Middle Ages proceeded to the daily consecra¬
tion of talismans corresponding to the seven genii. We
have already said that a pantacle is a synthetic character
resuming the entire magical doctrine in one of its special
conceptions. It is, therefore, the full expression of a com¬
pleted thought and will; it is the signature of a spirit.
The ceremonial consecration of this sign attaches to it still
more strongly the intention of the operator, and establishes
a veritable magnetic chain between himself and the
pantacle. Pantacles may be indifferently traced upon vir¬
gin parchment, paper, or metals. What is termed a talis¬
man is a sheet of metal, bearing either pantacles or char¬
acters, and having received a special consecration for a de¬
fined intention. In a learned work on magical antiquities,
Gaffarel has scientifically demonstrated the real power of
talismans, and the confidence in their virtue is otherwise so
strong in nature that we gladly bear about us some memor¬
ial of those we love, persuaded that such keepsakes will pre¬
serve us from danger and increase our happiness. Talis¬
mans are made of the seven Kabbalistic metals, and, when
the days and hours are favourable, the required and de¬
termined signs are engraved upon them. The figures of the
seven planets, with their magical squares, following Para¬
celsus, are found in the “Little Albert.” It should be ob¬
served that Paracelsus replaces the figure of Jupiter by
that of a priest, a substitution not wanting in a well-defined
mysterious intention. But the allegorical and mythological
figures of the seven spirits have now become too classical
and too vulgar to be any longer successfully engraved on
talismans; we must recur to more learned and expressive
signs. The pentagram should be invariably engraved upon
one side of the talisman, with a circle for the sun, a cres-

248               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


cent for the moon, for Mars a sword, a G for Venus, for
Jupiter a crown, and a scythe for Saturn. The other side
must bear the sign of Solomon, that is, the six-pointed star
composed of two superposed triangles; in the centre there
is placed a human figure for the talismans of the sun, a
chalice for those of the moon, a dog’s head for those of Mer¬
cury, an eagle’s for those of Jupiter, a lion’s head for
those of Mars, a dove’s for those of Venus, and a bull’s or
goat’s for those of Saturn. The names of the seven angels
are added either in Hebrew, in Arabic, or in magical char¬
acters like those of the alphabet of Trithemius. The two
triangles of Solomon may be replaced by the double cross
of the wheels of Ezekiel, which is found on a great number
of ancient pantacles, and is, as we have observed in our
Doctrine, the key to the trigrammes of Fohi.
   Precious stones may also be employed for amulets and
talismans; but all objects of this nature, whether metals or
gems, must be carefully kept in silken bags of a colour
analogous to that of the spirit of the planet, perfumed with
the perfumes of the corresponding day, and preserved from
all impure glances and contacts. Thus, pantacles and talis¬
mans of the sun must not be seen or touched by deformed
or misshapen persons, or by immoral women; those of the
moon are profaned by the looks and hands of debauched
men and menstruating females; those of Mercury lose their
virtue if seen or touched by paid priests; those of Mars
must be concealed from cowards; those of Venus from
depraved men and men under a vow of celibacy; those of
Jupiter from the impious; those of Saturn from virgins and
children, not that their looks or touches can ever be im¬
pure, but because the talisman would bring them misfortune
and thus lose all its virtue.
   Crosses of honour and other kindred decorations are ver¬
itable talismans, which increase personal value and merit;
they are consecrated by solemn investiture, and public
opinion can impart to them a prodigious power. Sufficient
attention has not been paid to the reciprocal influence of

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    249

signs on ideas and of ideas on signs; it is not less true that
the revolutionary work of modem times, for example, has
been symbolically resumed in its entirety by the Napo¬
leonic substitution of the Star of Honour for the Cross of
 St. Louis. It is the pentagram in place of the labarum, it
is the reconstitution of the symbol of light, it is the Ma¬
sonic resurrection of Adonhiram. They say that Napoleon
 believed in his star, and could he have been persuaded to
explain what he meant by this star, it would have proved
to be his genius; he would therefore have adopted the pen¬
tagram for his sign, that symbol of human sovereignty by
intelligent initiative. The mighty soldier of the Revolution
knew little, but he divined almost everything; so was he
the greatest instinctive and practical magician of modern
times: the world is still full of his miracles, and the country
people will never believe that he is dead.
   Blessed and indulgenced objects, touched by holy images
or venerable persons; chaplets from Palestine; the Agnus
Dei, composed of the wax of the Paschal candle, and the
annual remnants of holy chrism; scapulas and medals, are
all true talismans. One such medal has become popular
in our own day, and even those who are devoid of religion
suspend it from the necks of their children. Moreover, its
figures are so perfectly Kabbalistic that it is truely a mar¬
vellous double pantacle. On the one side is the great initia-
trix, the heavenly mother of the Zohar, the Isis of Egypt,
the Venus-Urania of the Platonists, the Mary of Christian¬
ity, throned upon the world, and setting one foot upon the
head of the magical serpent. She extends her two hands
in such a manner as to form a triangle, of which her head
is the apex; her hands are open and radiant, thus making
a double triangle, with all the beams directed towards the
earth, evidently representing the emancipation of intelli¬
gence by labour. On the other side is the double Tau of the
hierophants, the Lingam with the double Cteis, or the triple
Phallus, supported, with interlacement and repeated in¬
sertion, by the kabbalistic and masonic M, representing the

250               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


square between the two pillars Jakin and Bohas; below
are placed, upon the same plane, two loving and suffering
hearts, with twelve pentagrams around them. Every one
will tell you that the wearers of this medal do not attach
such significance to it, but it is only on that account more
absolutely magical; having a double sense, and, conse¬
quently, a double virtue. The ecstatic on the authority of
whose revelations this talisman was engraved, had already
beheld it existing perfectly in the astral light, which once
more demonstates the intimate connection of ideas and
signs, and gives a new sanction to the symbolism of uni¬
versal magic.
   The greater the importance and solemnity brought to
bear on the confection and consecration of talismans and
pentacles, the more virtue they acquire, as will be under¬
stood upon the evidence of the principles which we have
established. This consecration should take place on the
days we have indicated, with the appointments which we
have given in detail. Talismans are consecrated by the four
exorcised elements, after conjuring the spirits of darkness
by the Conjuration of the Four. Then, taking up the pan-
tacle, and sprinkling it with some drops of magical water,
say: In the name of Elohim and by the spirit of the living
waters, be thou unto me a sign of light and a sacrament of
will!
   Presenting it to the smoke of the perfumes: By the
brazen serpent which destroyed the serpents of fire, be
thou, &c.
   Breathing seven times upon the pantacle or talisman:
By the firmament and spirit of the voice, be thou, &c.
   Lastly, placing some particles of purified earth or salt
triadwise upon it: In the salt of earth, and by the virtue
of eternal life, be thou, &c.
   Then recite the Conjuration of the Seven as follows, al¬
ternately casting a pastille of the seven perfumes into the
sacred fire:

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    251

  In the name of Michael, may Jehovah command thee,
and drive thee hence, Chavajoth!
  In the name of Raphael, begone before Elchim, Sachabiel!
drive thee hence, Belial!
  In the name of Raphael, begone before Elchin, Sachabiel!
  By Samael Zebaoth, and in the name of Eloim Gibor,
get thee hence, Adrameleck!
  By Zachariel and      Sachiel-Meleck,
                         9             7
                                           be   obedient nnto
Elvah, Samgabiel!
   By the divine and human name of Schadda’i, and by the
sign of the pentagram which I hold in my right hand, in
the name of the angel Anael, by the power of Adam and of
Heva, who are Jotchavah, begone, Lilith! Let us rest in
peace, Nahemah!
  By the holy Eloim and by the names of the genii Cashiel
Sehaltiel, Aphiel, and Zarahiel, at the command of Orifiel,
depart from us, Moloch! We deny thee our children to
devour.
   The most important magical instruments are the rod, the
sword, the lamp, the chalice, the altar, and the tripod. In
the operations of transsendent and divine magic, the lamp,
rod, and chalice are used; in the works of black magic, the
rod is replaced by the sword and the lamp by the candle of
Cardan. We shall explain this difference in the chapter
devoted to black magic. Let us come now to the descrip¬
tion and consecration of the instruments. The magical rod,
which must not be confounded with the simple divining
rod, with the fork of necromancers, or the trident of Para¬
celsus, the true and absolute magical rod, must be one per¬
fectly straight beam of almond or hazel, cut at a single
blow with the magical pruning-knife or golden sickle, be¬
fore the rising of the sun, at that moment when the tree is
ready to blossom. It must be pierced through its whole
length without splitting or breaking it, and a long needle of
magnetized iron must fill its entire extent; to one of its
extremities must be fitted a polyhedral prism, cut in a
triangular shape, and to the other a similar figure of black

252      TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




         Magical Instruments.

      Lamp, rod, sword, and dagger.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   253

resin. Two rings, one of copper, and one of zinc, must be
placed at the centre of the rod; subsequently, the rod must
be gilt at the resin end, and silvered at the prism end as
far as the ringed centre; it must then be covered with silk,
the extremities not included. On the copper ring these
characters must be engraved:                      and on the
zinc ring:                 The consecration of the rod must
last seven days, beginning at the new moon, and should be
made by an initiate possessing the great arcana, and having
himself a consecrated rod. This is the transmission of the
magical secret, which has never ceased since the shrouded
origin of the transcendent science. The rod and the other
instruments, but the rod above all, must be concealed with
care, and under no pretext should the magus permit them
to be seen or touched by the profane; otherwise they will
lose all their virtue. The mode of transmitting the rod is
one of the arcana of science, the revelation of which is never
permitted. The length of the magical rod must not exceed
that of the operator’s arm; the magician must never use it
unless he is alone, and should not even then touch it with¬
out necessity. Many ancient magi made it only the length
of the forearm and concealed it beneath their long mantles,
showing only the simple divining rod in public, or some
allegorical sceptre made of ivory or ebony, according to the
nature of the works. Cardinal Richelieu, always athirst
for power, sought through his whole life the transmission
of the rod, without being able to find it. His Kabbalist
Gaffarel could furnish him with sword and talismans alone;
this was possibly the secret motive for the cardinal’s hatred
of Urbain Grandier, who knew something of his weak¬
nesses. The secret and prolonged conversations of Lau-
bardement with the unhappy priest some hours before his
final torture, and those words of a friend and confidant of
the latter, as he went forth to death—1 ‘You are a clever
man, monsieur, do not destroy yourself”—afford consider¬
able food for thought.
  The magical rod is the verendum of the magus; it must

254               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


not even be mentioned in any clear and precise manner;
no one should boast of its possession, nor should its con¬
secration ever be transmitted except under the conditions of
absolute discretion and confidence.
   The sword is less occult, and is made in the following
manner:—It must be of pure steel, with a cruciform copper
handle having three pommels, as represented in the enchi¬
ridion of Leo III, or with the guard of a double crescent, as
in our own figure. On the middle knot of the guard, which
should be covered with a golden plate, the sign of the
macrocosm must be chased on one side, and that of the
microcosm on the other.        The Hebrew monogram of
Michael, as found in Agrippa, must be engraved on the
pommel; on the one side of the blade must be these char¬
acters:                         and on the other the mono¬
gram of the Labarum of Constantine, followed by the
words: Vince in hoc, Deo dnce, comite ferro. For the au¬
thenticity and exactitude of these figures, see the best an¬
cient editions of the “ Enchiridion/’ The consecration of
the sword must take place on a Sunday, during the hours
of the sun, under the invocation of Michael. The blade of
the sword must be placed in a fire of laurel and cypress; it
must then be dried and polished with ashes of the sacred
fire, moistened with the blood of a mole or serpent, the fol¬
lowing words being said:—Be thou unto me as the sword of
Michael, by virtue of Eloim Sabaoth, may spirits of dark¬
ness and reptiles of earth flee away from thee!—It is then
fumigated with the perfumes of the sun, and wrapped up
in silk, together with branches of vervain, which should be
burned on the seventh day.
   The magical lamp must be composed of the four metals—
gold, silver, brass and iron; the pedestal should be of iron,
the mirror of brass, the reservoir of silver, the triangle at
the apex of gold. It should be provided with two arms
composed of a triple pipe of three intertwisted metals, in
such a manner that each arm has a triple conduit for the
oil; there must be nine wicks in all, three at the top and

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   255

three in each arm. The seal of Hermes must be engraved
on the pedestal, over which must be the two-headed
androgyne of Khunrath. A serpent devouring its own tail
must encircle the lower part. The sign of Solomon must be
chased on the reservoir. Two globes must be fitted to this
lamp, one adorned with transparent pictures, representing
the seven genii, while the other, of larger size and dupli¬
cated, should contain variously tinted waters in four com¬
partments. The whole instrument should be placed in a
wooden pillar, revolving on its own axis, and permitting a
ray of light to escape, as required, and fall on the altar
smoke at the moment for the invocations. This lamp is a
great aid to the intuitive operations of slow imaginations,
and for the immediate creation in the presence of mag¬
netised persons of forms alarming in their actuality, which,
being multiplied by the mirrors, will magnify suddenly, and
transform the operator’s cabinet into a vast hall filled with
visible souls; the intoxication of the perfumes and the
exaltation of the invocations will speedily change this fan¬
tasia into a real dream; persons formerly known will be
recognised, phantoms will speak, and something extraor¬
dinary and unexpected will follow the closing of the light
within the pillar and the increase of the fumigations.

256               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                     CHAPTER VIII

              A WARNING TO THE IMPRUDENT

The operations of science are not devoid of danger, as we
have stated several times. They may end in madness for
those who are not established firmly on the basis of supreme,
absolute, and infallible reason. Terrible and incurable dis¬
eases can be occasioned by excessive nervous excitement.
Swoons and death itself, as a consequence of cerebral con¬
gestion, may result from imagination when it is unduly im¬
pressed and terrified. We cannot sufficiently dissuade ner¬
vous persons, and those who are naturally disposed to ex¬
altation, women, young people, and all who are not habitu¬
ated in perfect self-control and the command of their fear.
In the same way, there can be nothing more dangerous
than to make magic a pastime, or, as some do, a part of an
evening’s entertainment. Even magnetic experiments, per¬
formed under such conditions, can only exhaust the sub¬
jects, mislead opinions, and defeat science. The mysteries
of life and death cannot be made sport of with impunity,
and things which are to be taken seriously must be treated
not only seriously but also with the greatest reserve. Never
yield to the desire of convincing others by phenomena. The
most astounding phenomena would not be proofs for those
who are not already convinced. They can always be attrib¬
uted to ordinary artifices and the magus included among the
more or less skilful followers of Robert Houdin or Hamil¬
ton. To require prodigies as a warrant for believing in
science is to shew one’s self unworthy or incapable1 of
science. Sancta Sanctis. Contemplate the twelfth figure
of the Tarot-keys, remember the grand symbol of Prome¬
theus, and be silent. All those magi who divulged their
works died violently, and many were driven to suicide, like
Cardan, Schroppfer, Cagliostro, and others. The magus

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    257

should live in retirement, and be approached with difficulty.
This is the significance of the ninth key of the Tarot, where
the initiate appears as a hermit completely shrouded in his
cloak. Such retirement must not, however, be one of isola¬
tion ; attachments and friendships are necessary, but he
must choose them with care and preserve them at all price.
He must also have another profession than that of magi¬
cian ; magic is not a trade.
   In order to devotei ourselves to ceremonial magic, we
must be free from anxious preoccupations; we must be in a
position to procure all the instruments of the science, and
be able to make them when needed; we must also possess an
inaccessible laboratory, in which there will be no danger of
ever being surprised or disturbed. Then, and this is an
indispensable condition, we must know how to equilibrate
forces and restrain the zeal of our initiative. This is the
meaning of the eighth key of Hermes, wherein a woman is
seated between two pillars, with an upright sword in one
hand and a balance in the other. To equilibrate forces they
must be simultaneously maintained and made to act al¬
ternately ; the use of the balance represents this double ac¬
tion. The same arcanum is typified by the dual cross in the
pantacles of Pythagoras and Ezekiel (see the plate which
appears on p. 166 in the “Doctrine”), where the crosses
equilibrate each other and the planetary signs are always in
opposition. Thus, Venus is the equilibrium of the works
of Mars; Mercury moderates and fulfills the operations of
the Sun and Moon; Saturn balances Jupiter. It was by
means of this antagonism between the ancient gods that
Prometheus, that is to say, the genius of science, contrived
to enter Olympus and carry off fire from heaven. Is it
necessary to speak more clearly? The milder and calmer
you are, the more effective will be your anger; the more
energetic you are, the more precious will be your forbear¬
ance ; the more skilful you are, the better will you profit by
your intelligence and even by your virtues; the more indif¬
ferent you are, the more easily will you make yourself

258                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


loved. This is a matter of experience in the moral order,
and is literally realised in the sphere of action. Human
passions produce blindly the opposites of their unbridled
desire, when they act without direction. Excessive love
produces antipathy; blind hate counteracts and scourges
itself; vanity leads to abasement and the most cruel humilia¬
tions. Thus, the Great Master revealed a mystery of posi¬
tive magical science when He said, ‘ ‘ Forgive your enemies,
do good to those that hate you, so shall ye heap coals of fire
upon their heads. ” Perhaps this kind of pardon seems
hypocrisy and bears a strong likeness to refined vengeance.
But we must remember that the magus is sovereign, and a
sovereign never avenges because he has the right to punish;
in the exercise of this right he performs his duty, and is
implacable as justice. Let it be observed, for the rest, so
that no one may misinterpret my meaning, that it is a ques¬
tion of chastising evil by good and opposing mildness to
violence. If the exercise of virtue be a flagellation for vice,
no one has the right to demand that it should be spared, or
that we should take pity on its shame and its sufferings.
   The man who dedicates himself to the works of science
must take moderate daily exercise, abstain from prolonged
vigils, and follow a wholesome and regular rule of life. He
must avoid the effluvia of putrefaction, the neighbourhood
of stagnant water, and indigestible or impure food. Above
all, he must daily seek relaxation from magical preoccupa¬
tions amongst material cares, or in labour, whether artistic,
industrial, or commercial. The way to see well is not to
be always looking; and he who spends his whole life upon
one object will end without attaining it. Another precau¬
tion must be equally observed, and that is never to experi¬
ment when ill.
   The ceremonies being, as we have said, artificial methods
for creating a habit of will become unnecessary when the
habit is confirmed. It is in this sense, and addressing him¬
self solely to perfect adepts, that Paracelsus proscribes their
use in his Occult Philosophy. They must be progressively

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  259

simplified before they are dispensed with altogether, and in
proportion to the experience we obtain in acquired powers,
and established habit in the exercise of extra-natural will.

260               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                      CHAPTER IX

               THE CEREMONIAL OF INITIATES

The science is preserved by silence and perpetuated by
initiation. The law of silence is not, therefore, absolute
and inviolable, except relatively to the uninitiated multi¬
tude. The science can only be transmitted by speech. The
sages must therefore speak occasionally. Yes, they must
speak, not to disclose, but to lead others to discover. Noli
ire, fac venire, was the device of Rabelais, who, being mas¬
ter of all the sciences of his time, could not be unacquainted
with magic. We have, consequently, to reveal here the
mysteries of initiation. The destiny of man, as we have
said, is to make or create himself; he is, and he will be, the
son of his works, both for time and eternity. All men are
called on to compete, but the number of the elect—that is,
of those who succeed—is invariably small. In other words,
the men who are desirous to attain are numbered by mul¬
titudes, but the chosen are few. Now, the government of
the world belongs by right to the flower of mankind, and
when any combination or usurpation prevents their possess¬
ing it, a political or social cataclysm ensues. Men who are
masters of themselves become easily masters of others; but
it is possible for them to hinder one another if they dis¬
regard the laws of discipline and of the universal hierarchy.
To be subject to a discipline in common, there must be a
community of ideas and desires, and such a communion
cannot be attained except by a common religion established
on the very foundations of intelligence and reason. This
religion has always existed in the world, and is that only
which can be called one, infallible, indefectible, and ver¬
itably catholic—that is, universal. This religion, of which
all others have been successively the veils and the shadows,
is that which demonstrates being by being, truth by rea-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     261

son, reason by evidence and common sense. It is that which
proves by realities the reasonable basis of hypotheses, and
 forbids reasoning upon hypotheses independently of reali¬
ties. It is that which is grounded on the doctrine of univer¬
sal analogies, but never confounds the things of science with
those of faith. It can never be of faith that two and one
 make more or less than three; that in physics the contained
can exceed the container; that a solid body, as such, can act
like a fluidic or gaseous body; that, for example, a human
body can pass through a closed door without dissolution or
opening. To say that one believes such a thing is to talk like
a child or a fool; yet it is no less insensate to define the un¬
known, and to argue from hypothesis to hypothesis, till we
come to deny evidence a priori for the affirmation of pre¬
cipitate suppositions. The wise man affirms what he knows,
and believes in what he does not know only in proportion
to the reasonable and known necessities of hypothesis.
   But this reasonable religion is unadapted for the multi¬
tude, for which fables, mysteries, definite hopes, and ter¬
rors having a physical basis, are needful. It is for this rea¬
son that the priesthood has been established in the world.
Now, the priesthood is recruited by initiation. Religious
forms perish when initiation ceases in the sanctuary,
whether by the betrayal of the mysteries, or by their neg¬
lect and oblivion. The Gnostic disclosures, for example,
alienated the Christian Church from the high truths of the
Kabbalah, which contains all the secrets of transcendental
theology. Hence, the blind, having become leaders of the
blind, great obscurities, great lapses, and deplorable scan¬
dals have followed. Subsequently, the sacred books, of
which the keys are all kabbalistic, from Genesis to the
Apocalypse, have become so little intelligible to Christians,
that pastors have reasonably judged it necessary to forbid
their being read by the uninstructed among believers.
Taken literally, and understood materially, these books
would be only an inconceivable tissue of absurdities and
scandals, as the school of Voltaire has too well demon-

262               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


strated. It is the same with all the ancient dogmas, their
brilliant theogonies and poetic legends. To say that the
ancients of Greece believed in the love-adventures of Jupi¬
ter, or those of Egypt in the cynocephalus and sparrow-
hawk, is to exhibit as much ignorance and bad faith as
would be shown by maintaining that Christians adore a
triple God, composed of an old man, an executed criminal,
and a pigeon. The ignorance of symbols is invariably
calumnious. For this reason we should always guard
against the derision of that which we do not know, when its
enunciation seems to involve some absurdity or even singu¬
larity, as a course no less wanting in good sense than to
admit the same without discussion and examination.
   Prior to anything which may please or displease our¬
selves, there is a truth—that is to say, a reason—and by this
reason must our actions be regulated rather than by our
desires, if wTe would create that intelligence within us which
is the raison d’etre of immortality, and that justice which
is the law thereof. A man who is truly man can only will
that which he should reasonably and justly do; so does
he silence lusts and fears that he may hearken solely to
reason. Now, such a man is a natural king and a spontan¬
eous priest for the wandering multitudes. Hence it was
that the end of the old initiations was indifferently termed
the sacerdotal art and the royal art. The antique magical
associations were seminaries for priests and kings, and ad¬
mission could only be obtained by truly sacerdotal and
royal works; that is, by placing one’s self above all the
weaknesses of nature. We will not repeat here what is
found everywhere concerning the Egyptian initiations, per¬
petuated, but with diminished power, in the secret societies
of the Middle Ages. Christian radicalism, founded upon a
false understanding of the words: “Ye have one father,
one master, and ye are all brethren, ’ ’ dealt a terrible blow
at the sacred hierarchy. Since that time, sacerdotal dig¬
nities have become a matter of intrigue or of chance; ener¬
getic mediocrity has managed to supplant modest superior,

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    263

 ity, misunderstood because of its modesty; yet, and not¬
 withstanding, initiation being an essential law of religious
 life, a society which is instinctively magical formed at the
 decline of the pontifical power, and speedily concentrated
 in itself alone the entire strength of Christianity, because,
 though it only understood vaguely, it exercised positively
the hierarchic power resident in the ordeals of initiation,
and the omnipotence of faith in passive obedience.
    What, in fact, did the candidate in the old initiations?
He entirely abandoned his life and liberty to the masters of
the temples of Thebes or Memphis; he advanced resolutely
through unnumbered terrors, which might have led him to
imagine that there was a premeditated outrage intended
against him; he ascended funeral pyres, swam torrents of
black and raging water, hung by unknown counterpoises
over unfathomed precipices . . . Was not all this a
blind obedience in the full force of the term ? Is it not the
most absolute exercise of liberty to abjure liberty for a time
so that we may attain emancipation? Now, this is pre¬
cisely what must be done, and what has been done invari¬
ably, by those who aspire to the sanctum regnum of magical
omnipotence.      The disciples of Pythagoras condemned
themselves to inexorable silence for many years; even the
sectaries of Epicurus only comprehended the sovereignty of
pleasure by the acquisition of sobriety and calculated tem¬
perance. Life is a warfare in which we must give proofs if
we would advance; power does not surrender of itself; it
must be seized.
    Initiation by contest and ordeal is therefore indispensable
for the attainment of the practical science of magic. We
have already indicated after what manner the four element¬
ary forms may be overcome, and will not repeat it here;
we refer those of our readers who would inquire into the
ceremonies of ancient initiations to the works of Baron
Tschoudy, author of the “Blazing Star,” “Adonhiramite
Masonry,” and some other mast valuable masonic treatises.
   Here we would insist upon a reflection, namely, that the

264                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


intellectual and social chaos in the midst of which we are
perishing, has been caused by the neglect of initiation, with
its ordeals and its mysteries. Men, whose zeal was greater
than their science, carried away by the popular maxims of
the Gospel, came to believe in the primitive and absolute
equality of men. A famous hallucine, the eloquent and un¬
fortunate Rousseau, propagated this paradox with all the
magic of his style—that society alone depraves men—much
as if he had said that competition and emulation in labour
renders workmen idle. The essential law of nature, that of
initiation by works and of voluntary and toilsome progress,
has been fatally misconstrued; masonry has had its desert¬
ers, as Catholicism its apostates. What has been the con¬
sequence?    The substitution of the steel plane for the
intellectual and symbolical plane. To preach equality to
what is beneath, without instructing it how to rise upward,
is not this binding us to descend ourselves? And hence
we have descended to the reign of the carmagnola, the sans-
cullotes, and Marat. To restore tottering and distracted so¬
ciety, the hierarchy and initiation must be again estab¬
lished. The task is difficult, but the whole intelligent world
feels that it is necessary to undertake it. Must we pass
through another deluge before succeeding? We earnestly
trust not, and this book, perhaps the greatest but not the
last of our audacities, is an appeal unto all that is yet alive
for the reconstitution of life in the very middle of decom¬
position and death.

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     265




                         CHAPTER X

                    THE KEY OF OCCULTISM

 Let us now examine the question of pantacles, for all magi¬
  cal virtue is there, since the secret of force is in the intel¬
  ligence which directs. We have already given the symbol
  and interpretation of the pantacles of Pythagoras and Eze¬
  kiel, so that we have no need to recur to these; we shall
  prove in a later chapter that all the instruments of Hebrew
  worship were pantacles, and that the first and final word of
 the Bible was written in gold and in brass by Moses, in the
 tabernacle and on all its accessories. But each magus can
 and should have his individual pantacle, for, understood ac¬
 curately, a pantacle is the perfect summary of a mind.
 Hence we find in the magical calendars of Tycho Brahe
 and Duchentau, the pantacles of Adam, Job, Jeremiah,
 Isaiah, and of all the other great prophets who have been,
 each in his turn, the kings of the Kabbalah and the grand
 rabbins of science.
     The pantacle, being a complete and perfect synthesis,
 expressed by a single sign, serves to focus all intellectual
 strength into a glance, a recollection, a touch. It is, so to
 speak, a starting-point for the efficient projection of the
 will. Nigromancers and goetic magicians traced their in¬
 fernal pantacles on the skin of the victims they immolated.
 The sacrificial ceremonies, the manner of skinning the kid,
then of salting, drying, and whitening the skin, are given in
 a number of clavicles and grimoires. Some Hebrew kab-
balists fell into similar follies, forgetting the anathemas
pronounced in the Bible against those who sacrifice on high
places or in the caverns of the earth. All spilling of blood
operated ceremonially is abominable and impious, and since
the death of Adonhiram the Society of true Adepts has a
horror of blood—Ecclesia abhorret a sanguine.

266               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


   The initiatory symbolism of pantacles adopted through¬
out the east is the key of all ancient and modem mytholo¬
gies. Apart from the knowledge of the hieroglyphic alpha¬
bet, one would be lost among the obscurities of the Vedas,
the Zend-Avesta, and the Bible. The tree which brings
forth good and evil, the source of the four rivers, one of
which waters the land of gold, that is, of light, and another
flows through Ethiopia, or the kingdom of darkness; the
magnetic serpent who seduces the woman, and the woman
who seduces the man, thus making known the law of attrac¬
tion ; subsequently the Cherub or Sphinx placed at the gate
of the Edenic sanctuary, with the fiery sword of the guar¬
dians of the symbol; then regeneration by labour and prop¬
agation by sorrow, which is the law of initiations and or¬
deals ; the division of Cain and Abel, which is the same sym¬
bol as the strife of Anteros and Eros; the ark borne upon
the waters of the deluge like the coffer of Osiris ; the black
raven who does not return and the white dove who does, a
new setting forth of the dogma of antagonism and balance
—all these magnificent kabbalistic allegories of Genesis,
which, taken literally, and accepted as actual histories, merit
even more derision and contempt than Voltaire heaped upon
them, become luminous for the initiate, who still hails with
enthusiasm and love the perpetuity of the true doctrine
and the universality of initiation identical in all sanctuaries
of the world.
   The five books of Moses, the prophecy of Ezekiel, and the
Apocalypse of St. John are the three kabbalistic keys of the
whole Biblical edifice. The sphinxes of Ezekiel are identical
with those of the sanctuary and the ark, and are a quad¬
ruple reproduction of the Egyptian tetrad; the wheels re¬
volving in one another are the harmonious spheres of
Pythagoras; the new temple, the plan of which is given ac¬
cording to wholly kabbalistic measures, is the type of the
labours of primitive masonry. St. John, in his Apocalypse,
reproduces the same images and the same numbers, and re¬
constructs the Edenic world ideally in the New Jerusalem;

                   transcendental magic                   267

 but at the source of the four rivers the solar lamb replaces
the mysterious tree. Initiation by toil and blood has been
 accomplished, and there is no more temple because the light
 of truth is universally diffused, and the world has become
the temple of justice. This splendid final vision of the Holy
 Scriptures, this divine Utopia which the Church has re¬
 ferred with good reason for its realisation to a better life,
has been the pitfall of all ancient arch-heretics and of many
modern idealists. The simultaneous emancipation and ab¬
solute equality of all men involve the arrest of progress and
consequently of life; in a world where all are equal there
could no longer be infants or the aged; birth and death
could not therefore be admitted. This is sufficient to demon¬
state that the New Jerusalem is no more of this world than
the primeval paradise, wherein there was no knowledge of
good or evil, of liberty, of generation, or of death; the
cycle of our religious symbolism begins and ends therefore
in eternity.
   Dupuis and Yolney lavished their great erudition to dis¬
cover this relative identity of all symbols, and arrived at
the negation of every religion. We attain by the same path
to a diametrically opposed affirmation, and we recognise
with admiration that there have never been any false re¬
ligions in the civilised world; that the divine light, the
splendour of the supreme reason of the Logos, of that word
which enlightens every man coming into the world, has
been no more wanting to the children of Zoroaster than to
the faithful sheep of St. Peter; that the permanent, the one,
the universal revelation, is written in visible nature, ex¬
plained in reason, and completed by the wise analogies of
faith; that there is, finally, but one true religion, one doc¬
trine, and one legitimate belief, even as there is but one
God, one reason, and one universe; that revelation is ob¬
scure for no one, since the whole world understands more
or less both truth and justice, and since all that is possible
can only exist analogically to what is. Being is being,
rpriK ntrs mn»

268                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


   The apparently bizarre figures presented by the Apoca¬
lypse of St. John are hieroglyphics, like those of all oriental
mythologies, and can be comprised in a series of pantacles.
The initiator, clothed in white, standing between seven
golden candlesticks and holding seven stars in his hand,
represents the unique doctrine of Hermes and the universal
analogies of the light. The woman clothed with the sun
and crowned with twelve stars is the celestial Isis, or the
gnosis; the serpent of material life seeks to devour her
child, but she takes unto herself the wings of the eagle and
flies away into the desert—a protestation of the prophetic
spirit) against the materialism of official religion. The
mighty angel with the face of a sun, a rainbow for nimbus,
and a cloud for vestment, having pillars of fire for his legs,
and setting one foot upon the earth and another on the sea,
is truly a kabbalistic Panthea. His feet represent the
equilibrium of Briah, or the world of forms; his legs are
the two pillars of the Masonic temple, Jakin and Bohas;
his body, veiled by clouds, from which issues a hand holding
a book, is the sphere of Jetzirah, or initiatory ordeals; his
solar head, crowned with the radiant septenary, is the world
of Atziluth, or perfect revelation; and we can only be
excessively astonished that Hebrew kabbalists have not rec¬
ognised and made known this symbolism, which so closely
and inseparably connects the highest mysteries of Chris¬
tianity with the secret but invariable doctrine of all the mas¬
ters in Israel. The beast with seven heads, in the symbolism
of St John, is the material and antagonistic negation of the
luminous septenary; the Babylonian harlot corresponds
after the same manner to the woman clothed with the sun;
the four horsemen are analogous to the four allegorical
animals; the seven angels with their seven trumpets, seven
cups, and seven swords characterise the absolute of the
struggle of good against evil by speech, by religious associa¬
tion, and by force. Thus are the seven seals of the occult
book successively opened, and universal initiation is accom¬
plished. The commentators who have sought anything else

                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  269

in this book of the transcendent Kabbalah have lost their
time and their trouble ony to make themselves ridiculous.
To discover Napoleon in the angel Apollyon, Luther in the
star which falls from heaven, Voltaire or Rousseau in the
grasshoppers armed like warriors, is merely high fantasy.
It is the same with all the violence done to the names of
celebrated persons so as to make them numerically equiva¬
lent to the fatal number 666, which we have already suf¬
ficiently explained; and when we think that men like Bos-
suet and Newton amused themselves with such chimeras^
wre can understand that humanity is not so malicious in its
nature as might be supposed from the complexion of its
vices.




                      y

270               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                      CHAPTER XI

                     THE TRIPLE CHAIN

The great work in   practical magic, after the education of
the will and the personal creation of the magus, is the for¬
mation of the magnetic chain, and this secret is truly that
of priesthood and of royalty. To form the magnetic chain
is to orginate a current of ideas which produces faith and
draws a large number of wills in a given circle of active
manifestation. A well-formed chain is like a whirlpool
which sucks down and absorbs all. The chain may be es¬
tablished in three ways—by signs, by speech, and by con¬
tact. The first is by inducing opinion to adopt some sign
as the representation of a force. Thus, all Christians com¬
municate by the sign of the cross, masons by that of the
square beneath the sun, the magi by that of the microcosm,
made by extending the five fingers, etc. Once accepted and
propagated, signs acquire force of themselves. In the early
centuries of our era, the sight and imitation of the sign of
the cross was enough to make proselytes to Christianity.
What is called the miraculous medal continues in our own
days to effect a great number of conversions by the same
magnetic law. The vision and illumination of the young
Israelite, Alphonse de Ratisbonne, is the most remarkable
fact of this kind. Imagination is creative not only within
us but without us by means of our fluidic prejections, and
undoubtedly the phenomena of the labarum of Constantine
and the cross of Migne should be attributed to no other
cause.
   The magic chain of speech was typified among the an¬
cients by chains of gold, which issued from the mouth of
Hermes.     Nothing equals the electricity of eloquence.
Speech creates the highest intelligence in the most grossly
constituted masses. Even those who are too remote for

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    271

 actual hearing understand by excitement, and are carried
 away with the crowd. Peter the Hermit convulsed Europe
 by his cry of ‘£ God wills it! ’ ’ A single word of the Em¬
 peror electrified his army, and made France invincible.
 Proudhon destroyed socialism by his celebrated paradox:
    Property is robbery. ’ ’ A current saying is frequently suf¬
 ficient to overturn a reigning power. Voltaire knew this
 well who shook the world by sarcasms.. So, also, he who
 feared neither pope nor king, neither parliament nor Bas¬
 tille, was afraid of a pun. We are on the verge of accom¬
 plishing the intentions of that man whose sayings we repeat.
    The third method of establishing the magic chain is by
 contact. Between persons who meet frequently, the head
 of the current soon manifests, and the strongest will is not
 slow to absorb the others. The direct and positive grasp of
hand by hand completes the harmony of dispositions and it
 is for this reason a mark of sympathy and intimacy. Chil¬
 dren, who are guided instinctively by nature, from the
 magic chain by playing at bars or rounds; then gaiety
spreads, then laughter rings. Circular tables are more
favourable to convivial feasts than those of any other shape.
 The great circular dance of the Sabbath, which con¬
cluded the mysterious assemblies of adepts in the middle
ages, was a magic chain, which joined all in the same inten¬
tions and the same acts. It was formed by standing back
to back and linking hands, the face outside the circle, in
imitation of those antique sacred dances, representations of
which are still found on the sculptures of old temples. The
electric furs of the lynx, panther, and even domestic cat,
were stitched to their garments, in imitation of the ancient
bacchanalia; hence comes the tradition that the Sabbath
miscreants each wore a cat hung from the girdle, and that
they danced in this guise.
    The phenomena of tilting and talking tables has been a
fortuitous manifestation of fluidic communication by means
of the circular chain. Mystification combined with it after¬
wards, and even educated and intelligent persons were so

272               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


infatuated with the novelty that they hoaxed themselves,
and became the dupes of their own absurdity. The oracles
of the tables were answers more or less voluntarily sug¬
gested or extracted by chance; they resembled the conversa¬
tions which we hold or hear in dreams. Other and stranger
phenomena may have been the external manifestations of
imaginations operating in common. We, however, by no
means deny the possible intervention of elementary spirits
in these occurrences, as in those of divination by cards or
by dreams; but we do not believe that it has been in any
sense proven, and we are therefore in no way obliged to
admit it.
   One of the most extraordinary powers of human imagina¬
tion is the realisation of the desires of the will, or even of
its apprehensions and fears. We believe easily anything
that we fear or desire, says a proverb; and it is true, be¬
cause desire and fear impart to imagination a realising
power, the effects of which are incalculable. How is one
attacked, for example, by a disease about which one feels
nervous? We have already cited the opinions of Para¬
celsus on this point, and have established in our doctrinal
part the occult laws confirmed by experience; but in mag¬
netic currents, and by mediation of the chain, the realisa¬
tions are all the more strange because almost invariably un¬
expected, at least when the chain has not been formed by
an intelligent, sympathetic, and powerful leader. In fact,
they are the result of purely blind and fortuitous com¬
binations. The vulgar fear of superstitious feasters, when
they find themselves thirteen at table, and their conviction
that some misfortune threatens the youngest and weakest
among them, is, like most superstitions, a remnant of magi¬
cal science. The duodenary being a complete and cyclic
number in the universal analogies of nature, invariably at¬
tracts and absorbs the thirteenth, which is regarded as a
sinister and superfluous number. If the grindstone of a
mill be represented by the number twelve, then thirteen is
that of the grain which is to be ground. On kindred con-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   273

siderations, the ancients established the distinctions be¬
tween lucky and unlucky numbers, whence came the ob¬
servance of days of good or evil augury. It is in such
concerns, above all, that imagination is creative, so that
both days and numbers seldom fail to be propitious or other¬
wise to those who believe in their influence. Consequently,
Christianity was right in proscribing the divinatory
sciences, for} in thus diminishing the number of blind
chances, it gave further scope and empire to liberty.
   Printing is an admirable instrument for the formation of
the magic chain by the extension of speech. No book is
lost; as a fact, writings go invariably precisely where they
should go, and the aspirations of thought attract speech.
We have proved this a hundred times in the course of our
magical initiation; the rarest books have offered them¬
selves without seeking as soon as they became indispensable.
Thus have we recovered intact that universal science which
so many learned persons have regarded as engulfed by a
number of successive cataclysms; thus have we entered the
great magical chain which began with Hermes or Enoch, and
will only end with the world. Thus have we been able to
evoke, and come face to face with, the spirits of Apollonius,
Plotinus, Synesius, Paracelsus, Cardanus, Agrippa, and
others less or more known, but too religiously celebrated to
make it possible for them to be named lightly. We continue
their great work, which others will take up after us. But
unto whom will it be given to complete it?

274               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                      CHAPTER XII

                      THE GREAT WORK

To be ever rich, to be always young, and to die never; such,
from all time, has been the dream of the alchemists. To
change lead, mercury, and all other metals into gold, to
possess the universal medicine and the elixir of life—such
is the problem which must be solved to accomplish this
desire and to realise this dream. Like all magical mysteries,
the secrets of the great work have a triple meaning; they
are religious, philosophical, and natural. The philosophical
gold in religion is the absolute and supreme reason; in phi¬
losophy, it is truth; in visible nature, it is the sun; in the
subterranean and mineral world, it is the purest and most
perfect gold. Hence the search after the great work is called
the search for the absolute, and this work itself is termed
the operation of the sun. All masters of science recognise
that it is impossible to achieve material results until we
have found all the analogies of the universal medicine and
the philosophical stone in the two superior degrees. Then,
it is affirmed, is the labour simple, light, and inexpensive;
otherwise, it consumes to no purpose the life and fortune of
the bellows-blower.
   The universal medicine is, for the soul, supreme reason
and absolute justice; for the mind, it is mathematical and
practical truth; for the body, it is the quintessence, which
is a combination of gold and light. In the superior world,
the first mater of the great work is enthusiasm and activity;
in the intermediate world, it is intelligence and industry;
in the inferior world, it is labour; in science it is sulphur,
mercury, and salt, which, volatilised and fixed alternately,
compose the Azoth of the sages. Sulphur corresponds to
the elementary form of fire, mercury to air and water, salt
to earth. All the masters in alchemy who have written con-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    275

cerning the great work have employed symbolical and fig¬
urative expressions, and have rightly done so, as much to
deter the profane from a work which would, for them, be
dangerous, as to make themselves intelligible to adepts, by
revealing the entire world of analogies wThich is ruled by
the one and sovereign dogma of Hermes. For such, gold
and silver are the sun and moon, or the king and queen;
sulphur is the flying eagle; mercury is the winged and
bearded hermaphrodite, throned upon a cube and crowned
with flames; matter or salt is the winged dragon; metals in
the molten state are lions of various colours; finally, the
whole work is symbolised by the pelican and phoenix. Her¬
metic art is, therefore, at one and the same time, a religion,
a philosophy, and a natural science. Considered as relig¬
ion, it is that of the ancient magi and the initiates of all the
ages; as a philosophy, its priciples may be found in the
school of Alexandria and in the theories of Pythagoras; as
science, its priciples must be sought from Paracelsus, Nich¬
olas Flamel, and Raymund Lully. The science is true only
for those who accept and understand the philosophy and
religion, and its processes are successful only for the adept
who has attained sovereign volition, and has thus become
the monarch of the elementary world, for the great agent
of the solar work is that force described in the Hermetic
symbol of the Emerald Table; it is universal magical power;
it is the igneous spiritual motor; it is the Od of the He¬
brews, and the astral light, according to the expression we
have adopted in this work. There is the secret, living, and
philosophical fire, of which all Hermetic philosophers speak
only with the most mysterious reservations ; there is the
universal sperm, the secret of which they guarded, repre¬
senting it only under the emblem of the caduceus of Hermes.
Here then is the great Hermetic arcanum, and we reveal
it for the first time clearly and devoid of mystical figures;
what the adepts term dead substances are bodies as found
in nature; living substances are those which have been as¬
similated and magnetised by the science and will of the

276              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


operator. Therefore the great work is something more than
a chemical operation; it is an actual creation of the human
Word initiated into the power of the Word of God himself.

                           : naan
                 'Ton biv npj « bn Tn:n
                 firm vnwn rn:on Kin 'D
                 hi nmsm craann
                 bib   rrroi   hn   dhd   ihk
                 Sk      aruiyoo
                             : nnivm nAion
   This Hebrew text which we transcribe in proof of the
authenticity and reality of our discovery, is derived from
the rabbinical Jew Abraham, the master of Nicholas Flamel,
and is found in his occult commentary on the Sepher
Jetzirah, the sacred book of the Kabbalah. This commen¬
tary is extremely rare, but the sympathetic potencies of our
chain led us to the discovery of a copy which has been pre¬
served since the year 1643 in the protestant church at
Rouen. On its first page there is written: Ex dono, then an
illegible name: Dei magni.
   The creation of gold in the great work takes place by
transmutation and multiplication. Raymund Lully states
that in order to make gold we must have gold and mercury,
while in order to make silver we must have silver and mer¬
cury. Then he adds: “By mercury, I understand that
mineral spirit which is so refined and purified that it gilds
the seed of gold, and silvers the seed of silver.’* Doubtless
he is here speaking of Od, or astral light. Salt and sulphur
are serviceable in the work only for the preparation of
mercury; it is with mercury above all that the magnetic
agent must be assimilated and incorporated. Paracelsus,
Raymund Lully, and Nicholas Flamel seem alone to have
perfectly understood this mystery. Basil Valentine and
 Trevisan indicate it after an incomplete manner, which
might be capable of another interpretation. But quite the
most curious things which we have found on this subject

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    277

are indicated by the mystical figures and magical legends
in a book of Henry Khunrath, entitled Amphitkeatrum
Sapientioe Aiternce. Khunrath represents and resumes the
most learned Gnostic schools, and connects in symbology
with the mysticism of Synesius. He affects Christianity in
expressions and in signs, but it is easy to see that his Christ
is the Abraxas, the luminous pentagram radiating on the
astronomical cross, the incarnation in humanity of the
sovereign sun celebrated by the Emperor Julian; it is the
luminous and living manifestation of that Kuach-Elohim
which, according to Moses, brooded and worked upon the
bosom of the waters at the birth of the world; it is the
man-sun, the monarch of light, the supreme magus, the
master and conqueror of the serpent, and in the four-fold
legend of the evangelists, Khunrath finds the allegorical key
of the great work. One of the pantacles of his magical book
represents the philosophical stone erected in the middle of
a fortress surrounded by a wall in which there are twenty
impracticable gates. One alone conducts to the sanctuary
of the great, work. Above the stone there is a triangle
placed upon a winged dragon, and on the stone is graven
the name of Christ qualified as the symbolical image of all
nature. “It is by him alone,” he adds, “that thou canst
obtain the universal medicine for men, animals, vegetables,
and minerals. ’ * The winged dragon, ruled by the triangle,
represents, therefore, the Christ of Khunrath; that is, the
sovereign intelligence of light and life; it is the secret of
the pentagram; it is the highest dogmatic and practical
mystery of traditional magic. Thence unto the grand and
ever incommunicable maxim there is only one step.
   The kabbalistic figures of Abraham the Jew, which im¬
parted to Flamel the first desire for knowledge, are no other
than the twenty-two keys of the Tarot, elsewhere initiated
and resumed in the twelve keys of Basil Valentine. There
the sun and moon reappear under the figures of emperor
and empress; Mercury is the juggler; the Great Hierophant
is the adept or abstractor of the quintessence; death, judg-

278               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


ment, love, the dragon or devil, the hermit or lame elder,
and, finally, all the remaining symbols are there found with
their chief attributes, and almost in the same order. It
could have scarcely been otherwise, since the Tarot is the
primeval book and the keystone of the occult sciences; it
must be Hermetic, because it is kabbalistic, magical, and
theosophical. So, also, we find in the combination of its
twelfth and twenty-second keys, superposed one upon the
other, the hieroglyphic revelation of the solution of the
trees or posts, forming the Hebrew letter ^ ; the man’s arms
grand work and its mysteries. The twelfth key represents
a man hanging by one foot from a gibbet composed of three
constitute a triangle with his head, and his entire hiero-
glyphical shape is that of a reversed triangle surmounted by
a cross, an alchemical symbol known to all adepts, and rep¬
resenting the accomplishment of the great work.             The
twenty-second key, which bears the number twenty-one,
because the fool which precedes it carries no numeral,
represents a youthful female divinity slightly veiled and
running in a flowering circle, supported at four corners by
the four beasts of the Kabbalah. In the Italian Tarot this
divinity has a rod in either hand; in the Besancon Tarot,
the two wands are in one hand while the other is placed
upon her thigh, both equally remarkable symbols of mag¬
netic action, either alternate in its polarisation, or simulta¬
neous by opposition and transmission.
   The great work of Hermes is, therefore, an essentially
magical operation, and the highest of all, for it supposes
the absolute in science and volition. There is light in gold,
gold in light, and light in all things. The intelligent will,
which assimilates the light, directs in this manner the opera¬
tions of substantial form, and uses chemistry solely as a
secondary instrument. The influence of human will and
intelligence upon the operations of nature, dependent in
part on its labour, is otherwise a fact so real that all serious
alchemists have succeeded in proportion to their knowledge
and their faith, and have reproduced their thought in the

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    279

phenomena of the fusion, salification, and recomposition of
metals. Agrippa, who was a man of immense erudition and
fine genius, but pure philosopher and sceptic, could not
transcend the limits of metallic analysis and synthesis.
Etteilla, a confused, obscure, fantastic, but persevering kab-
balist, reproduced in alchemy the eccentricities of his mis¬
construed and mutilated Tarot; metals in his crucibles as¬
sumed extraordinary forms, which excited the curiosity of
all Paris, with no greater profit to the operator than the fees
which were paid by his visitors. An obscure bellows-blower
of our own time, who died mad, poor Louis Cambriel,
really cured his neighbours, and, by the evidence of all his
parish, brought back to life a smith who was his friend.
For him the metallic work took the most inconceivable and
apparently illogical forms. One day he .beheld the figure
of God himself in his crucible, incandescent like the sun,
transparent as crystal, his body composed of triangular
conglomerations, which Cambriel naively compared to
quantities of tiny pearls.
   One of our friends, who is a learned kabbalist, but be¬
longs to an initiation which we regard as erroneous, per¬
formed recently the chemical operations of the great work,
and succeeded in weakening his eyes through the execssive
brilliance of the Athanor. He created a new metal which
resembles gold, but is not gold, and hence has no value.
Raymund Lully, Nicholas Flamel, and most probably Henry
Khunrath, made true gold, nor did they take away their
secret with them, for it is enclosed in their symbols, and
they have further indicated the sources from which they
drew for its discovery and for the realisation of its effects.
It is this same secret which we now ourselves make public.

280               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                     CHAPTER XIII

                        NECROMANCY

We have boldly declared our opinion, or rather our convic¬
tion, as to the possibility of resurrection in certain cases;
it remains for us now to complete the revelation of this
arcanum and to expose its practice. Death is a phantom of
ignorance; it does not exist; everything in nature is living,
and it is because it is alive that everything is in motion and
undergoes incessant change of form. Old age is the begin¬
ning of regeneration, it is the labour of renewing life, and
the ancients represented the mystery we term death by the
Fountain of Youth, which was entered in decrepitude and
left in new childhood. The body is a garment of the soul.
When this garment is completely worn out, or seriously and
irreparably rent, it is abandoned and never reassumed. But
when this garment is removed by some accident ivithout
being worn out or destroyed, it can, in certain cases, be put
on again, either by our own efforts or by the assistance
of a stronger and more active will than ours. Death is
neither the end of life nor the beginning of immortality;
it is the continuation and transformation of life. Now, a
transformation being always a progress, few of those who
are apparently dead will consent to return to life, that is, to
reassume the vestment which they have left behind. It is
this which makes resurrection one of the hardest works of
the highest initiation, and hence its success is never in¬
fallible, but must be regarded almost invariably as acci¬
dental and unexpected. To raise up a dead person we must
suddenly and energetically rebind the most powerful chains
of attraction which connect it with the body that it has just
 quitted. It is, therefore, necessary to be previously ac-
quained with this chain, then to seize thereon, finally to
 produce an effort of will sufficiently powerful to instan-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      281

taneously and irresistibly relink it. All this, as we say, is
extremely difficult, but is in no sense absolutely impossible.
The prejudices of materialistic science exclude resurrection
at present from the natural order, and hence there is a
disposition to explain all phenomena of this class by lethar¬
gies more or less complicated with signs of death, and more
or less long in duration. If Lazarus rose again before our
doctors, they would simply record in their memorials to
recognized academies a strange case of lethargy accom¬
panied by an apparent beginning of putrefaction and a
strong corpse-like odour; the exceptional occurrence would
be labelled with a becoming name, and the matter would
be at an end. We have no wish to frighten anyone, and if,
out of respect for the men with diplomas who represent
science officially, it is requisite to term our theories concern¬
ing resurection the art of curing exceptional and aggra¬
vated trances, nothing, I hope, will hinder us from making
such a concession. But if ever a resurrection has taken
place in the world, it is incontestable that resurrection is
possible. Now, constituted bodies protect religion, and re¬
ligion positively asserts the fact of resurrections; therefore
resurrections are possible. From this escape is difficult.
To say that they are possible outside the laws of nature,
and by an influence contrary to universal harmony, is to
affirm that the spirit of disorder, darkness, and death, can
be the sovereign arbiter of life. Let us not dispute with the
worshippers of the devil, but pass on.
   It is not religion alone which attests the facts of resur¬
rection ; we have collected a number of cases. An occur¬
rence which impressed the imagination of Greuze, the
painter, has been reproduced by him in one of his most
remarkable pictures. An unworthy son, present at his
father’s deathbed, seizes and destroys a will unfavourable
to himself; the father rallies, leaps up, curses his son, and
then drops back dead a second time. An analogous and
more recent fact has been certified to ourselves by ocular
witnesses: a friend, betraying the confidence of one who

282               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


had just died, tore up a trust-deed he had signed, where¬
upon the dead person rose up, and lived to defend the rights
of his chosen heirs, which his false friend sought to set
aside; the guilty person went mad, and the risen man com¬
passionately allowed him a pension. When the Saviour
raised up the daughter of Jairus, He was alone with three
faithful and favoured disciples; He dismissed the noisy and
the loud mourners, saying, ‘ * The girl is not dead but sleep¬
ing. ’ ’ Then, in the presence only of the father, the mother,
and the three disciples, that is to say, in a perfect circle of
confidence and desire, He took the child’s hand, drew her
abruptly up, and cried to her, “ Young girl, I say to thee,
arise!” The -undecided soul, doubtless in the immediate
vicinity of the body, and possibly regretting its extreme
youth and beauty, was surprised by the accents of that
voice, which was heard by her father and mother trembling
with hope, and on their knees; it returned into the body;
the maiden opened her eyes, rose up, and the Master com¬
manded immediately that food should be given her, so that
the functions of life might begin a new cycle of absorption
and regeneration. The history of Eliseus, raising up the
daughter of the Shunamite, and St Paul raising Eutychus,
are facts of the same order; the resurection of Dorcas by
St Peter, narrated so simply in the Acts of the Apostles,
is also a history the truth of which can scarcely be reason¬
ably questioned. Apollonius of Tyana seems also to have
accomplished similar miracles, and we ourselves have been
the witness of facts which are not wanting in analogy with
these, but the spirit of the century in which we live imposes
in this respect the most careful reserve upon us, the
thaumaturge being liable to a very indifferent reception at
the hands of a discerning public—all which does not hinder
the earth from revolving, or Galileo from having been a
great man.
  The resurrection of a dead person is the masterpiece of
magnetism, because it needs for its accomplishment the
exercise of a kind of sympathetic omnipotence. It is pos-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   283

sible in the case of death by congestion, by suffocation, by
exhaustion, or by hysteria. Eutychus, who was resuscitated
by St Paul, after falling from a third story, was doubtless
not seriously injured internally, but had succumbed to
asphyxia, occasioned by the rush of air during his fall, or
alternatively to the violent shock and to terror. In a par¬
allel case, he who feels conscious of the power and faith
necessary for such an accomplishment, must, like the
apostle, practise insufflation, mouth to mouth, combined
with contact of the extremities for the restoration of
warmth. Were it simply a matter of what the ignorant
call miracle, Elias and St Paul, who made use of the same
procedure, would simply have spoken in the name of Je¬
hovah or of Christ. It is occasionally enough to take the
person by the hand, and raise them quickly, calling them
in a loud voice. This procedure, which commonly suc¬
ceeds in swoons, may even have effect upon the dead, when
the magnetizer who exercises it is endowed with speech
powerfully sympathetic and possesses what may be called
eloquence of tone. He must also be tenderly loved or
greatly respected by the person on whom he would operate,
and he must perform the work with a great burst of faith
and will, which we do not always find ourselves to possess
in the first shock of a great sorrow.
   What is vulgarly called necromancy has nothing in com¬
mon with resurrection, and it is at least highly doubtful
that in operations connected with this application of magical
power, we really come into correspondence with the souls of
the dead whom we evoke. There are two kinds of necro¬
mancy, that of light and that of darkness, the evocation by
prayer, pantacle, and perfumes, and the evocation by blood,
imprecations, and sacrileges. We have only practised the
first, and advise no one to devote themselves to the second.
It is certain that the images of the dead do appear to the
magnetized persons who evoke them; it is certain also that
they never reveal any mysteries of the life beyond. They
are beheld as they still exist in the memories of those who

284               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


knew them, and, doubtless, as their reflections have left
them impressed on the astral light. When evoked spectres
reply to questions addressed them, it is always by signs or
by interior and imaginary impression, never with a voice
which really strikes the ears, and this is comprehensible
 enough, for how should a shadow speak? With what
 instrument could it cause the air to vibrate by impressing it
in such a manner as to make distinct sounds ? At the same
time, electrical contacts are experienced from apparitions,
and sometimes appear to be produced by the hand of the
phantom, but the phenomenon is wholly subjective, and is
occasioned solely by the power of imagination and the local
wealth of the occult force which we term the astral light.
 The proof of this is that spirits, or at least the spectres
pretended to be such, may indeed occasionally touch us, but
we cannot touch them, and this is one of the most affright¬
ing characteristics of these apparitions, which are at times
so real in appearance that we cannot unmoved feel the hand
pass through that which seems a body without touching or
meeting anything.
   We read in ecclesiastical historians that Spiridion, Bishop
of Tremithonte, afterwards invoked as a saint, called up
the spirit of his daughter, Irene, to ascertain from her the
whereabouts of some concealed money which she had taken
in charge for a traveller.        Swedenborg communicated
habitually with the so-called dead, whose forms appeared
to him in the astral light. Several credible persons of our
acquaintance have assured us that they have been revisited
for years by the dead who were dear to them. The cele¬
brated atheist Sylvanus Marechal manifested to his widow
and one of her friends, to acquaint her concerning a sum of
1500 francs which he had concealed in a secret drawer.
This anecdote was related to us by an old friend of the
family.
  Evocations should have always a motive and a becoming
end; otherwise, they are works of darkness and folly, most
dangerous for health and reason. To evoke out of pure

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    285

curiosity, and to find out whether we shall see anything, is
to be predisposed to fruitless fatigue. The transcendental
sciences admit of neither doubt nor puerility. The per¬
missible motive of an evocation may be either love or
intelligence. Evocations of love require less apparatus and
are in every respect easier. The procedure is as follows:
We must, in the first place, carefully collect the memorials
 of him (or her) whom we desire to behold, the articles
he used, and on which his impression remains; we must
 also prepare an apartment in which the person lived, or
otherwise one of similar kind, and place his portrait veiled
 in white therein, surrounded with his favourite flowers,
which must be renewed daily. A fixed date must then be
 observed, either the birthday of the person, or that day
 which was most fortunate for his and our own affection, one
 of which we may believe that his soul, however blessed
 elsewhere, cannot lose the remembrance; this must be the
 day for the evocation, and we must provide for it during
 the space of fourteen days. Throughout this period we
 must refrain from extending to any one the same proofs of
 affection which we have the right to expect from the dead;
 we must observe strict chastity, live in retreat, and take
 only one modest and light collation daily. Every evening
 at the same hour we must shut ourselves in the chamber
 consecrated to the memory of the lamented person, using
 only one small light, such as that of a funeral lamp or
 taper. This light should be placed behind us, the portrait
 should be uncovered, and we should remain before it for an
 hour, in silence; finally, we should fumigate the apartment
 with a little good incense, and go out backwards. On the
 morning of the day fixed for the evocation, we should adorn
 ourselves as if for a festival, not salute any one first, make
 but a single repast of bread, wine, and roots, or fruits; the
 cloth should be white, two covers should be laid, and one
 portion of the bread broken should be set aside; a little
 wine should also be placed in the glass of the person we
 design to invoke. The meal must be eaten alone in the

286                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 chamber of evocations, and in presence of the veiled por¬
 trait; it must be all cleared away at the end, except the
 glass belonging to the dead person, and his portion of
 bread, which must be placed before the portrait. In the
 evening, at the hour for the regular visit, we must repair in
 silence to the chamber, light a clear fire of cypress-wood,
 and cast incense seven times thereon, pronouncing the name
 of the person whom we desire to behold. The lamp must
 then be extinguished, and the fire permitted to die out. On
 this day the portrait must not be unveiled. When the flame
 is extinct, put more incense on the ashes, and invoke God
 according to the forms of the religion to which the dead
 person belonged, and according to the ideas which he him¬
 self possessed of God. While making this prayer, we must
 identify ourselves with the evoked person, speak as he
 spoke, believe in a sense as he believed; then, after a silence
 of fifteen minutes, we must speak to him as if he were
 present, with affection and with faith, praying him to
manifest to us. Renew this prayer mentally, covering the
 face with both hands; then call him thrice with a loud
voice; tarry on our knees, the eyes closed or covered, for
some minutes; then again call thrice upon him in a sweet
and affectionate tone, and slowly open the eyes. Should
nothing result, the same experiment must be renewed in
the following year, and if necessary a third time, when it is
certain that the desired apparition will be obtained, and the
longer it has been delayed the more realistic and striking
it will be.
   Evocations of knowledge and intelligence are made with
more solemn ceremonies. If concerned with a celebrated
personage, we must meditate for twenty-one days upon his
life and writings, form an idea of his appearance, converse
with him mentally, and imagine his answers; carry his
portrait, or at least his name, about us; follow a vegetable
diet for twenty-one days, and a severe fast during the last
seven. We must next construct the magical oratory, de¬
scribed in the thirteenth chapter of our Doctrine. This

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   287

oraory must be invariably darkened; but if we operate
in the daytime, we may leave a narrow aperture on the
side where the sun will shine at the hour of evocation, and
place a triangular prism before this opening, and a crystal
globe, filled with water, before the prism. If the operation
be arranged for night, the magic lamp must be so placed
that is single ray shall fall upon the altar smoke. The
purpose of these preparations is to furnish the magic agent
with elements of corporeal appearance, and to ease as much
as possible the tension of imagination, which could not be
exalted without danger into the absolute illusion of dream.
For the rest, it will be easily understood that a beam of
sunlight, or the ray of a lamp, coloured variously, and fall¬
ing upon curling and irregular smoke, can in no way create
a perfect image. The chafing-dish containing the sacred
fire should be in the centre of the oratory, and the altar of
perfumes hard by. The operator must turn towards the
east to pray, and the west to invoke; he must be either
alone or assisted by two persons preserving the strictest
silence; he must wear the magical vestments, which we
have described in the seventh chapter, and must be crowned
with vervain and gold. He should bathe before the opera¬
tion, and all his under garments must be of the most intact
and scrupulous cleanliness. The ceremony should begin
with a prayer suited to the genius of the spirit about to be
invoked, and one which would be approved by himself if he
still lived. For example, it would be impossible to evoke
Voltaire by reciting prayers in the style of St Bridget. For
the great men of antiquity, we may use the hymns of
Cleanthes or Orpheus, with the adjuration terminating'the
Golden Verses of Pythagoras. In our own evocation of
Apollonius, we used the magical philosophy of Patricius
for the ritual, containing the doctrines of Zoroaster and
the writings of Hermes Trismegistus. We recited the
Nuctemeron of Apollonius in Greek with a loud voice,
and added the following conjuration:—
   Vouchsafe to be present, 0 Father of All, and thou

288               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


Thrice Mighty Hermes, Conductor of the Dead. Asclepius,
son of Hephaistus, Patron of the Healing Art: and thou
Osiris, Lord of strength and vigour, do thou thyself be
present too. Amebaseenis, Patron of Philosophy, and yet
again Asclepius, son of Imuthe, who presidest over
poetry . . .
        •      ••••••

   Apollonius, Apollonius, Apollonius! Thou teachest the
Magic of Zoroaster, son of Oromasdes; and this is the wor¬
ship of the Gods.
   For the evocation of spirits belonging to religions issued
from Judaism, the following kabbalistic invocation of Solo¬
mon should be used, either in Hebrew, or in any other
tongue with which the spirit in question is known to have
been familiar:—
   Powers of the Kingdom, be ye under my left foot and in
my right hand! Glory and Eternity, take me by the two
shoulders, and direct me in the paths of victory! Mercy
and Justice, be ye the equilibrium and splendour of my
life!   Intelligence and Wisdom, crown me!         Spirits of
Malchuth, lead me betwixt the two pillars upon which
rests the whole edifice of the temple! Angels of Netsah
and PIod, strengthen me upon the cubic stone of Jesod!
O Gedulael ! 0 Geburael ! O Tiphereth ! Binael, be thou
my love! Ruach Hochmael, be thou my light! Be that
which thou art and thou shalt be, 0 Ketheriel! Ischim,
assist me in the name of Saddai ! Cherubim, be my strength
in the name of Adonai! Beni-Elohim, be my brethren in
the name of the Son, and by the powers of Zebaoth !
Elo'im, do battle for me in the name of Tetragrammaton !
Malachim, protect me in the name of Jod He Vau He!
Seraphim, cleanse my love in the name of Elvoh ! Hasmalim,
enlighten me with the splendours of Eloi and Shechinah!
Aralim, act!      Ophanim, revolve and shine! Hajoth a
Kadosh, cry, speak, roar, bellow! Kadosh, Kadosh, Ka-
dosh, Saddai, Adonai, Jotchavah, Eieazereie! Hallelu¬
jah, Hallelu-jah, Hallelu-jah. Amen.

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     289

     It should be remembered above all, in conjurations, that
  the names of Satan, Beelzebub, Adramelek, and others do
  not designate spiritual unities, but legions of impure spirits.
    Our name is legion, for we are many, ’ ’ says the spirit of
  darkness in the Gospel. Number constitutes the law, and
  progress takes place inversely in hell—that is to say, the
  most advanced in Satanic development, and consequently
  the most degraded, are the least intelligent and feeblest.
  Thus, a fatal law drives the demons downward when they
  wish and believe themselves to be ascending. So also those
  who term themselves chiefs are the most impotent and
  despised of all. As to the horde of perverse spirits, they
 tremble before an unknown, invisible, incomprehensible,
 capricious, implacable chief, who never explains his laws,
 whose arm is ever stretched out to strike those who fail to
 understand him. They give this phantom the names of
 Baal, Jupiter, and even others more venerable, which can¬
 not, without profanation, be pronounced in hell. But this
 phantom is only the shadow and remnant of God, disfigured
 by their wilful perversity, and persisting in their imagina¬
 tion like a vengeance of justice and a remorse of truth.
    When the evoked spirit of light manifests with dejected
 or irritated countenance, we must offer him a moral sacri¬
 fice, that is, be inwardly disposed to renounce whatever of¬
 fends him; and before leaving the oratory, we must dismiss
him, saying: ‘ ‘ May peace be with thee! I have not wished
to trouble thee; do thou torment me not. I shall labour to
improve myself as to anything that vexes thee. I pray, and
will still pray, with thee and for thee. Pray thou also both
with and for me, and return to thy great slumber, expecting
that day when we shall awake together.              Silence and
adieu!”
    We must not close this chapter without giving some de¬
tails on black magic for the benefit of the curious. The
practices of Thessalian sorcerers and Roman Canidias are
described by several ancient authors. In the first place,
a pit was dug, at the mouth of which they cut the throat

290                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


  of a black sheep; the psylla* and larva* presumed to be
  present, and swarming round to drink the blood, were
  driven off with the magic sword; the triple Hecate and the
  infernal gods were evoked, and the phantom whose appari¬
  tion was desired was called upon three times. In the middle
  ages, necromancers violated tombs, composed philtres and
  unguents with the fat and blood of corpses combined with
  aconite, belladonna, and poisonous fungi; they boiled and
  skimmed these frightful compounds over fires nourished
  with human bones and crucifixes stolen from churches;
  they added dust of dried toads and ash of consecrated hosts;
' they anointed their temples, hands, and breasts with the
  infernal unguent, traced the diabolical pantacles, evoked
  the dead beneath gibbets or in deserted graveyards. Their
  howlings were heard from afar, and belated travellers
  imagined that legions of phantoms rose out of the earth;
  the very trees, in their eyes, assumed appalling shapes;
  fiery orbs gleamed in the thickets; frogs in the marshes
  seemed to echo mysterious words of the Sabbath with croak¬
  ing voices. It was the magnetism of hallucination, the
  contagion of madness.
     The end of procedure in black magic was to disturb
  reason and produce the feverish excitement which em¬
  boldens to great crimes. The grimoires, formerly seized
  and burnt by authority everywhere, are certainly not harm¬
  less books. Sacrilege, murder, theft, are indicated or hinted
  as means to realisation in almost all these works. Thus, in
  the Great Grimoire, and its modem version, the Red
  Dragon, there is a recipe entitled “Composition of Death,
  or Philosophical Stone,” a broth of aqua fortis, copper,
  arsenic, and verdigris. There are also necromatic processes,
  comprising the tearing up of earth from graves with the
  nails, dragging out bones, placing them crosswise on the
  breast, then assisting at midnight mass on Christmas eve,
  and flying out of the church at the moment of consecra¬
  tion, crying: “Let the dead rise from their tombs!”—
  then returning to the graveyard, taking a handful of earth

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    291

nearest to the coffin, running back to the door of the church,
which has been alarmed by the clamour, depositing the two
bones crosswise, again shouting: “Let the dead rise from
their tombs,” and then, if we escape being seized and
shut up in a mad-house, retiring at a slow pace, and count¬
ing four thousand five hundred steps in a straight line,
which means following a broad road or scaling walls.
Having traversed this space, you must lie down upon the
earth, place yourself as if in a coffin, and repeat in lugu¬
brious tones: “Let the dead rise from their tombs!”
Finally, call thrice on the person whose apparition you
desire. No doubt any one who is mad enough and wicked
enough to abandon himself to such operations is predis¬
posed to all chimeras and all phantoms. Hence the recipe
of the Grand Grimoire is most efficacious, but we advise
none of our readers to have recourse to it.

292                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                   CHAPTER XIV
                     TRANSMUTATIONS




St    Augustine?  speculates, as we have said, whether
Apuleius could have been changed into an ass and then
have resumed his human shape. The same doctor might
have equally concerned himself with the adventure of the
comrades of Ulysses, transformed into swine by Circe. In
vulgar opinion, transmutations and metamorphoses have
always been the very essence of magic. Now, the crowd,
being the echo of opinion, which is queen of the world, is
never perfectly right nor entirely wrong. Magic really
changes the nature of things, or, rather, modifies their ap¬
pearances at pleasure, according to the strength of the
operator's will and the fascination of ambitious adepts.
Speech creates its form, and when a person, held infallible,
confers a name upon a given thing, he really transforms
that thing into the substance signified by the name. The

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    293

masterpiece of speech and of faith, in this order, is the
real transmutation of a substance without change in its ap¬
pearances. Had Apollonius offered a cup of wine to his
disciples, and said to them: ‘ ‘ This is my blood, of which ye
shall drink henceforth to perpetuate my life within you; ’ ’
and had his disciples through centuries believed that they
continued the transformation by repeating the same words;
had they taken the wine, despite its odour and taste, for the
real, human, and living blood of Apollonius, we should
have to* acknowledge this master in theurgy as the most
accomplished of enchanters and most potent of all the magi.
It would remain for us then to adore him.
   Now, it is well known that mesmerists impart for their
somnambulists any taste that they choose to plain water,
and if we assume a magus having sufficient command over
the astral fluid to magnetize at the same moment a whole
assembly of persons, otherwise prepared for magnetism by
adequate over-excitement, we shall be in a position to ex¬
plain readily, not indeed the Gospel miracle of Cana, but
works of the same class. Are not the fascinations of love,
which result from the universal magic of nature, truly
prodigious, and do they not actually transform persons and
things ? Love is a dream of enchantments that transfigures
the world; all becomes music and fragrance, all intoxication
and felicity. The beloved being is beautiful, is good, is
sublime, is infallible, is radiant, beams with health and
happiness. When the dream ends we seem to have fallen
from the clouds; we are inspired with disgust for the
brazen sorceress who took the place of the lovely Melusine,
for the Thersites whom we deemed was Achilles or Nereus.
What is there we cannot cause the person who loves us to
believe? But also what reason or justice can we instil into
those who no longer love us? Love begins magician and
ends sorcerer. After creating the illusions of heaven on
earth, it realises those of hell; its hatred is absurd like its
ardour, because it is passional, that is, subject to influences
which are fatal for it. For this cause it has been proscribed

294               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


by sages, who declare it to be the enemy of reason. Are
they to be envied or commiserated for thus condemning,
doubtless without understanding, the most alluring of ill-
doers? All that can be said is that when they spoke thus,
they either had not yet loved or they loved no longer.
   Things that are eternal are for us what our word in¬
ternal makes them. To believe that we are happy is to
be happy; what we esteem becomes precious in proportion
to the estimation itself: this is the sense in which we can
say that magic changes the nature of things. The “Meta¬
morphoses” of Ovid are true, but they are allegorical, like
the ‘ ‘ Golden Ass ’9 of rare Apuleius. The life of beings is a
progressive transformation, and its forms can be de¬
termined, renewed, prolonged further, or destroyed sooner.
If the doctrine of metempsychosis were true, might one not
say that the debauch represented by Circe really and ma¬
terially changes men into swine; for, on this hypothesis, the
retribution of vices would be a relapse into animal forms
that correspond to them ? Now, metempsychosis, which has
frequently been misinterpreted, has a perfectly true side;
animal forms communicate their sympathetic impressions to
the astral body of man, which speedily reacts on his apti¬
tudes according to the force of his habits. A man of in¬
telligent and passive mildness assumes the inert physiog¬
nomy and ways of a sheep, but in somnambulism it is a
sheep that is seen, and not a man with a sheepish counte¬
nance, as the ecstatic and learned Swedenborg experienced
a thousand times. In the kabbalistic book of Daniel the
seer, this mystery is represented by the legend of Nabucho-
 donsor changed into a beast, which, after the common fate
 of magical allegories, has been mistaken for an actual his¬
tory. In this way, we can really transform men into ani¬
 mals and animals into men; we can metamorphose plants
 and alter their virtue ; we can endow minerals with ideal
 properties; it is all a question of willing. We can equally
 render ourselves visible or invisible at will, and this helps
 us to explain the mysteries of the ring of Gyges.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   295

   In the first place, let us remove from the mind of our
readers all supposition of the absurd; that is, of an effect
devoid of cause or contradicting its cause. To become in¬
visible one of three things is necessary—the interposition
of some opaque medium between the light and our body, or
between our body and the eyes of the spectators, or the
fascination of the eyes of the spectators in such a manner
that they cannot make use of their sight. Of these methods,
the third only is magical. Have we not all of us observed
that under the government of a strong preoccupation we
look without seeing and hurt ourselves against objects in
front of us? “So do, that seeing they may not see/’ said
the great Initiator, and the history of this grand master
tells us that one day, finding himself on the point of being
stoned in the temple, he made himself invisible and went
out. There is no need to repeat here the mystifications of
popular grimoires about the ring of invisibility. Some
ordain that it shall be composed of fixed mercury, enriched
by a small stone which it is indispensable to find in a
pewit’s nest, and kept in a box of the same metal. The
author of the “Little Albert” ordains that this ring should
be composed of hairs tom from the head of a raging hyena,
which recalls the history of the bell of Rodilard. The only
writers who have discoursed seriously of the ring of Gyges
 are Jamblichus, Porphyry, and Peter of Apono. What
they say is evidently allegorical, and the representation
which they give, or that which can be made from their
 description, proves that they are really speaking of nothing
 but the great magical arcanum. One of the figures depicts
the universal movement, harmonic and equilibrated in im¬
 perishable being; another, which should be formed from
 an amalgam of the seven metals, calls for a description in
 detail. It has a double collet and two precious stonesr—a
 topaz, constellated with the sign of the sun, and an emerald
 with the sign of the moon; it should bear on the inner
 side the occult characters of the planets, and on the outer
 their known signs, twice repeated and in kabbalistic op-

296               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


position to each other; that is, five on the right and five on
the left; the signs of the sun and moon resuming the four
several intelligences of the seven planets. Now, this con¬
figuration is no other than that of a pantaele signifying all
the mysteries of magical doctrine, and here is the occult
significance of the ring: to exercise the omnipotence, of
which ocular fascination is one of the most difficult demon¬
strations to give, we must possess all science and know
how to make use of it.
   Fascination is fulfilled by magnetism. The magus in¬
wardly forbids a whole assembly to see him, and it does
not see him. In this manner he passes through guarded
gates, and departs from prison in the face of his petrified
gaolers. At such times a strange numbness is experienced,
and they recall having seen the magus as if in a dream, but
never till after he has gone. The secret of invisibility,
therefore, wholly consists in a power which is capable of
definition—that of distracting or paralysing attention, so
that the light reaches the visual organ without impressing
the eye of the soul. To exercise this power we must possess
a will accustomed to sudden and energetic actions, great
presence of mind, and skill no less great in causing diver¬
sions among the crowd. Let a man, for example, who is
being pursued by his intending murderers, dart into a side
street, return immediately, and advance with perfect calm¬
ness towards his pursuers, or let him mix with them and
seem to be engaged in the chase, and he will certainly make
himself invisible. A priest who was being hunted in ’93,
with the intention of hanging him from a lamp-post, fled
down a side street, assumed a stooping gait, and leaned
against a corner, with an intensely preoccupied expression;
the crowd of his enemies swept past; not one saw him, or
rather, it never struck anyone to recognise him; it was so
unlikely to be he! The person who desires to be seen
always makes himself observed, and he who would remain
unnoticed effaces himself and disappears. The true ring of
Gyges is the will; it is also the rod of transformations,

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    297

and by its precise and strong formulation it creates the
magical word. The omnipotent terms of enchantments are
those which express this creative power of forms. The
tetragram, which is the supreme word of magic, signifies:
“It is that which it shall be,” and if we apply it to any
transformation whatsoever with full intelligence, it will
renew and modify all things, even in the teeth of evidence
and common sense. The hoc est of the Christian sacrifice
is a translation and application of the tetragram; hence
this simple utterance operates the most complete, most in¬
visible, most incredible, and most clearly affirmed of all
transformations. A still stronger word than that of trans¬
formation has been judged necessary by councils to express
the marvel, that of transubstantiation.
 .The Hebrew terms mn\ K'ttK, rpnN, idk, have been con"
 sidered by all kabbalists as the keys of magical transforma¬
 tion. The Latin words, est, sit, esto, fiat, have the same
 force when pronounced with full understanding. M. de
 Montalembert seriously relates, in his legend of St Elizabeth
 of Hungary, how one day this saintly lady, surprised by her
noble husband, from whom she sought to conceal her good
works, in the act of carrying bread to the poor in her apron,
told him that she was carrying roses, and it proved on in¬
vestigation that she had spoken truly; the loaves had been
changed into roses. This story is a most gracious magical
apologue, and signifies that the truly wise man cannot lie,
that the word of wisdom determines the form of things,
or even their substance independently of their forms. Why,
for example, should not'the noble spouse of St Elizabeth,
a good and firm Christian like herself, and believing im¬
plicitly in the real presence of the Saviour in true human
body upon an altar where he beheld only a wheaten host,
why should he not believe in the real presence of roses in
his wife’s apron under the appearance of bread? She ex¬
hibited him loaves undoubtedly, but as she had said that
they were roses, and as he believed her incapable of the
smallest falsehood, he saw and wished to see roses only.

298               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


This is the secret of the miracle. Another legend narrates
how a saint, whose name has escaped me, finding nothing to
eat on a Lenten day or a Friday, commanded the fowl to
become a fish, and it became a fish. The parable needs
no interpretation, and it recalls a beautiful story of St
Spiridion of Tremithonte, the same who evoked the soul of
his daughter Irene. One Good Friday a traveller reached
the abode of the holy bishop, and as bishops in those days
took Christianity in earnest, and were consequently poor,
Spiridion, who fasted religiously, had in his house only some
salted bacon, which had been made ready for Easter. The
stranger was overcome with fatigue and famished with
hunger; Spiridion offered him the meat, and himself shared
the meal of charity, thus transforming the very flesh which
the Jews regard as of all most impure into a feast of peni¬
tence, transcending the material law by the spirit of the law
itself, and proving himself a true and intelligent disciple
of the man-God, who hath established his elect as the
monarchs of nature in the three worlds.

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    299




                       CHAPTER XV

               THE SABBATH OF THE SORCERERS

 We return once more to that terrible number fifteen, sym-
  bolished in the Tarot by a monster throned upon an altar,
 mitred and horned, having a woman’s breasts and the
 generative organs of a man—a chimera, a malformed
 sphinx, a synthesis of monstrosities ; below this figure we
 read a frank and simple inscription—The Devil. Yes, we
 confront here the phantom of all terrors, the dragon of
 all theogonies, the Ariman of the Persians, the Typhon of
 the Egyptians, the Python of the Greeks, the old serpent
 of the Hebrews, the fantastic monster, the nightmare, the
 Croquemitaine, the gargoyle, the great beast of the middle
 ages, and, worse than all this, the Baphomet of the
 Templars, the bearded idol of the alchemists, the obscene
 deity of Mendes, the goat of the Sabbath. The frontispiece
 to this Riual reproduces the exact figure of the terrible
 emperor of night, with all his attributes and all his
 characters.
    Let us state now for the edification of the vulgar, for the
satisfaction of M. le Comte de Mirville, for the justification
 of the demonologist Bodin, for the greater glory of the
Church, which persecuted Templars, burnt magicians, ex¬
communicated Freemasons, &c.—let us state boldly and
precisely that all the inferior initiates of the occult sciences
and profaners of the great arcanum, not only did in the
past, but do now, and will ever, adore what is signified by
this alarming symbol. Yes, in our profound conviction, the
Grand Masters of the Order of the Templars worshipped
the Baphomet, and caused it to be worshipped by their
adepts; yes, there existed in the past, and there may be
still in the present, assemblies which are presided over by
this figure, seated on a throne and having a flaming torch

300               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


between the horns ; but the adorers of this sign do not
consider, as do we, that it is the representation of the devil;
on the contrary, for them it is that of the god Pan, the god
of our modem schools of philosophy, the god of the Alex¬
andrian theurgic school, and of our own mystical Neopla-
tonists, the god of Lamartine and Victor Cousin, the god
of Spinoza and Plato, the god of the primitive Gnostic
schools; the Christ also of the dissident priesthood; this
last qualification, ascribed to the goat of black magic, will
not astonish students of religious antiquities who are ac¬
quainted with the phases of symbolism and doctrine in their
various transformations, whether in India, Egypt, or Judea.
   The bull, the dog, and the goat are the three symbolical
animals of Hermetic magic, resuming all the traditions of
Egypt and India. The bull represents the earth or salt of
the philosophers; the dog is Hermanubis, the Mercury of
the sages, fluid, air, and water; the goat represents fire, and
is at the same time the symbol of generation. Two goats,
one pure and one impure, were consecrated in Judea; the
first was sacrificed in expiation for sins; the other, loaded
with those sins by imprecation, was set at liberty in the
desert—a strange ordinance, but one of deep symbolism,
reconciliation by sacrifice and expiation by liberty! Now,
all the fathers of the Church, who have concerned them¬
selves with Jewish symbolism, have recognized in the im¬
molated goat the figure of him who assumed, as they say,
the very form of sin. Hence the Gnostics were not outside
symbolical tradition when they gave Christ the Liberator
this same mystical figure. All the Kabbalah and all magic,
as a fact, are divided between the cultus of the immolated
and that of the emissary goat. There is, therefore, the
magic of the sanctuary and that of the wilderness, the white
and the black Church, the priesthood of public assemblies
and the sanhedrin of the Sabbath. The goat which is rep¬
resented in our frontispiece bears upon his forehead the
sign of the pentagram with one point in the ascendant,
which is sufficient to distinguish him as a symbol of the

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   301

light; he makes the sign of occultism with both hands,
pointing upward to the white moon of Chesed, and down¬
ward to the black moon of Geburah. This sign expresses
the perfect harmony of mercy with justice. One of the
arms is feminine and the other masculine, as in the an¬
drogyne of Khunrath, whose attributes we have combined
with those of our goat, since they are one and the same
symbol. The torch of intelligence burning between the
horns is the magical light of universal equilibrium; it is
also the type of the soul exalted above matter, even while
connecting with matter, as the flame connects with the
torch. The hideous head of the animal expresses horror of
sin, for which the material agent, alone responsible, must
alone and for ever bear the penalty, because the soul is
impassible in its nature, and can suffer only by materialis¬
ing. The caduceus, which replaces the generative organ,
represents eternal life; the scale-covered belly typifies
water; the circle above it is the atmosphere; the feathers
still higher up signify the volatile; lastly, humanity is de¬
picted by the two breasts and the androgyne arms of this
sphinx of the occult sciences. Behold the shadows of the
infernal sanctuary dissipated!      Behold the sphinx of
mediaeval terrors divined and cast from his throne! Quo-
modo cecidisti, Lucifer!
   The dread Baphomet henceforth, like all monstrous idols,
enigmas of antique science and its dreams, is only an in¬
nocent and even pious hieroglyph. How should man adore
the beast, since he exercises a sovereign power over it?
Let us affirm, for the honour of humanity, that it has never
adored dogs and goats any more than lambs and pigeons.
In the hieroglyphic order, why not a goat as much as a
lamb? On the sacred stones of Gnostic Christians of the
Basilidean sect, are representations of Christ under the
diverse figures of kabbalistic animals—sometimes a bird,
at others a lion, and, again, a lion or bull-headed serpent;
but in all cases He bears invariably the same attributes of
light, even as our goat, who cannot be confounded with

302               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


fabulous images of Satan, owing to his sign of the
pentagram.
   Let us assert most strongly, to combat the remnants of
Manichaeanism which are daily appearing among Christians,
that as a superior personality and power Satan does not
exist. He is the personification of all errors, perversities,
and, consequently, weaknesses. If God may be defined asN
He who necessarily exists, may we not define His antagonist
and enemy as he who necessarily does not exist? The ab¬
solute affirmation of good implies the absolute negation of
evil; so also in the light shadow itself is luminous. Thus,
erring spirits are good to the extent of their participation
in being and in truth. There are no shadows without reflec¬
tions, no nights without moon, phosphorescence, and stars.
If hell be just, it is good. No one has ever blasphemed
God. The insults and mockeries addressed to His dis¬
figured images attain Him not.
   We have named Manichaganism, and it is by this mon¬
strous heresy that we shall explain the aberrations of black
magic. The misconstrued doctrine of Zoroaster and the
magical law of two forces constituting universal equilib¬
rium, have caused some illogical minds to imagine a nega¬
tive divinity, subordinate but hostile to the active divinity.
Thus, the impure duad comes into being. Men were mad
enough to halve God; the star of Solomon was separated
into two triangles, and the Manichaeans imagined a trinity
of night. This evil God, product of sectarian fancies, in¬
spired all manias and all crimes. Sanguinary sacrifices
were offered him; monstrous idolatry replaced the true
religion; black magic traduced the transcendent and lu¬
minous magic of true adepts, and horrible conventicles of
sorcerers, ghouls, and stryges took place in caverns and
desert places, for dementia soon changes into frenzy, and
from human sacrifices to cannibalism there is only one step.
The mysteries of the Sabbath have been variously described,
but they figure always in grimoires and in magical trials;
the revelations made on the subject may be classified under

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  303

three heads—1. those referring to a fantastic and imaginary
Sabbath; 2. those which betray the secrets of the occult as¬
semblies of veritable adepts; 3. revelations of foolish and
criminal gatherings, having for their object the operations
of black magic. For a large number of unhappy men and
women, given over to these mad and abominable practices,
the Sabbath was but a prolonged nightmare, where dreams
appeared realities, and were induced by means of potions,
fumigations, and narcotic frictions. Baptista Porta, whom
we have already signalised as a mystifier, gives in his
4‘Natural Magic,” a pretended recipe for tiie sorcerer’s
unguent, by means of which they were transported to the
Sabbath. It is a composition of child’s fat, of aconite
boiled with poplar leaves, and some other drugs, the whole
mixed with soot, which could not contribute to the beauty
of the naked sorceresses who repaired to the scene anointed
with this pomade. There is another and more serious recipe
given by Baptista Porta, which we transcribe in Latin to
preserve its grimoire character. Recipe: suim, acorum vul-
gare, pentaphyllon, verspertillionis sanguinem solanum
somniferum et oleum, the whole boiled and incorporated to
the consistence of an unguent. We infer that compositions
containing opiates, the pith of green hemp, datura-
stramonium or laurel-almond, would enter quite as success¬
fully into such preparations. The fat or blood of night-
birds added to these narcotics, with black magical cere¬
monies, would impress imagination and determine the di¬
rection of dreams. To Sabbaths dreamed in this manner
we must refer the accounts of a goat issuing from pitchers
and going back into them after the ceremony; infernal
powders obtained from the ordure of this goat, who is called
Master Leonard; banquets where abortions are eaten with¬
out salt and boiled with serpents and toads; dances, in
which monstrous animals or men and women with im¬
possible shapes, take part; unbridled debauches where in-
cubi project cold sperm. Nightmare alone could produce
or explain such scenes. The unfortunate cure, Gaufridy,

304               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


and his abandoned penitent, Madeline de la Palud, went
mad through kindred delusions, and were burned for per¬
sisting in affirming them. We must read the depositions of
these diseased beings during their trial to understand the
extent of the aberration possible to an afflicted imagination.
But the Sabbath was not always a dream; it did exist in
reality; even now there are secret nocturnal assemblies for
the practice of the rites of the old world, some of which
assemblies have a religious and social object, while that of
others is concerned with orgies and conjurations. From
this two-fold point of view we propose to consider and
condemn the true Sabbath, of the magic of light in one
case and the magic of darkness in the other.
   When Christianity proscribed the public exercise of the
ancient worships, the partisans of the latter were compelled
to meet in secret for the celebration of their mysteries.
Initiates presided over these assemblies, and soon established
among the varieties of the worships a kind of orthodoxy,
more easily facilitated by the aid of magical truth, because
proscription unites wills and gathers up the bonds of
brotherhood between men. Thus, the mysteries of Isis, of
Ceres Eleusinia, of Bacchus, combined with those of the
good goddess and primeval Druidism. The meetings took
place usually between the days of Mercury and Jupiter, or
between those of Venus and Saturn; the proceedings in¬
cluded the rites of initiation, exchange of mysterious signs,
singing of symbolical hymns, the cementing of union at the
banqueting board, the successive formation of the magical
chain at table and in the dance; and, finally, the meeting
broke up after renewing pledges in the presence of the
chiefs and receiving instructions from them. The candi¬
date for the Sabbath was led, or rather carried, to the
assembly, with his eyes covered by the magical mantle in
which he was completely enveloped, he was led between
immense fires, while alarming noises were made about him.
When his face was bared, he found himself surrounded by
infernal monsters, and in the presence of a colossal and

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    305

hideous goat which he was commanded to adore. All these
ceremonies were tests of his force of character and con¬
fidence in his initiators. The final ordeal was most decisive
of all because it was at first sight humiliating and ridicu¬
lous to the mind of the candidate; he was commanded with¬
out circumspection to kiss respectfully the posterior of the
goat; if he refused, his head was again covered, and he was
transported to a distance from the assembly with such ex¬
traordinary rapidity that he believed himself whirled
through the air; if he assented, he was taken round the
symbolical idol, and there found, not a repulsive and ob¬
scene object, but the young and gracious countenance of a
priestess of Isis or Maia, who gave him a maternal salute,
and he was then admitted to the banquet. As to the orgies
which in many such assemblies followed the banquet, we
must beware of believing that they were generally per¬
mitted at these secret agapae; at the same time it is known
that a number of gnostic sects practised them in their con¬
venticles during the early centuries of Christianity. That
the flesh had its protestants in those ages of asceticism
and compression of the senses was inevitable, and can oc¬
casion no surprise, but we must not accuse transcendent
magic of the irregularities it has never authorised. Isis is
chaste in her widowhood; Diana Panthea is a virgin; Her-
manubis, possessing both sexes, can satisfy neither; the
Hermetic hermaphrodite isi pure; Apollonius of Tyana.
never yielded to the seductions of pleasure; the Emperor
Julian was a man of rigid continence; Plotinus of Alex¬
andria was ascetic in the manner of his life; Paracelsus
was such a stranger to foolish love that his sex was sus¬
pected ; Raymund Lully was initiated in the final secrets of
science only after a hopeless passion which made him
chaste for ever. It is also a magical tradition that pantacles
and talismans lose all their virtue when he who wears them
enters a house of prostitution or commits an adultery.
The Sabbath of orgies must not therefore be considered as
that of the veritable adepts.

306               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


   With regard to the term Sabbath, some have traced it to
the name of Sabasius, and other etymologies have been
imagined. The most simple, in our opinion, connects it
with the Jewish Sabbath, for it is certain that the Jews, the
most faithful depositaries of the secrets of the Kabbalah,
were almost invariably the great masters in magic during
the middle ages. The Sabbath was therefore the Sunday of
the Kabbalists, the day of their religious festivals, or rather
the night of their regular assembly. This feast, surrounded
with mysteries, had the vulgar timidity for its safeguard
and escaped persecution by terror. As to the diabolical Sab¬
bath of necromancers, it was a counterfeit of that of the
magi, an assembly of malefactors who exploited idiots and
fools. There horrible rites were practised and abominable
potions compounded, there sorcerers and sorceresses laid
their plans and instructed one another for the common sup¬
port of their reputation in prophecy and divination; at that
period diviners were generally consulted and followed a
lucrative profession while exercising a real power. Such
institutions neither had nor could possess any regular rites;
everything depended on the caprice of the chiefs and the
vertigo of the assembly. What was narrated by some who
had been present at them served as a type for all night¬
mares of hallucination and from this chaos of impossible
realities and demoniac dreams have issued the revolting and
foolish histories of the Sabbath which figure in magical
processes and in the books of such writers as Spranger,
Delancere, Delrio, and Bodin.
   The rites of the Gnostic Sabbath were imported into
Germany by an association which took the name of Mopses.
It replaced the Kabbalistic goat by the Hermetic dog, and
the candidate, male or female, for the order initiated
women, was brought in with eyes bandaged; the same in¬
fernal noise was made in their neighborhood, which sur¬
rounded the name of Sabbath with so many inexplicable
rumours; they were asked whether they were afraid of the
devil, and were abruptly required to choose between kiss-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  307

ing the posterior of the grand master and that of a small
silk-covered figure of a dog, which was substituted for the
old grand idol of the goat of Mendes. The sign of recogni¬
tion was a ridiculous grimace, which recalls the phantas¬
magoria of the ancient Sabbath and the masks of the as¬
sistants. For the rest, their doctrine is summed up in the
cultus of love and license. The association came into ex¬
istence when the! Roman Church was persecuting Free¬
masonry. The Mopses pretended to recruit only among
Catholics, and for the oath at reception they substituted a
solemn engagement upon honour to reveal no secrets of the
order. It was more effectual than any oath, and left noth¬
ing for religion to object.
   The name of the Templar Baphomet, which should be
spelt Kabbalistically backwards, is composed of three abbre¬
viations: Tem. oph. ab., Templi omnium hominum pacis
abbas, “the father of the temple of universal peace among
men.” According to some, the Bahomet was a monstrous
head; according to others, a demon in the form of a goat.
A sculptured coffer was disintered recently in the ruins of
 an old commandery of the temple, and antiquaries observed
upon it a baphometic figure, corresponding by its attributes
 to the goat of Mendes and the androgyne of Khunrath. It
 was a bearded figure with a female body, holding the sun in
 one hand and the moon in the other, attached to chains.
 Now, this virile head is a beautiful allegory which attrib¬
 utes to thought alone the initiating and creating principle.
 Here the head represents spirit and the body matter. The
 orbs enchained to the human form, and directed by that
 nature of which intelligence is the head, are also mag¬
 nificently allegorical. The sign all the same was discovered
 to be obscene and diabolical by the learned men who ex¬
 amined it. Can we be surprised after this at the spread of
 mediaeval superstition in our own day! One thing only
 surprises me, that, believing in the devil and his agents,
 men do not rekindle the faggots. M. Veuillot is logical and

 308                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


   demands it; one should honour men who have the courage
   of their opinions.
       Pursuing our curious researches, we come now to the
   most horrible mysteries of the grimoire, those which are
   concerned with the evocations of devils and pacts with hell.
   After attributing a real existence to the absolute negation
   of goodness, after having enthroned the absurd and created
   a god of falsehood, it remained for human folly to invoke
   the impossible idol, and this maniacs have done. We were
   lately informed that the most reverend Father Ventura,
j, formerly Superior of the Theatines, Bishops ’ Examiner,
   etc., after reading our Doctrine, declared that the kabbalah
   was, in his opinion, an invention of the devil, and that the
   star of Solomon was another diabolical device to persuade
   the world that Satan was the same as God. See what is
   taught seriously by the masters in Israel! The ideal of
   nothingness and night inventing a sublime philosophy
   which is the universal basis of faith and the keystone of all
   temples! The demon placing his signature by the side of
   God’s! My venerable masters in theology, you are greater
   sorcerers than you or others are aware, and He who said:
   ‘ ‘ The devil is a liar like his father, ’ ’ would have had some
   observations to make on the decisions of your reverences.
       The evokers of the devil must before all things belong
   to a religion which admits a devil, creator and rival of God.
   To invoke a power, we must believe in it. Given this firm
   faith in the religion of the devil, we must proceed as follows
   to enter into correspondence with this pseudo-Deity:

                        Magical Axiom.

    In the circle of its action, every word creates that which
 it affirms.
                     Direct Consequence.

   He who affirms the devil, creates or makes the devil.

       Conditions of Success in Infernal Evocations.
   1, Invincible obstinacy; 2, a conscience at once hardened

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     309

to crime and most subject to remorse and fear; 3, affected
or natural ignorance; 4, blind faith in all that is incredible;
5, a completely false idea of God.
   We must afterwards—(a) Profane the ceremonies of the
cultus in which we believe; (b) offer a bloody sacrifice;
 (c) procure the magic fork, which is a branch of a single
beam of hazel or almond, cut at one blow with the new
knife used for the sacrifice. It must terminate in a fork,
which must be armoured with iron or steel made from
the blade of the before-mentioned knife. A fast of fifteen
days must be observed, taking a single unsalted repast after
sundown; this repast should consist of black bread and
blood seasoned with unsalted spices or black beans and
milky and narcotic herbs. We must get drunk every five
days, after sundown, on wine in which five heads of black
poppies and five ounces of pounded hemp seed have been
steeped for five hours, the infusion being strained through
a cloth woven by a prostitute; strictly speaking, the first
cloth which comes to hand may be used, should it have been
woven by a woman. The evocation should be performed
on the night between Monday and Tuesday, or that be¬
tween Friday and Saturday. A solitary and condemned
spot must be chosen, such as a cemetery haunted by evil
spirits, an avoided ruin in the country, the vaults of an
abandoned convent, a place where some murder has been
committed, a druidic altar or an old temple of idols. A
black seamless and sleeveless robe must be provided; a
leaden cap emblazoned with the signs of the moon, Venus,
and Saturn; two candles of human fat set in black wooden
candlesticks, carved in the shape of a crescent; two crowns
of vervain; a magical sword with a black handle; the
magical fork; a copper vase containing the blood of the
victim; a censer holding the perfumes, namely, incense,
camphor, aloes, ambergris, and storax, kneaded with the
blood of a goat, a mole, and a bat; four nails taken from
the coffin of an executed criminal; the head of a black cat
which has been nourished on human flesh for five days;

310      TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




              Goetic Circle

      of Black Evocations and Pacts.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    311

a bat drowned in blood; the horns of a goat cum quo puella
conculnierit; and the skull of a parricide. All these hideous
and scarcely obtainable objects having been collected, they
must be aranged as follows: A perfect circle is traced by
the sword, with a break, or way of issuing, on one side; a
triangle is drawn in the circle, and the pantaele thus formed
is coloured with blood; at one of the angles of the triangle
a chafing-dish is placed, and this should have been included
among the indispensable objects already enumerated; at the
opposite base of the triangle three little circles are described
for the operator and his two assistants; behind that of the
operator the sign of the labarum or monogram of Constan¬
tine is drawn, not with the blood of the victim, but with
the operator’s own blood. The operator and his assistants
must have bare feet and covered heads. The skin of the
immolated victim must be also brought to the place, and,
being cut into strips, must be placed within the circle, form¬
ing a second and inner circle, fixed at four corners by the
four nails from the coffin already mentioned. Hard by the
nails, but outside the circle, must be placed the head of the
cat, the human or rather inhuman skull, the horns of the
goat, and the bat; they must be sprinkled with a branch
of birch dipped in the blood of the victim, and then a fire
of cypress and alderwood must be lighted, the two magical
candles being placed on the right and left of the operator,
encircled with the wreaths of vervain. The formula of evo¬
cation can now be pronounced, as they are found in the
magical elements of Peter of Apono, or in the grimoires,
wdiether printed or manuscript. That of the Grand Gri-
moire, reproduced in the vulgar Red Dragon, has been
wilfully altered, and should be read as follows: ‘‘ By Adonai
Eloi'm, Adonai Jehova, Adonai' Sabaoth, Metraton On Agla
Adonai Mathon, the pythonic word, the mystery of the
salamander, the assembly of the sylphs, the grotto of the
gnomes, the demons of the heaven of Gad, Almousin, Gibor,
Jehosua, Evam, Zariatnatmik, Come, Come, Come!”
   The grand appellation of Agrippa consists only in these

312                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


words: Dies Mies Jeschet Boenedoesef Douvema Eni-
temaus.     We make no pretence of understanding their
meaning; possibly they possess none, assuredly none which
is reasonable, since they avail in evoking the devil, who is
the sovereign unreason. Picus de Mirandola, no doubt from
the same motive, affirms that in black magic the most
barbarous and unintelligible words are the most efficacious
and the best. The conjurations are repeated in a louder
voice, accompanied by imprecations and menaces, until the
spirit replies. He is commonly preceded by a violent wind
which seems to make the whole country resound. Then
domestic animals tremble and hide away, the assistants feel
a breath upon their faces, and their hair, damp with cold
sweat, rises upon their heads. The grand and supreme
appellation, according to Peter of Apono, is as follows:—
   “Hemen-Etan! Hemen-Etan! Hemen-Etan! El* Ati*
Titeip* Aozia* Hyn* Teu* Minosel* Achadon* vay* vaa*
Eye* Aaa* Eie* Exe* A EL EL EL A Hy! Hau! Hau!
Hau! Hau! Ya! Va! Ya! Ya! CHAYAJOTH.                     Aie
Saraye, aie Saraye, aie Saraye! By Eloym, Archima, Ba¬
bur, Bathas over Abrac, flowing down, coming from above
Abeor upon Aberer Chavajoth! Chavajoth! Chavajoth! I
command thee by the Key of Solomon and the great name
Semhamphoras. ? ?
  The ordinary signs and signatures of demons are given
below:—

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    313

But they are those of the inferior demons, and here follow
the official signatures of the princes of hell, attested judi¬
cially—judicially, 0 M. le Comte de Mirville!—and pre¬
served in the archives of justice as convicting evidences for
the trial of the unfortunate Urbain Grandier.




   These signatures appear under a pact of which Collin de
 Plancy gives a facsimile reproduction in the Atlas of his
 “Infernal Dictionary.” It has this marginal note: “The
draught is in hell, in the secretary of Lucifer, ’ ’ a valuable
item of information about a locality but imperfectly known,
and belonging to a period approximate to our own, though
anterior to the trial of the young Labarre and Etalonde,
who, as every one knows, were contemporaries of Voltaire.
   Evocations were frequently followed by pacts written on
parchment of goat skin with an iron pen and blood drawn
from the left arm. The document was in duplicate; one
copy was carried off by the fiend and the other swallowed
by the wilful reprobate. The reciprocal engagements were
that the demon should serve the sorcerer during a given
period of years, and that the sorcerer should belong to the
demon after a determinate time. The Church in her exor-

314               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


cisms has consecrated the belief in all these things, and it
may be said that black magic and its darksome prince are
the true, living, and terrible creation of Roman Catholicism;
that they are even its special and characteristic work, for
priests invent not God. So do true Catholics cleave from
the bottom of their hearts to the consecration and even the
regeneration of this great work, which is the philosophical
stone of the official and positive cultus. In tfiieves’ slang
the devil is called the baker by malefactors; all our desire,
and we speak no longer from the standpoint of the magus,
but as a devoted child of Christianity and of that Church to
which we owe our earliest education and our first en¬
thusiasms—all our desire, we say, is that the phantom of
Satan may no longer be able to be termed the baker for the
ministers of morality and the representatives of the highest
virtue. Will they appreciate our intention and forgive the
boldness of our aspirations in consideration of our devoted
intentions and the sincerity of our faith?
   The devil-making magic which dictated the Grimoire of
Pope Honorius, the Enchiridion of Leo III., the exorcisms
of the Ritual, the verdicts of inquisitors, the suits of Lau-
bardement, the articles of the Veuillot brothers, the books of
MM. de Falloux, de Montalembert, de Mirville, the magic of
sorcerers and of pious persons who are not sorcerers, is
something truly to be condemned in the one and infinitely
deplored in the other. It is above all to combat these un¬
happy aberrations of the human mind by their exposure
that we have published this book. May it further the holy
cause!
   But we have not yet exhibited these impious devices in
all their turpitude, and in all their monstrous folly; we
must remove the blood-stained filth of perished supersti¬
tions; we must tax the annals of demonomania, so as to
conceive of certain crimes which imagination alone could
not invent. The Kabbalist Bodin, Israelite by conviction
and Catholic by necessity, had no other intention in his
‘‘Demonomania of Sorcerers’’ than to impeach Catholicism

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     315

in its works, and to undermine it in the greatest of all its
doctrinal abuses. The treatise of Bodin is profoundly
maehiavellic, and strikes at the heart of the institutions
and persons it appears to defend. It would be difficult
to imagine without reading his vast mass of sanguinary
and hideous histories, acts of revolting superstition, sen¬
tences and executions of stupid ferocity. ‘ ‘ Burn all! ’ ’ the
inquisitors seemed to cry. ‘ ‘ God will distinguish His own! ’ ’
Poor fools, l^sterical women, and idiots, were accordingly
burned without mercy for the crime of magic, while, at the
same time, great criminals escaped this unjust and san¬
guinary justice. Bodin gives us to understand this by
recounting such anecdotes as that which he connects with
the death of Charles IX. It is an almost unknown abom¬
ination, and one which has not, so far as we know, tempted
the skill of any romancer, even at the periods of the most
feverish and deplorable literature.
   Attacked by a disease of which no physician could dis¬
cover the cause or explain the frightful symptoms, King
Charles IX. was dying. The Queen-Mother, who ruled him
entirely, and had everything to lose under another reign—
the Queen-Mother, who has been suspected as the author of
the disease, because concealed devices and unknown interests
have always been attributed to her who was capable of any¬
thing—consulted her astrologers, and then had recourse to
the foulest form of magic, the Oracle of the Bleeding Head,
 for the sufferer’s condition grew worse and more desperate
 daily. The infernal operation was performed in the follow¬
 ing way. A child was selected, of beautiful appearance
 and innocent manners ; he was prepared for his first com¬
 munion by the almoner of the palace. When the day or
 rather night of the sacrifice arrived, a monk, an apostate
Jacobin, given over to the occult works of black magic,
 celebrated the Mass of the Devil at midnight, in the sick¬
 room, and in the presence only of Catherine de Medicis
and her trusted confidants. It was offered before the image
of the demon, having a crucifix upside down under its

316               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


feet, and the sorcerer consecrated two hosts, one black and
one white. The white was given to the child, who was
brought in clothed as for baptism, and was murdered on
the steps of the altar immediately after his communion.
His head, cut by one blow from the body, was set palpitat¬
ing upon the great black host which covered the bottom of
the paten, and then transported to a table where mysterious
lamps were burning. The exorcism began, an oracle was
besought of the demon, and an answer by the mouth of
the head to a secret question which the king dared not
make aloud, and had confided to no one. A strange and
feeble voice, which had nothing human about it, was pres¬
ently heard in the poor little martyr’s head, saying in
Latin: Vim patior; “I am forced.” At this reply, which
doubtless announced to the sick man that hell no longer
protected him, a horrible trembling seized the monarch,
his arms stiffened, and he cried in a hoarse voice: ‘ ‘ Away
with that head! Away with that head! ’ ’ and so continued
screaming till he gave up the ghost. His attendants, who
were not in the confidence of the frightful mystery, be¬
lieved that he was pursued by the phantom of Coligny, and
that he saw the head of the illustrious admiral; what tor¬
mented the dying man was not, however, a remorse, but a
hopeless terror and an anticipated Hell.
   This darksome magical legend of Bodin recalls the
abominable practices and deserved fate of Gilles de Laval,
lord of Retz, who passed from asceticism to black magic,
and offered the most revolting sacrifices to conciliate the
favour of Satan. This madman confessed at his trial
that Satan had frequently appeared to him, but had always
deceived him by promises of treasures which he had never
given. It transpired from the judicial informations that
several hundred unfortunate children had falleh victims to
the cupidity and atrocious fancies of this monster.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    317




                      CHAPTER XYI

                  WITCHCRAFT AND SPELLS

What sorcerers and necromancers sought above all in their
evocations of the impure spirit was that magnetic power
which is the possession of the true adept, but was desired
by them only that they might shamefully abuse it. The
folly of sorcerers was an evil folly, and one of their chief
ends was the power of bewitchments or harmful influences.
We have set down in our Doctrine wrhat we think upon the
subject of bewitchment, and how it seems to us a dangerous
and real power. The true magus bewitches without cere¬
monial, and by his mere reprobation, those whom he con¬
demns and considers it necessary to punish; his forgive¬
ness even bewitches those who do him wrong, and never do
the enemies of initiates carry far the impunity of their
injustice. We have ourselves witnessed numerous examples
of this fatal law. The murderers of martyrs always perish
miserably, and the adepts are martyrs of intelligence;
Providence seems to scorn those who despise them, and to
slay those who would deprive them of life. The legend of
the Wandering Jew is the popular poetry of this arcanum.
A wise man was driven by a nation to his doom; it bade
him * ‘ Go on! ’ ’ when he wdshed to rest for a moment. What
is the consequence? A similar condemnation overtakes the
nation itself; it is proscribed bodily; men have cried to it:
‘ ‘ Get on ! Get on! ” for centuries, and it has found no pity
and no repose.
   A man of learning had a wife whom he loved wildly and
passionately in the exaltation of his tenderness; he honoured,
her with blind confidence, and trusted her entirely. Vain
of her beauty and understanding, this woman became
jealous of her husband’s superiority, and began to hate him.
Some time after she deserted him, disgracing herself with

318              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


an old, ugly, stupid, and immoral man. This was the be¬
ginning of her punishment, but it did not end there. The
man of learning solemnly pronounced the following sen¬
tence upon her: ‘‘I take back your understanding and
your beauty. ’ ’ A year after she was no longer recognised
by those who had known her; she had lost her plumpness,
and reflected in her countenance the hideousness of her new
affections. Three years later she was ugly; seven years
later she was deranged. This happened in our own time,
and we were acquainted with both persons.
   The magus condemns, after the manner of the skilful
physician, and for this reason there is no appeal from his
sentence when it has once been pronounced against a guilty
person. There are no ceremonies and no invocations; he
simply abstains from eating at the same table, or if forced
to do so, he neither accepts nor offers salt. But the be¬
witchments of sorcerers are of another kind, and may be
compared to an actual poisoning of some current of astral      \
light. They exalt their will by cermonies till it becomes
venomous at a distance; but, as we have observed in our
Doctrine, they more often expose themselves, to be the first
that are killed by their infernal machinery. Let us here
stigmatise some of their guilty proceedings. They procure
the hair or garments of the person whom they seek to exe¬
crate; they next select some animal, which seems to them
symbolic of the person, and, by means of the hair or gar¬
ments, they place it in magnetic connection with him or
her. They give it the same name, and then slay it with
one blow of the magic knife. They cut open the breast, tear
out the heart, wrap it, while still palpitating, in the mag¬
netised objects, and hourly, for the space of three days,
they drive nails, red hot pins, or long thorns therein, pro¬
nouncing maledictions upon the name of the bewitched
person. They are persuaded, and often rightly, that the
victim of their infamous operations experiences as many
tortures as if his own heart had been pierced at all points.

                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  319

He begins to waste away, and after a time dies of an un¬
known disease.
   Another bewitchment, made use of in country places,
consists in consecration of nails to works of hatred by
means of the stinking fumigations of Saturn and invoca¬
tions of the evil genii; then, in following the footsteps
of the person whom it is sought to torment, and nailing
crosswise every imprint of his feet which can be traced
upon the earth or sand. Yet another and more abominable
practice. A fat toad is selected; it is baptised; the name
and surname of the person to be accursed is given it; it is
made to swallow a consecrated host, over which the formulae
of execration have been pronounced. The animal is then
wrapped in the magnetised objects, tied with the hairs of
the victim, upon which the operator has previously spat,
and buried at the threshold of the bewitched person’s door,
or at some point where he is obliged to pass daily. The
 elementary spirit of the toad will become a nightmare
 and vampire, haunting the dreams of the victim, unless,
 indeed, he should know how to send it back to the
operator.
   Let us pass now to bewitchments by waxen images. The
sorcerers of the middle ages, eager to please by their sac¬
rileges him whom they regarded as their master, mixed
baptismal oil and the ashes of consecrated hosts with a
modicum of wax. Apostate priests were never wanting to
deliver them the treasures of the Church. With the ac¬
cursed wax they formed an image as much as possible re¬
sembling the person whom they desired to bewitch. They
clothed this image with garments similar to his, they ad¬
ministered to it the sacraments which he received, then they
called down upon its head all maledictions which could ex¬
press the hatred of the sorcerer, inflicting daily imaginary
tortures upon it, so as to reach and torment by sympathy
the person represented by the image. This bewitchment is
more infallible if the hair, blood, and, above all, a tooth
of the victim can be procured. It was this which gave rise

320               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


to the proverbial saying: You have a tooth against me.
There is also bewitchment by the glance, called the jetta-
tura, or evil eye, in Italy. During our civil wars, a shop¬
keeper had the misfortune to denounce one of his neigh¬
bours, who, after a period of detention, was set at liberty,
but with his position lost. His sole vengeance was to pass
twice daily the shop of his denouncer, whom he regarded
fixedly, saluted, and went on. Some little time after, the
shopkeeper, unable to bear the torment of this glance any
longer, sold his goods at a loss, and changed his neighbour¬
hood, leaving no address. In a word, he was ruined.
   A threat is a real bewitchment, because it acts power¬
fully on the imagination, above all, when the latter receives
with facility the belief in an occult and unlimited power.
The terrible menace of hell, that bewitchment of humanity
during so many centuries, has created more nightmares,
more nameless diseases, more furious madness, than all vices
and all excesses combined.       This is what the Hermetic
artists of the middle ages represented by the incredible and
unheard-of monsters which they carved at the doors of
basilicas. But bewitchment by threat produces an effect
altogether contrary to the intention of the operator when
it is evidently a vain threat, when it does outrage to the
legitimate pride of the menaced person, and consequently
provokes his resistance, or, finally, when it is ridiculous by
its atrocity. The sectaries of hell have discredited heaven.
Say to a reasonable man that equilibrium is the law of
motion and life, and that liberty, which is moral equilib¬
rium, rests upon an eternal and immutable distinction be¬
tween true and false, between good and bad; tell him that,
endowed as he is with free will, he must place himself by
his works in the empire of truth and goodness, or relapse
eternally, like the rock of Sisyphus, into the chaos of false¬
hood and evil; then he will understand the doctrine, and if
you term truth and goodness heaven, falsehood and evil
hell, he will believe in your heaven and hell, over which
the divine ideal rests calm, perfect, and inaccessible to

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   321

either wrath or offence, because he will understand that if
in principle hell be eternal as liberty, it cannot in fact be
more than a temporary agony for souls, because it is an
expiation, and the idea of expiation necessarily supposes
that of reparation and destruction of evil. This much said,
not with dogmatic intention, which is outside our province,
but to indicate the moral and reasonable remedy for the be¬
witchment of consciences by the terrors of the life beyond,
let us speak of the means of escaping the baleful influences
of human wrath. The first among all is to be reasonable
and just, giving no opportunity or excuse to anger. A law¬
ful indignation is greatly to be feared; make haste therefore
to acknowledge and expiate your faults. Should anger
persist after that, then it certainly proceeds from vice;
seek to know what vice, and unite yourself strongly to the
magnetic currents of the opposite virtue. The bewitchment
will then have no further power upon you. Wash carefully
the clothes which you have finished with before giving them
away; otherwise, bum them; never use a garment which
has belonged to an unknown person without purifying it
by water, sulphur, and such aromatics as camphor, incense,
amber, &c.
   A great means of resisting bewitchment is not to fear it;
it acts after the manner of contagious maladies. In times
of epidemic, the terror-struck are the first to be attacked.
The secret of not fearing an evil is not to think about it,
and my advice is completely disinterested since I give it in
a book on magic of which I am the author, when I strongly
urge upon persons who are nervous, feeble, credulous,
hysterical, superstitious devotees, foolish, without energy
and without will, never to open a book on magic, and to
close this one if they have opened it, to turn a deaf ear to
those who talk of the occult sciences, to deride them, never
to believe in them, and to drink water, as said the great
pantagruelist magician, the excellent cure of Meudon.
   As for the wise—and it is time that we turned to them
after espousing the cause of the foolish—they have scarcely

322               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


any sorceries to fear save those of fortune, but seeing that
they are priests and physicians, they may be called upon to
cure the bewitched, and this should be their method of pro¬
cedure. They must persuade a bewitched person to do
some act of goodness to his bewitcher, render him some
service which he cannot refuse, and lead him directly or
otherwise to the communion of salt. A person who believes
himself bewitched by the execration and interment of the
toad must carry about him a living toad in a horn box.
For the bewitchment of the pierced heart, the afflicted in¬
dividual must be made to eat a lamb’s heart seasoned with
sage and onion, and to carry a talisman of Venus or of the
moon in a satchel filled with camphor and salt. For be¬
witchment by the waxen figure, a more perfect figure must
be made, as much as possible in the likeness of the person;
seven talismans must be hung round the neck; it must be
set in the middle of a great pantacle representing the
pentagram, and must each day be rubbed slightly with a
mixture of oil and balm, after reciting the Conjuration of
the Four to turn aside the influence of elementary spirits.
At the end of seven days the image must be burnt in con¬
secrated fire, and one may rest assured that the figure
fabricated by the bewitcher will at the same moment lose
all its virtue.
   We have already mentioned the sympathetic medicine of
Paracelsus, who medicated waxen limbs and operated upon
the discharges of blood from wounds for the cure of the
wounds themselves. This system permitted the employ¬
ment of more than usually violent remedies, and his chief
specifics were sublimate and vitriol.       We believe that
homoeopathy is a reminiscence of the theories of Paracelsus
and a return to his wise practices. But we shall follow up
this subject in a special treatise exclusively consecrated to
occult medicine.
   Contracts by parents forestalling the future of their chil¬
dren are bewitchments which cannot be too strongly con¬
demned ; children dedicated in white, for example, scarcely

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     323

ever prosper; those who were formerly dedicated to celi¬
bacy fell commonly into debauch, or ended in despair and
madness. Man is not permitted to do violence to destiny,
still less to impose bonds upon the lawful use of liberty.
   As a supplement or appendix to this chapter, we will
add a few words about mandragores and androids, which
several writers on magic confound with the waxen images
serving the purposes of bewitchment. The natural mandra-
gore is a filamentous root which, more or less, presents as a
wThole either the figure of a man, or that of the virile
members.      It is slightly narcotic, and an aphrodisiacal
virtue was ascribed to it by the ancients, who represented
it as being sought by Thessalian sorcerers for the composi¬
tion of philtres. Is this root the umbilical vestige of our
terrestrial origin? We dare not seriously affirm it, but all
the same it is certain that man came out of the slime of
the earth, and his first appearance must have been in the
form of a rough sketch. The analogies of nature make this
notion necessarily admissible, at least as a possibility. The
first men were, in this case, a family of gigantic, sensitive
mandragores, animated by the sun, who rooted themselves
up from the earth; this assumption not only does not ex¬
clude, but, on the contrary, positively supposes, creative will
and the providential co-operation of a first cause, which we
have reason to call God.
   Some alchemists, impressed by this idea, speculated on
the culture of the mandragore, and experimented in the
artificial reproduction of a soil sufficiently fruitful and a sun
sufficiently active to humanise the said root, and thus create
men without the concurrence of the female. Others, who
regarded humanity as the synthesis of animals, despaired
about vitalising the mandragore, but they crossed monstrous
pairs and projected human seed into animal earth, only for
the production of shameful crimes and barren deformities.
The third method of making the android was by galvanic
machinery. One of these almost intelligent automata was at¬
tributed to Albert us Magnus, and it is said that St. Thomas

324               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 destroyed it with one blow from a stick because he was
 perplexed by its answers. This story is an allegory; the
 android was primitive scholasticism, which was broken by
the Summa of St. Thomas, the daring innovator who first
substituted the absolute law of reason for arbitrary divin¬
ity, by formulating that axiom which we cannot repeat too
often, since it comes from such a master: “A thing is not
just because God wills 4t, but God wills it because it is
just.”
   The real and serious android of the ancients was a secret
which they kept hidden from all eyes, and Mesmer was the
first who dared to divulge it; it was the extension of the
will of the magus into another body, organised and served
by an elementary spirit; in more modem and intelligible
terms, it was a magnetic subject.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   325




                     CHAPTER XVII

                THE WRITING OF THE STARS

We have finished with infernus, and we breathe the fresh
air freely as we return to daylight after traversing the
crypts of black magic. Get thee behind us, Satan! We re¬
nounce thee, with all thy pomps and works, and still more
with all thy deformities, thy meanness, thy nothingness,
thy deception! The Great Initiator beheld thee fall from
heaven like a thunderbolt. The Christian legend changes
thee, making thee set thy dragon’s head mildly beneath
the foot of the mother of God. Thou art for us the image
of unintelligence and mystery; thou art unreason and blind
fanaticism; thou are the inquisition and its hell; thou
art the god of Torquemada and Alexander VI; thou
hast become the sport of children, and thy final place
is at the side of Polichinello; henceforth thou art only a
grotesque character in our foreign theatres, and a means of
instruction in a few so-called religious markets.
   After the sixteenth key of the Tarot, which represents
the downfall of Satan’s temple, we find on the seventeenth
leaf a magnificent and gracious emblem. A naked woman,
a young and immortal maid, pours out upon the earth the
juice of universal life from two ewers, one of gold and one
of silver; hard by there is a flowering shrub, on which rests
the butterfly of Psyche; above her shines an eight-pointed
star with seven other stars around it. “I believe in eter¬
nal life!” Such is the final article of the Christian symbol,
and this alone is a profession of faith.
   The ancients, when they compared the calm and peaceful
immensity of heaven, thronged with innumerable lights, to
the tumults and darlmess of this world, believed themselves
to have discovered in that beautiful book, written in letters
of gold, the final utterance of the enigma of destinies; in

326                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


imagination they drew lines of correspondence between these
 shining points of the divine writing, and it is said that the
 first constellations marked out by the shepherds of Chaldea
 were also the first letters of the kabbalistic alphabet. These
 characters, expressed first of all by means of lines, then
 enclosed in hieroglyphic figures, would, according to M.
 Moreau de Dammartin, author of a very curious treatise on
 alphabetic characters, have determined the ancient magi in
the choice of the Tarot figures, which are taken by this man
 of learning, as by ourselves, for an essentially hieratic and
 primitive book. Thus, in his opinion, the Chinese tsew, the
 Hebrew aleph, and the Greek alpha, expressed hieroglyph-
ically by the figure of the juggler, would be borrowed from
the constellation of the crane, in the vicinity of the celestial
fish, a sign of the eastern hemisphere. The Chinese tcheou,
the Hebrew beth, and the Latin B, corresponding to Pope
Joan or Juno, were formed after the head of the Ram; the
Chinese yn, the Hebrew ghimel, and the Latin G, represented
by the Empress, would be derived from the constellation of
the Great Bear, &c. The kabbalist Gaffarel, whom we have
cited more than once, erected a planisphere, in which all
the constellations form Hebrew letters; but we confess that
the configurations are frequently arbitrary in the highest
degree, and upon the indication of a single star, for exam¬
ple, we can see no reason why a ^ should be traced rather
than a ^ or a ^ four stars will also give indifferently a
or pj as well as an ^. We are therefore deterred from repro¬
ducing a copy of Gaffarel’s planisphere, examples of which
are, moreover, not exceedingly rare. It was included in the
work of Montfaucon on the religions and superstitions of
the world, and also in the treatise upon magic published by
the mystic Eckartshausen. Scholars, moreover, are un¬
agreed upon the configuration of the letters of the primitive
alphabet. The Italian Tarot, of which the lost Gothic orig¬
inals are much to be regretted, connects by the disposition
of its figures with the Hebrew alphabet in use after the cap¬
tivity, and known as the Assyrian alphabet; but there are

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   327

fragments of anterior Tarots where the disposition is dif¬
ferent. There should be no conjecture in matters of re¬
search, and hence we suspend our judgment in the expecta¬
tion of fresh and more conclusive discoveries. As to the
alphabet of the stars, we believe it to be intuitive, like the
configuration of clouds, which seem to assume any form that
imagination lends them. Star-groups are like points) in
geomancy or the pasteboards of cartomancy. They are a
pretext for self-magnetising, an instrument to fix and deter¬
mine native intuition. Thus, a kabbalist, familiar with
mystic hieroglyphics, will perceive signs in the stars which
will not be discerned by a simple shepherd, but the shep¬
herd, on his part, will observe combinations that will escape
the kabbalist. Country people substitute a rake for the
belt and sword of Orion, while a kabbalist recognises in the
same sign as a whole all the mysteries of Ezekiel, the ten
sephiroth arranged in a triadic manner, a central triangle
formed of four stars, then a line of three stars making the
jod, and the two figures taken together expressing the mys¬
teries of Bereschith; finally, four stars constituting the
wheels of Mercavah, and completing the divine chariot.
Looked at after another manner, and arranging other ideal
lines, he will notice a well-formed ghimel placed above a
jody in a large daleth, a symbol typifying the strife between
good and evil, with the final triumph of good. As a fact,
the ghimel superposed on the jod is the triad produced by
unity, the manifestation of the divine Word, whilst the re¬
versed daleth is the triad composed of the evil duad multi¬
plied by itself.

328               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




Thus regarded, the figure of Orion would be identical with
that of the angel Michael doing battle with the dragon, and
the appearance of this sign, so understood, would be, for the
kabbalist, a portent of victory and happiness.
  A long contemplation of the sky exalts the imagination,
and then the stars respond to our thoughts. The lines
drawn mentally from one to another by the primitive ob¬
servers must have given man his first notions of geometry.
Accordingly, as our soul is troubled or at rest, the stars
seem burning with menace or sparkling with hope. The
sky is thus the mirror of the human soul, and when we think
that we are reading in the stars it is in ourselves we read.
  Gaffarel, applying the prophesies of celestial writing to
the destinies of empires, says that not in vain did the
ancients place all signs of evil augury in the northern region
of the sky; calamities have been in all ages regarded as
coming from the north to spread themselves over the earth
by the invasion of the south. “For this reason,” he tells

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     329

us, “the ancients represented in the northern parts of the
heaven a serpent or dragon near two bears, since these
animals are the true hieroglyphs of tyranny, pillage, and
all oppression. As a fact, glance at history, and you will
see that all great devastations proceed from the north. The
Assyrians or Chaldeans, incited by Nabuchodonosor or
Salmanasor, exhibited this truth in abundance by the de¬
struction of the most splendid and most holy temple and
city in the universe, and by the complete overthrow of a
people whom God himself had taken under his special pro¬
tection, of whom he specially termed himself father. And
that other Jerusalem, Rome the blessed, has not it, too, ex¬
perienced frequently the violence of this evil northern race,
when it beheld its altars demolished and the towers of its
proud edifices brought level with the foundations, through
the cruelty of Alaric, Genseric, Attila, and the other princes
of the Goths, Huns, Vandals, and Alain. . . . Very prop¬
erly, therefore, in the secrets of this celestial writing, do
we read calamities and misfortunes on the northern side,
since a septentrione pandetur omne malum. Now, the word
        which we translate by pandetur, is also equivalent of
the depingetur or scribetur, and the prophecy signifies
equally: All the misfortunes of the world are written in the
northern sky.”
   We have transcribed this passage at length, because it is
not without application in our day, when the north once
more seems to threaten Europe        but it is also the destiny
of hoar-frost to be melted by the sun, and the darkness
disappears of itself when the light manifests. Such is our
final word of prophecy, and the secret of the future. Gaf-
farel adds some prognostics drawn from the stars, as, for
example, the progressive weakening of the Ottoman empire;
but, as already said, his constellated letters are exceedingly
arbitrary. He states, for the rest, that he derived his pre¬
dictions from a Hebrew kabbalist, Rabbi Chomer, but does
not himself pretend to understand him especially well.
       * This passage was written before the Crimean War.

330               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


   Here follows the table of magical characters traced after
the zodiacal constellations by the ancient astrologers; each
of them represents the name of a genius, be he good or evil.
It will be known that the signs of the Zodiac correspond to
various celestial influences, and consequently signify an
annual alternative of good or evil.




   The names of the genii designated by the above characters
are:—For the Ram, Sataaran and Sarahiel; for the Bull,
Bagdal and Araziel; for the Twins, Sagras and Saraiel;
for the Crab, Rahdar and Phakiel; for the Lion, Sagham
and Seratiel; for the Virgin, Iadara and Schaltiel; for the
Balance, Grasgarben and Hadakiel; for the Scorpion,
Riehol and Saissaiel; for the Archer, Vhnori and Saritaiel;
for the Goat, Sagdalon and Semakiel; for the Water-
Bearer, Archer and Ssakmakiel; for the Fishes, Rasamasa
and Vacabiel.
   The wise man, who would read the sky, must observe also
the days of the moon, the influence of which is very great

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  331

in astrology. The moon successively attracts and repels the
magnetic fluid of the earth, and thus produces the ebb and
flow of the sea; we must, therefore, be well acquainted with
its phases and be able to distinguish its days and hours.
The new moon is propitious to the beginning of all magical
works; from first quarter to full moon its influence is
warm; from full moon to third quarter it is dry; and from
third quarter to last it is cold. Here follow the special
characters of all the days of the moon, distinguished by the
twenty-two Tarot keys and by the signs of the seven planets.

                 1. The Juggler, or Magus.
  The first day of the moon is that of the creation of the
moon itself. This day is consecrated to mental enterprises,
and should be favourable for opportune innovations.

               2. Pope Joan, or Occult Science.
    The second day, the genius of which is Enediel, was the
fifth of creation, for the moon was made on the fourth day.
The birds and fishes, created on this day, are the living
hieroglyphs of magical analogies and of the universal doc¬
trine of Hermes. The water and air, which were thereby
filled with the forms of the Word, are the elementary figures
of the ^Mercury of the Sages, that is, of intelligence and
speech. This day is propitious to revelations, initiations,
and great discoveries of science.

           3. The Celestial Mother, or Empress.
   The third day was that of man's creation. So is the
moon called the Mother in Kabbalah when it is represented
in association with the number 3. This day is favourable
to generation, and generally to all productions, whether of
body or mind.
                 4. The Emperor, or Ruler.
  The fourth day is baleful; it was that of the birth
of Cain; but it is favourable to unjust and tyrannical
enterprises.

332              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


              5. The Pope, or Hierophant.
  The fifth day is fortunate; it was that of the birth of
Abel.
               6. The Lover, or Liberty.
  The sixth is a day of pride; it was that of the birth of
Lameeh, who said unto his wives: “I have slain a man to
my wounding, and a young man to my hurt. If Cain shall
be avenged sevenfold, truly Lameeh seventy and seven¬
fold.” This day is propitious for conspiracies and re¬
bellions.
                    7. The Chariot.
   On the seventh day, birth of Hebron, who gave his name
to the first of the seven sacred cities of Israel. A day of
religion, prayers, and success.

                         8. Justice.
  Murder of Abel.   Day of expiation.

               9. The Old Man, or Hermit.
  Birth of Methuselah.    Day of blessing for children.

            10. Ezekiel fs Wheel of Fortune.
  Birth of Nabuchodonosor. Reign of the Beast.        Fatal
day.
                    11. Strength.
   Birth of Noah. Visions on this day are deceitful, but it
is one of health and long life for children born on it.

            12. The Victim, or Hanged Man.
  Birth of Samuel. Prophetic and kabbalistic day, fav¬
ourable to the fulfilment of the great work.

                         13. Death.
  Birthday of Canaan, the accursed son of Cham.     Baleful
day and fatal number.

             14. The Angel of Temperance.
  Blessing of Noah on the fourteenth day of the moon.

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    333

This day is governed by the angel Cassiel of the hierarchy
of Uriel.
                  15. Typhon, or the Devil.
  Birth of Ishmael.       Day of reprobation and exile.

                   16.     The Blasted Tower.
  Birthday of Jacob and Esau; the day also of Jacob’s
predestination, to Esau’s ruin.

                   17.    The Glittering Star.
  Fire from heaven burns Sodom and Gomorrah. Day of
salvation for the good, and ruin for the wicked; on a
Saturday dangerous. It is under the dominion of the
Scorpion.
                    18. The Moon.
  Birth of Isaac. Wife’s triumph.          Day of conjugal af¬
fection and good hope.
                           19. The Sun.
  Birth of Pharaoh. A beneficent or fatal day for the great
of earth, according to the different merits of the great.

                         20. The Judgment.
   Birth of Jonas, the instrument of God’s judgment.       Pro¬
pitious for divine revelations.

                          21. The World.
  Birth of Saul, material royalty.        Danger to mind and
reason.
                   22.    Influence of Saturn.
  Birth of Job.    Day of trial and suffering.

                   23.     Influence of Venus.
  Birth of Benjamin.        Day of preference and tenderness.

                  24.     Influence of Jupiter.
  Birth of Japhet.

                  25.     Influence of Mercury.
  Tenth plague of Egypt.

334              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


                 26. Influence of Mars.
  Deliverance of the Israelites, and passage of the Red Sea.

           27. Influence of Diana, or Hecate.
  Splendid victory achieved by Judas Maccabeus.

               28.   Influence of the Sun.
  Samson carries off the gates of Gaza.    Day of strength
and deliverance.

               29.   The Fool of the Tarot.
   Day of failure and miscarriage in all things.
   We see from this rabbinical table, which John Belot and
others borrowed from the Hebrew kabbalists, that these an¬
cient masters concluded a posteriori from facts to presum¬
able influences, which is completely within the logic of the
occult sciences. We see also what diverse significations are
included in the twenty-two keys which form the universal
alphabet of the Tarot, together with the truth of our asser¬
tions, when we say that all secrets of the Kabbalah and
magic, all mysteries of the elder world, all science of the
patriarchs, all historical traditions of primeval times, are
enclosed in this hieroglyphic book of Thoth, Enoch, or
Cadmus.
   An exceedingly simple method of finding celestial horo¬
scopes by onomancy is that which we are about to describe;
it harmonises Gaffarel with our own views, and its results
are most astounding in their exactitude and depth. Take
a black card; cut therein the name of the person for whom
you wish to make the consultation; place this card at the
end of a tube which must diminish towards the eye of the
observer; then look through it alternately towards the four
cardinal points, beginning at the east and finishing at the
north. Take note of all the stars which you see through
the letters; convert these letters into numbers, and, with
the sum of the addition written down in the same manner,
renew the operation; then compute the number of stars

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    335

yon have; next, adding this number to that of the name,
again cast up and write the sum of the two numbers in
Hebrew characters. Again renew the operation; inscribe
separately the stars which you have noticed; then find the
names of all the stars in the planisphere; classify them ac¬
cording to their size and brightness, choosing the most bril¬
liant of all as the pole-star of your astrological operation;
then find, in the Egyptian planisphere, the names and fig¬
ures of the genii to which these stars belong. A good
example of the planisphere will be found in the atlas to the
great work of Dupuis. You will then know the fortunate
and unfortunate signs which enter into the name of the per¬
son, and what is their influence; whether in childhood,
which is the name traced at the east; in youth, which is the
name traced at the south; in mature age, which is the name
at the west; in decline, which is the name at the north; or,
finally, during the whole life, obtained from the stars which
enter into the entire number formed by the addition of the
letters and stars. This astrological operation is simple, easy,
and requires few calculations; it connects with the highest
antiquity, and belongs evidently to primitive patriarchal
magic, as will be seen by studying the works of Gaffarel
and his master Rabbi Chomer. Onomantic astrology was
practised by the old Hebrew kabbalists, as is proved from
their observations preserved by Rabbi Chomer, Rabbi Kapol,
Rabbi Abjudan, and other masters in Kabbalah. The men¬
aces of the prophets uttered against various nations were
based upon the characters of the stars found vertically over
them in the permanent correspondence of the celestial and
terrestrial spheres. Thus, by writing in the sky of Greece
the Hebrew name of that country ^ or ^ and translating
the numbers, they obtained the word                   signifies
destroyed, desolated.

336                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


                                    CIU
                                     2 2 8
                                    CHARAB.
                       Destroyed, Desolated.
                             Sum 12.


                                     c i v
                                     5 6 1
                                    JAVAN.
                                    Greece.
                                    Sum 12.


  Hence they inferred that after a cycle of twelve periods
Greece would be destroyed and desolated. A short time
before the sack of Jerusalem and its temple by Nabuzardan,
the kabbalists remarked eleven stars disposed in the fol¬
lowing manner vertically above the temple:—
                 .y.    Jf,   J(,    «U.   JL   4L   Jfc   JL
                 W      TT    W      TT    1v   TP   Tv*   TP




                              #

                        #            #

All these entered into the word          wr^fen from south
to west, the term signifying reprobation and abandonment
without mercy. The sum of the number of the letters is
423, exactly the period of the duration of the temple. De¬
struction threatened the empires of Persia and Assyria, in
the shape of four vertical stars which entered into the three
letters      Poev, and the fatal period indicated was 208
years. So, also four stars announced to the kabbalistic rab¬
bins of another period the fall and division of the empire
of Alexander; they entered into the word           Parad, to
divide, 284, the number of this word, indicating the entire
duration of this empire, both as to root and branches. Ac¬
cording tai Rabbi Chomer, the destinies of the Ottoman
power at Constantinople would be fixed and announced be¬
forehand by four stars, entering into the word          Caah,
signifying to be feeble, weak, and drawing to its end. The

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     337

stars being more brilliant in the letter ^, indicated a capital,
and gave it the numerical value of a thousand. The three
letters combined make 1025, which must be computed from
the taking of Constantinople by Mahomet II., a calculation
which still holds out several centuries of existence to the
enfeebled empire of the sultans, at present sustained by all
Europe combined. The Mane Thecel Phares which Bal¬
thazar, in his intoxication, saw written on the wall of his
palace by the glare of the torches, was an onomantic in¬
tuition similar to that of the rabbins. Initiated, no doubt,
by his Hebrew diviners in the reading of the stars, Balthazar
operated mechanically and instinctively upon the lamps of
his nocturnal feast, as he would upon the stars of heaven.
The three words which he had formed in his imagination
soon became indelible to his eyes, and paled all the lights of
his banquet. It was easy to predict an end like that of
 Sardanapalus to a king who abandoned himself to orgies in
a besieged town.
   In conclusion, we have said, and we repeat, that magnetic
 intuitions alone give value and reality to all kabbalistic and
 astrological calculations, puerile possibly, and completely
 arbitrary, when made without inspiration, by cold curiosity,
 and in the absence of a powerful will.

338               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                    CHAPTER XVIII

                PHILTRES AND MAGNETISM.

Let us now adventure in Thessaly, the country of enchant¬
ments. Here was Apuleius deluded like the companions of
Ulysses, and underwent a shameful metamorphosis. Here
all is magical,—the birds that fly, the insects humming in
the grass, even the trees and flowers; here in the moon¬
light are brewed those poisons which compel love; here
spells are devised by the stryges to render them young and
lovely like the Charites. 0 all ye youths, beware!
   The art of poisoning the reason, or of philtres, seems, as
a fact, if traditions may be trusted, to have developed its
venomous efflorescence more abundantly in Thessaly than
elsewhere; there, also, magnetism played its most important
part, for exciting or narcotic plants, bewitching and harmful
animal substances, derived all their power from enchant¬
ments—that is to say, sacrifices accomplished and words
pronounced by sorcerers when preparing philtres and bev¬
erages. Stimulating substances, and those in which phos¬
phorus predominates, are naturally aphrodisiacal. Any¬
thing which acts strongly on the nervous system may de¬
termine passional exaltation, and when a skilful and per¬
severing will knows how to direct and influence these
natural tendencies, it can make use of the passions of others
to the profit of its own, and will soon reduce the most in¬
dependent personalities into instruments of its pleasures.
From such influence it behoves us to seek protection, and to
give arms to the weak is our purpose in writing this
chapter. These, in the first place, are the devices of the
enemy. The man who seeks to compel love—we attribute
such unlawful manoeuvres to men only, assuming that
women can never have need of them—must in the first
place make himself observed by the person whom he desires.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   339

and must contrive to impress her imagination. He must
inspire her with admiration, astonishment, terror, even
with horror, failing all other resources; but at any cost he
must set himself apart in her eyes from the rank of ordi¬
nary men, and, with or against her will, must make himself
a place in her memory, her apprehensions, her dreams. The
type of Lovelace is certainly not the admitted ideal of the
type of Clarissa, but she thinks of him incessantly to con¬
demn him, to execrate him, to compassionate his victims, to
desire his conversion and repentance; next she seeks his
regeneration by devotion and forgiveness; later on secret
vanity whispers to her how grand it would be to fix the
affections of a Lovelace, to love him, and yet to withstand
him. Behold, then, Clarissa surprised into loving Lovelace!
She chides herself, blushes, renounces a thousand times, and
loves him a thousand more; then, at the supreme moment,
she forgets to resist him. Had angels been women, as repre¬
sented by modern mysticism, Jehovah, indeed, would have
acted as a wise and prudent father by placing Satan at the
gate of heaven. It is a serious imposition on the self-love
of some amiable women to find that man fundamentally
good and honourable who enamoured them when they
thought him a scapegrace. The angel leaves him disdain¬
fully saying: “You are not the devil!” Play the devil as
well as you can, if you wish to allure an angel. No license
is possible to a virtuous man. ‘‘For what does he take usV’
say the women. *1 Does he think us less strict than he is ? ”
But everything is forgiven in a rascal. “What else could
you expect ? ’ ’ The part of a man with high principles and
of rigid character can never be a power save with women
whom no one wishes to fascinate; the rest, without excep¬
tion, adore the reprobates. It is quite the opposite with
men, and this contrast has made modesty woman’s dower,
the first and most natural of her coquetries. One of the
distinguished physicians and most amiable men of learning
in London told me last year that one of his blients, when
leaving the house of a distinguished lady, observed to him:

340               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


“I have just had a strange compliment from the Mar¬
chioness of —-. Looking me straight in the face, she
said: ‘Sir, you will not make me flinch before your ter¬
rible glance; you have the eyes of Satan.’ ” “Well,” an¬
swered the doctor, smiling, “you, of course, put your arms
round her neck and embraced her?” “Not at all; I was
overwhelmed by her sudden onslaught. ” “ Beware how you
call on her again, then, my friend, you will have fallen
deeply in her estimation! ’ ’
   The office of executioner is commonly said to go down
from father to son. Do executioners really have children ?
Undoubtedly, as they never fail to get wives. Marat had a
mistress who loved him tenderly, he, the loathsome leper;
but still it was that terrible Marat, who caused the world
to tremble. Love, above all in a woman, may be termed a
veritable hallucination; for want of a prudent motive, it
will frequently select an absurd one. Deceive Joconde for
a baboon, what horror!—Ah! but supposing it is a horror,
why not perpetrate it? It must be pleasant to be occa¬
sionally guilty of a small abomination!
   Given this transcendental knowledge of the woman, an¬
other* device can be adopted to attract her notice—not
to concern oneself with her, or to do so in a way which is
humiliating to her self-love, treating her as a child and
deriding all notion of paying court to her. The parts are
then reversed; she will move heaven and earth to tempt
you; she will initiate you into secrets which women keep
back; she will vest and unvest before you, making such
observations as: “Between women—among old friends—I
have no fear about you—you are not a man for me,” &c.
Then she will watch your expression; if she find it calm and
indifferent, she will be indignant; she will approach you
under some pretext, brush you with her tresses, permit her
bodice to slip open. Women, in such cases, occasionally
will risk a violence, not out of desire, but from curiosity,
from impatience, and from provocation. A magician of
any spirit will need no other philtres than these; he will

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  341

also use flattering words, magnetic breathings, slight but
voluptuous contacts, by a kind of hypocrisy, and as if un¬
conscious. Those who resort to potions are old, idiotic,
ugly, impotent. Where, indeed, is the use of the philtre?
Any one who is truly a man has always at his disposal
the means of making himself loved, providing he does not
seek to usurp a place which is occupied. It would be a
sovereign blunder to attempt the conquest of a young and
affectionate bride during the first felicities of the honey¬
moon, or of a fortified Clarissa already made miserable by
a Lovelace, or bitterly lamenting her love.
   We shall not discuss here the impurities of black magic
on the subject of philtres; we have done with the coctions
of Canidia. The epodes of Horace tell us after what man¬
ner this abominable Roman sorceress compounded her
poisons, while for the sacrifices and enchantments of love,
we may refer to the Eclogues of Virgil and Theocritus,
where the ceremonials for this species of magical work are
minutely described. Nor shall we need to reproduce the
recipes of the Grimoires or of the Little Albert, which any
one can consult for themselves. All these various practices
connect with magnetism or poisonous magic, and are either
 foolish or criminal. Potions which enfeeble mind and
disturb reason assure the empire already conquered by an
evil will, and it was thus that the empress Casonia is said
to have fixed the savage love of Caligula. Prussic acid is
the mast terrible agent in these envenomings of thought,
and hence we should all beware of extractions with an
almond flavour, and never tolerate in bedchambers the
presence of laurel-almond, datura stramonium, almond
soaps or washes, and generally all perfumes in which this
odour predominates, above all,, when its action on the brain
is seconded by that of amber.
   To weaken the activity of intelligence is to strengthen
proportionally the forces of unreasoning passion. Love of
that kind which the malefactors we are concerned with
would inspire is a veritable stupefaction and the most

342               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


shameful of moral bondages.       The more we enervate a
slave, the more incapable we make him of freedom, and
here lies the true secret of the sorceress in Apuleius and
the potions of Circe. The use of tobacco, by smoking or
otherwise, is a dangerous auxiliary of stupefying philtres
and brain poisons. Nicotine, as we know, is not less deadly
than prussic acid, and is present in tobacco in larger quan¬
tities than is this acid in almonds. The absorption of one
will by another frequently changes a whole series of des¬
tinies, and not for ourselves only should we watch our re¬
lations, learning to distinguish pure from impure atmos¬
pheres, for the true philtres, and those most dangerous,
are invisible; these are the curents of vital radiating light,
which, mingling and interchanging, produce attractions
and sympathies, as magnetic experiments leave no room to
doubt. The history of the Church tells us that an arch¬
heretic named Marcos infatuated all women by breathing
on them, but his power was destroyed by a valiant Chris¬
tian female, who forestalled him in breathing, and said to
him: “May God judge thee!” The cure Gaufridy, who
was burnt as a sorcerer, pretended to enamour all women
who came in contact with his breath. The notorious Father
Girard, a Jesuit, was accused by his penitent, Mile. Cardier,
of completely destroying her self-control by breathing on
her. The excuse was most necessary to minimise the hor¬
rible and ridiculous nature of her accusations against this
priest, whose guilt, moreover, has never been well estab¬
lished, though, consciously or unconsciously, he had cer¬
tainly inspired an exceedingly shameful passion in the
miserable girl.
   “Mile. Ranfaing, having become a widow in 16—,”
says Dom Calmet in his “Treatise on Apparitions,” “was
sought in marriage by a physician named Poirot. Failing
to obtain a hearing, he thereupon gave her potions to in¬
duce love, and these caused extraordinary derangements in
the health of the lady, increasing to such a degree that she
was believed to be possessed, and physicians, baffled by her

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  343

case, recommended her for the exorcisms of the Church.
Thereupon, by command of M. de Porcelets, Bishop of
Toul, the following were named as her exorcists: M. Viar-
din, doctor in theology, the state councillor of the Duke of
Lorraine, a Jesuit, and a capuchin, but in the long course
of their ceremonies, almost all the clergy of Nancy, the
aforesaid lord bishop, the bishop of Tripoli, suffragan of
Strasbourg, M. de Nancy, formerly ambassador of the most
Christian King at Constantinople and then priest of the
Oratory, Charles of Lorraine, Bishop of Verdun, two Sor-
bonne doctors specially deputed to assist, frequently exor¬
cised her in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin, and she in¬
variably replied to them pertinently, though she herself
could scarcely read even Latin. Mention is made of the
certificate given by M. Nicholas de Harlay, learned in the
Hebrew tongue, who recognised that Mile. Ranfaing was
really possessed, that she had answered the mere motion of
his lips without any uttered words, and had given numerous
other proofs. The sieur Gamier, doctor of the Sorbonne,
having also commanded her several times in the Hebrew
language, she replied lucidly, but in French, saying that
the pact bound her to speak in ordinary language. The
demon added: “Is it not sufficient for me to shew that I
understand what you say ? ’ ’ The same doctor, addressing
him in Greek, inadvertently used one case for another,
whereupon the possessed woman, or rather the devil, said:
“You have blundered.” The doctor replied in Greek,
“Point out my error.” The devil answered, “Be satisfied
that I mention the mistake; I shall tell you no more.’ ’ The
doctor bade him be silent in Greek, and he retorted, “You
bid me be silent, and I will not be silent. ’ ’
   This remarkable example of hysterical affection carried
into the region of ecstasy and demonomania, as the con¬
sequence of a potion administered by a man who believed
that he was a sorcerer, proves, better than anything we
could say, the omnipotence of will and imagination re¬
acting one upon another, and the strange lucidity of

344              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


ecstatics or somnambulists, who comprehend speech by
reading it in thought, though they have no knowledge of
the words. I make no question as to the sincerity of the
witnesses cited by Dom Calmet; I am merely astonished
that men so serious passed by the difficulty which the pre¬
tended demon experienced over answering in a tongue
foreign to the sufferer. Had their interlocutor been what
they understood by a demon, he would have spoken as well
as understood Greek; the one would have been as easy as
the other to a spirit so learned and satirical. Dom Calmet
does not stop here with his history; he enumerates a long
series of insidious questions and unserious injunctions on
the part of the exorcisors, and a like sequence of more
or less congruous replies by the poor sufferer, who was al¬
ways ecstatic and somnambulistic. It is needless to add
that the excellent father draws precisely the luminous con¬
clusions of the not less excellent M. de Mirville. The phe¬
nomena being above the comprehension of the witnesses,
they were all ascribed to perdition.       Splendid and in¬
structed conclusion! The most serious part of the business
is that the physician Poirot was arraigned as a magician,
confessed, like all others, under torture, and was burnt.
Had he, by any potion, really attempted the reason of the
woman in question, he would have deserved punishment as
a poisoner; that is the most that we can say.
   But the most terrific of all philtres are the mystical
exaltations of misdirected devotion. Will ever any impuri¬
ties equal the nightmares of St Anthony or the tortures of
St Theresa and St Angela de Foligny? The last applied a
red hot iron to her rebellious flesh, and found that the
material fire was cooling to her hidden ardours. With what
violence does nature cry out for that which is denied her,
but! is brooded over continually to increase detestation
thereof! The pretended bewitchments of Magdalen Bavan,
of Miles, de la Palud, and de la Cadiere, began with mysti¬
cism. The excessive fear of a given thing makes it almost
invariably inevitable. To follow the two curves of a circle

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      345

  is to reach and to meet at the same point.              Nicholas
  Remigius, criminal judge of Lorraine, who burnt alive eight
  hundred women as sorcerers, beheld magic everywhere; it
  was his fixed idea, his mania. He was eager to preach a
  crusade against sorcerers, with whom Europe, in his opin¬
  ion, was swarming; in despair that his word was not taken
  when he affirmed that nearly everyone in the world had
  been guilty of magic, he ended by declaring that he was
  himself a sorcerer, and was burned on his own confession.
    To preserve ourselves against evil influences, the first
  condition is therefore to forbid excitement to the imagina¬
 tion. All those who are prone to excitement are more or
 less mad, and a maniac is ever governed by his mania.
 Place yourself, then, above puerile fears and vague desires;
 believe in supreme wisdom, and be assured that this wis¬
 dom, having given you understanding as the means of
 knowledge, cannot seek to lay snares for your intelligence
 or reason. Everywhere about you, you behold effects pro¬
 portioned to their causes; you find causes directed and
 modified in the domain of humanity by understanding; in
 a word, you find goodness stronger and more respected
 than evil; why should you assume an immense unreason in
 the infinite, seeing that there is reason in the finite ? Truth
 is hidden from no one. God is visible in His works, and
 He requires nothing contrary to its nature from any being,
 for He is himself the author of that nature. Faith is con¬
fidence ; have confidence, not in men who malign reason, for
they are fools or impostors, but in the eternal reason which
is the Divine Word, that true light which is offered like
the sun to the intuition of every human creature coming
into this world. If you believe in absolute reason, and
if you desire truth and justice before all things, you will
have no occasion to fear anyone, and you will love those
only who are deserving of love. Your natural light will
repel instinctively that of the wicked, because it will be
ruled by your will. Thus, even poisonous substances, which
it is possible may be administered to you, will not affect

346               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


your intelligence; ill, indeed, they may make you, but
never criminal.
  What most contributes to render women hysterical is
their soft and hypocritical education; if they took more
exercise, if they were instructed more frankly and fully in
matters of the world, they would be less capricious, and con¬
sequently less accessible to evil tendencies. Weakness ever
sympathises with vice, because vice is a weakness which
assumes the mask of strength. Madness holds reason in
horror, and on all subjects it delights in the exaggerations
of falsehood. In the first place, therefore, cure your dis¬
eased intelligence.    The cause of all bewitchments, the
poison of all philtres, the power of all sorcerers, are there.
As to narcotics or other drugs which may be administered
to you, it is a subject for the physician and the law, but
we do not think that such enormities will be largely repro¬
duced at this day. Lovelaces no longer stupefy Clarissas
otherwise than by their gallantries, and potions, like ab¬
ductions by masked men and imprisonments in subter¬
ranean dungeons, have even passed out of our romances.
All these must be relegated to the Confessional of the Black
Penitents or the ruins of the Castle of Udolpho.

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                      347




                       CHAPTER XIX

                  THE MASTERY OF THE SUN

We come now to that number which is attributed in the
Tarot to the sign of the sun. The denary of Pythagoras
and the triad multiplied by itself represent wisdom in its
application to the absolute. It is with the absolute, there¬
fore, that we are concerned here. To discover the absolute
in the infinite, the indefinite, and the finite, such is the great
work of the sages, that which is termed by Hermes the
work of the sun. To find the immovable foundations of
true religious faith, of philosophical truth, and of metallic
transmutation, this is the whole secret of Hermes, this is
the philosophical stone. Now, this stone is both one and
manifold; it is decomposed by analysis and recomposed by
synthesis. In the analysis it is a powder, the alchemical
powder of projection; before the analysis and in the syn¬
thesis it is a stone. The philosophical stone, say the mas¬
ters, must not be exposed to the air, nor to the eyes of the
profane; it must be kept in concealment and preserved
carefully in the most secret receptacle of the laboratory,
the key of the place being always carried upon the person.
   He who possesses the great arcanum is truly king and is
 above any king, for he is inaccessible to all fears and to all
 vain hopes. In any malady of soul or body, a single frag¬
 ment broken from the precious stone, a single grain of the
 divine powder, are more than sufficient for their cure.
4‘He that hath ears to hear, let him hear,” as the Master
said.
   Salt, sulphur, and the mercuries are only accessory ele¬
ments and passive instruments of the great enterprise.
Everything depends, as we have said, upon the interior
magnes of Paracelsus. The work consists entirely in pro¬
jection, and projection is accomplished perfectly by the

348               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


effective and realisable intelligence of a single word. There
is but one important operation, and that is sublimation,
which is nothing else, according to Geber, but the elevation
of the dry substance by means of fire, with adherence to its
proper vessel. He who is desirous of understanding the
great word and of possessing the great arcanum, after
studying the principles of our Doctrine, should read the
Hermetic philosophers carefully, and he will doubtless at¬
tain initiation, as others have attained it; but for the key
of their allegories he must take the one dogma of Hermes,
contained in the Emerald Table, and to classify the knowl¬
edge and direct the operation he must follow the order in¬
dicated in the kabbalistic alphabet of the Tarot, of which
an absolute and complete explanation will be given in the
last chapter of this work.
   Among the rare and priceless treatises which contain the
mysteries of the great arcanum, the ‘ ‘ Chemical Pathway or
Manual” of Paracelsus must be placed in the first rank, as
comprising all the mysteries of demonstrative physics and
the most secret kabbalah. This unique manuscript is pre¬
served in the Vatican Library; a copy was transcribed by
Sendivogius, and was used by Baron Tschoudy when com¬
posing the Hermetic Catechism contained in his work en¬
titled “The Blazing Star.” This catechism, which we
point out to instructed kabbalists as a substitute for the
incomparable treatise of Paracelsus, expounds all the es¬
sential principles of the great work in a form so clear and
complete that a person must be absolutely wanting in the
quality of occult understanding if he fail in attaining the
absolute truth by its study. We shall now give a succinct
analysis of this work, together with a few words by way of
commentary.
   Raymond Lully, one of the grand and sublime masters of
science, says that before we can make gold we must have
gold. Out of nothing we can make nothing; wealth is not
absolutely created; it is increased and multiplied. Hence,
let aspirants to knowledge understand thoroughly that

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     349

neither miracles nor jugglers’ feats are required of the
adept. Hermetic science, like all real sciences, is mathe¬
matically demonstrable. Even its material results are as
exact as a well-worked equation. Hermetic gold is not only
a true doctrine, a shadowless light, truth unalloyed with
falsehood; it is also material, actual, pure gold, the most
precious which can be found in the veins of the earth, but
the living gold, living sulphur, or true fire of the philoso¬
pher, must be sought in the house of mercury. This fire
feeds on air; to express its attractive and expansive power,
a better comparison is impossible than that of lightning,
which primally is a dry and terrestrial exhalation united
to humid vapour, and afterwards, in virtue of its exalta¬
tion, assuming an igneous nature, acts on its inherent
humidity, which it attracts and transmutes into its own
nature, after which it falls rapidly to earth, where it is
drawn by a fixed nature similar to its own. These words,
enigmatic in form but clear in essence, express openly
what the philosophers understand by their mercury fructi¬
fied by sulphur, becoming the master and regenerator of
salt; it is Azoth, universal magnesia, the great magical
agent, the astral light, the light of life, fertilised by animic
force, by intellectual energy, which they compare to sul¬
phur on account of its affinities with divine fire. As to
salt, it is absolute matter. All that is material contains
salt, and all salt can be converted into pure gold by the
combined action of sulphur and mercury, which at times
act with such swiftness that transmutation can take place
in an instant, or in an hour, without labour for the operator
and almost without expense; at other times, when the ten¬
dencies of the atmospheric media are more contrary, the
operation requires several days, months, and, occasionally,
even years.
  As we have already said, there are two palmary natural
laws—two essential laws—which, balanced one against an¬
other, produce the universal equilibrium of things. These
are fixity and motion, analogous to truth and discovery in

350                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


philosophy, and in absolute conception to necessity and
liberty, which are the very essence of God. The Hermetic
philosophers give the name of fixed to all which is ponder¬
able, to all which tends by its nature to central rest and
immobility; whatsoever obeys more naturally and readily
the law of motion, they term volatile; and they compose
their stone by analysis, that is, the volatilisation of the
fixed; then by synthesis, that is, the fixation of the volatile,
which they operate by applying to the fixed, called their
salt, sulphurated mercury or light of life, directed and
rendered omnipotent by a secret operation. They possess
themselves in this manner of all nature, and their stone is
found wherever there is salt, which is equivalent to saying
that no substance is foreign to the great work, and that
even the most apparently contemptible and vile matters can
be changed into gold, which is true in this sense, as we have
said, that all contain the fundamental salt, represented in
our emblems by the cubic stone itself, as may be seen in
the symbolic and universal frontispiece to the keys of Basil
Valentine. To know how to extract from all matter the
pure salt which is concealed in it is to possess the secret of
the stone. It is, therefore, a saline stone, which the od, or
universal astral light, decomposes or recomposes. It is one
and many, for, like ordinary salt, it can be dissolved and
incorporated with other substances. Obtained by analysis,
it may be termed the universal sublimate; recovered by the
synthetic way, it is the veritable panacea of the ancients, for
it cures all diseases, whether of soul or body, and is termed,
in an eminent manner, the medicine of all nature. When,
by means of absolute initiation, we can dispose of the
forces of the universal agent, this stone is always to our
hand, for its extraction is then a simple and easy operation,
far different from projection or metallic realisation. The
stone in its sublimated state must not be exposed to the
air, which might dissolve it and spoil its virtue. More¬
over, to inhale its exhalations is not devoid of danger. The
wise man more readily conserves it in its natural envelopes,

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    351

knowing that he can extract it by a single effort of his will,
and a single application of the universal agent to the en¬
velopes, which the kabbalists term shells.       To express
hieroglyphically this law of prudence, the sages of Egypt
ascribed to their mercury, personified as Hermanubis, a
dog’s head, and to their sulphur, represented by the Baph-
omet of the temple, or prince of the Sabbath, that goat’s
head which brought such odium upon the occult associa¬
tions of the middle ages.
   For the mineral work, the first matter is exclusively
mineral, but it is not a metal. It is a metallised salt.
This matter is called vegetable, because it resembles a fruit,
and animal, because it produces a kind of milk and blood.
It alone contains the fire by which it must be dissolved.

352               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                      CHAPTER XX

                 THE   THAUMATURGE

We have defined miracles as the natural effects of excep¬
tional causes. The immediate action of the human will
upon the body, or at least that action exercised without
visible means, constitutes a miracle in the physical order.
The influence exercised upon wills or intelligences, either
suddenly or within a given time, and capable of subjugat¬
ing thoughts, changing the most determined resolutions,
paralysing the most violent passions—this influence con¬
stitutes a miracle in the moral order. The common error
concerning miracles is to regard them as effects without
causes, contradictions of nature, sudden vagaries of the
divine mind, not seeing that a single miracle of this class
would destroy the universal harmony, and reduce the uni¬
verse to chaos. There are miracles which are impossible,
even for God, namely, those which involve absurdity. Could
God be absurd for one instant, neither Himself nor the
world would be in existence the moment following. To
expect from the divine arbiter an effect having a dispro¬
portionate cause, or even no cause at all, is what is called
tempting God; it is casting one’s self into the void. God
operates by His works—in heaven by angels, and on earth
by men. Hence, in the circle of angelic action, the angels
can perform all that is possible for God, and in the human
circle of action men can dispose equally of divine omnipo¬
tence. In the heaven of human conceptions, it is humanity
which creates God, and men think that God has made
them in His image because they have made Him in theirs.
The domain of man is all corporeal and visible nature on
earth, and if he cannot rule suns and stars, he can at least
calculate their motion, compute their distances, and identify
his will with their influence; he can modify the atmos-

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    353

 phere, act up to a certain point upon the seasons, heal or
 harm his neighbours, preserve life and inflict death, the
 conservation of life, including resurrection in certain cases,
 as already established. The absolute in reason and volition
 is the greatest power which can be given any man to attain,
 and it is by means of this power that he performs what as¬
 tonishes the multitude under the name of miracles.
    The most perfect purity of intention is indispensable to
the thaumaturge, and in the next place a favourable cur¬
rent and unlimited confidence. The man who has come to
fear nothing and desire nothing is master of all. This is
the meaning of that beautiful allegory of the Gospel,
wherein the Son of God, thrice victor over the unclean
spirit, is ministered unto by angels in the wilderness.
Nothing on earth withstands a free and rational will.
When the wise man says, “I will,” it is God Himself who
wills, and all that He commands takes place. It is the
knowledge of the physician, and the confidence placed in
him, which constitute the virtue of his prescriptions, and
thaumaturgy is the only real and efficacious remedy. Hence
occult therapeutics are apart from all vulgar medication.
It chiefly makes use of words and insufflations, and com¬
municates by will a various virtue to the simplest sub¬
stances—water, oil, wine, camphor, salt. The water of
homoeopathists is truly a magnetised and enchanted water,
which works by means of faith. The dynamic substances
added in, so to speak, infinitesimal quantities are consecra¬
tions and signs of the physician’s will.
   What is vulgarly called charlatanism is a great means of
real success in medicine, assuming that it is sufficiently
skilful to inspire great confidence and to form a circle of
faith. In medicine, above all, it is faith which saves. There
is scarcely a village which does not possess its male or fe¬
male compounder of occult medicine, and these people are
almost everywhere, and invariably, more successful incom¬
parably than physicians approved by the faculty. The
remedies they prescribe are often strange or ridiculous, and

354               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 hence answer all the better, for they exact and realise more
 faith on the part of patients and operators. An old mer¬
 chant of our acquaintance, a man of eccentric character and
 exalted religious sentiment, after retiring from business,
set himself to exercise gratuitously, and out of Christian
 charity, occult medicine in one of the Departments of
 France.   His sole specifics were oil, insufflations, and
 prayers. The institution of a law-suit against him for the
illegal exercise of medicine established in public knowledge
that ten thousand cures had been attributed to him in the
space of about five years, and that the number of his be¬
lievers increased in proportions calculated to alarm all
the doctors of the district. We saw also at Mans a poor
nun who was regarded as slightly demented, but she healed,
nevertheless, all diseases in the surrounding country by
means of an elixir and plaster of her own invention. The
elixir was taken internally, the plaster was applied out¬
wardly, so that nothing escaped this universal panacea.
The plaster never stuck upon the skin save at the place
where its application was necessary, and it rolled up and
fell off by itself—such at least was asserted by the good
sister and declared to be the case by the sufferers. This
thaumaturge was also subjected to prosecution, for she
impoverished the practice of all the doctors round about
her; she was rigidly cloistered, but it was soon found neces¬
sary to produce her at least once a week, and on the day
for her consultations we have seen Sister Jane-Francis
surrounded by the country folk, who had arrived over¬
night, awaiting their turn, lying at the convent gate; they
had slept upon the ground, and tarried only to receive the
elixir and plaster of the devoted sister. The remedy being
the same in all diseases, it would appear needless for her
to be acquainted with the cases of her patients, but she
listened to them invariably with great attention, and only
dispensed her specific after learning the nature of the com¬
plaint. There was the magical secret. The direction of the
intention imparted its special virtue to the remedy, which

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  355

   was insignificant in itself. The elixir was spiced brandy
  mixed with the juice of bitter herbs; the plaster was a
  compound analogous to theriac as regards colour and smell;
  it was possibly electuary Burgogne pitch, but whatever the
  substance, it worked wonders, and the wrath of the rural
  folk would have been visited on those who questioned the
  miracles of their nun. Near Paris, also, we knew of an old
  gardener thaumaturge who accomplished marvellous cures
  by putting in his phials the juice of all the herbs of St
  John. He had, however, a sceptical brother, who derided
  the sorcerer, and the poor gardener, overwhelmed by the
  sarcasms of this infidel, began to doubt himself, whereupon
  all the miracles ceased, the sufferers lost confidence, and
  the thaumaturge, slandered and despairing, died mad.
  The Abbe Thiers, cure of Vibraie, in his curious “Treatise
 concerning Superstitions/’ records that a woman, afflicted
 with an apparently aggravated ophthalmia, having been
 suddenly and mysteriously cured, confessed to a priest
 that she had betaken herself to magic.        She had long
 importuned a clerk, whom she regarded as a magician, to
 give her a talisman that she might wear, and he had at
 length delivered her a scroll of parchment, advising her at
 the same time to wash three times daily in fresh water.
 The priest made her give up the parchment, on which were
 these words: Eruat diabolus oculos tuos et repleat ster-
 coribus loca vacantia. He translated them to the good
 woman, who was stupefied; but, all the same, she was
cured.
    Insufflation is one of the most important practices of
occult medicine, because it is a perfect sign of the trans¬
mission of life. To inspire, as a fact, means to breathe
upon some person or thing, and we know already, by the
one doctrine of Hermes, that the virtue of things has
created words, and that there is an exact proportion be¬
tween ideas and speech, which is the first form and verbal
realisation of ideas. The breath attracts or repels, accord¬
ingly, as it is warm or cold. The warm breathing cor-

356               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 responds to positive electricity, and the cold breathing
 to negative electricity. Electrical and nervous animals
 fear the cold breathing, and the experiment may be made
 upon a cat, whose familiarities are importunate.           By
 fixedly regarding a lion or tiger and blowing in their
 face, they would be so stupefied as to be forced to retreat
 before us. Warm and prolonged insufflation restores the
 circulation of the blood, cures rheumatic and gouty pains,
 re-establishes the balance of the humours, and dispels las¬
situde. When the operator is sympathetic and good, it
 acts as a universal sedative.       Cold insufflation soothes
pains occasioned by congestions and fluidic accumulations.
 The two breathings must, therefore, be used alternately,
observing the polarity of the human organism, and acting
in a contrary manner upon the poles, which must be treated
successfully to an opposite magnetism. Thus, to cure an
inflamed eye, the one which is not affected must be sub¬
jected to a warm and gentle insufflation, cold insufflation
being practised upon the suffering member at the same
distance and in the same proportion. Magnetic passes
have a similar effect to insufflations, and are a real breath¬
ing by transpiration and radiation of the interior air,
which is phosphorescent with vital light; slow passes con¬
stitute a warm breathing which fortifies and raises the
spirits; swift passes are a cold breathing of dispersive
nature, neutralising tendencies to congestion. The warm
insufflation should be performed transversely, or from be¬
low upward; the cold insufflation is more effective when
directed downward from above.
   We breathe not only by means of mouth and nostrils;
the universal porousness of our body is a true respiratory
apparatus, inadequate undoubtedly, but most useful to life
and health. The extremities of the fingers, where all the
nerves terminate, diffuse or attract the astral light accord¬
ingly as we will. Magnetic passes without contact are a
simple and slight insufflation; contact adds sympathetic and
equilibrating impression; it is good and even necessary, to

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    357

prevent hallucinations at the early stages of somnambulism,
for it is a communion of physical reality which admonishes
the brain and recalls wandering imagination; it must not,
however, be too prolonged when the object is merely to
magnetise. Absolute and prolonged contact is useful when
the design is incubation or massage rather than magnetism
properly so called. We have given some examples of in¬
cubation from the most revered book of the Christians;
they all refer to the cure of apparently incurable lethargies,
as we are induced to term resurrections. Massage is still
largely resorted to in the east, where it is practised with
great success at the public baths. It is entirely a system
of frictions, tractions, and pressures, practised slowly along
the whole length of members and muscles, the result being
 renewed equilibrium in the forces, a feeling of complete
repose and well-being, with a sensible restoration of activity
 and vigour.
    The whole power of the occult physician is in the con¬
 science of his will, while his whole art consists in exciting
 the faith of his patient. “If you have faith,” said the
 Master, ‘‘ all things are possible to him who believes. ’ ’ The
 subject must be dominated by expression, tone, gesture;
 confidence must be inspired by a fatherly manner, and
 cheerfulness stimulated by seasonable and sprightly con¬
 versations. Rabelais, who was a greater magician than he
 seemed, made pantagruelism his special panacea. He com¬
 pelled his patients to laugh, and all the remedies he sub¬
 sequently gave them succeeded better in consequence; he
 established a magnetic sympathy between himself and
 them, by means of which he communicated to them his own
 confidence and good humour; he flattered them in his
 prefaces, termed them his precious, most illustrious patients,
 and dedicated his books to them. So are we convinced that
 Gargantua and Pantagruel cured more black humours, more
 tendencies to madness, more atrabilious whims, at that
 epoch of religious animosities and civil wars, than the whole
 Faculty of medicine could boast. Occult medicine is essen-

358                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 tially sympathetic. Reciprocal affection, or at least real
 good will, must exist between doctor and patient. Syrups
 and juleps have very little inherent virtue; they are what
 they become through the mutual opinion of operator and
 subject; hence homoeopathic medicine dispenses with them
 and no serious inconvenience follows. Oil and wine, com¬
 bined with salt or camphor, are sufficient for the healing of
 all afflictions, and for all external frictions or soothing
 applications, oil and wine are the chief medicaments of
 the Gospel tradition. They formed the balm of the Good
 Samaritan, and in the Apocalypse, when describing the
 last plagues, the prophet prays the avenging powers to
spare these substances, that is, to leave a hope and a remedy
for so many wounds. What we term extreme unction was
the pure and simple practice of the Master’s traditional
medicine, both for the early Christians and in the mind of
the apostle Saint James, who has included the precept in
his epistle to the faithful of the whole world. 4 ‘ Is any man
sick among you,” he writes, “let him call in the priests
of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him
with oil in the name of the Lord.” This divine therapeutic
science was lost gradually, and Extreme Unction came to be
regarded as a religious formality necessary as a prepara¬
tion for death. At the same time, the thaumaturgic virtue
of consecrated oil could not be altogether effaced from re¬
membrance by the traditional doctrine, and it is perpetuated
in the passage of the catechism which refers to Extreme
Unction. Faith and charity were the most signal healing
powers among the early Christians. The source of most
diseases is in moral disorders; we must begin by healing
the soul, and then the cure of the body will follow quickly.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   359




                      CHAPTER XXI

               THE SCIENCE OF THE PROPHETS

This chapter is consecrated to divination, which, in its
broadest sense, and following the grammatical significance
of the word, is the exercise of divine power, and the
realisation of divine knowledge. It is the priesthood of
the magus. But divination, in general opinion, is concerned
more closely with the knowledge of hidden things.          To
know the most secret thoughts of men; to penetrate the
mysteries of past and future; to evoke age by age the
exact revelation of effects by the precise knowledge of
causes; this is what is universally called divination. Now,
of all mysteries of nature, the most profound is the heart of
man, and at the same time nature forbids its depths to be
inaccessible. In spite of the deepest dissimulation, despite
the most skilful policy, she herself traces, and makes plain
in the bodily form, in the light of glances, in movements, in
carriage, in voice, a thousand tell-tale indices. The perfect
initiate has no need of these indices; he perceives the truth
in the light; he senses an impression which makes known
the whole man, his glance penetrates hearts, he may even
feign ignorance to disarm the fear or hatred of the wicked
whom he knows too well. A man of had conscience thinks
always that he is being accused or suspected; he recognises
himself in a touch of collective satire, he applies that whole
satire to himself, and cries loudly that he is calumniated.
Ever suspicious, but as curious as he is apprehensive, in the
presence of the magus he is like the Satan of the parable,
or like those scribes who questioned tempting. Ever stub¬
born and ever feeble, what he fears above all is the recog¬
nition that he is in the wrong. The past disquiets him,
the future alarms him; he seeks to compound with him¬
self and to believe himself a well-placed and virtuous

360               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


man. His life is a perpetual struggle between good aspira¬
tions and evil habits; he thinks himself a philosopher after
the manner of Aristippe or Horace in accepting all the
 corruption of his time as a necessity which he must
undergo; he distracts himself with some philosophical
pastime, and appropriates the protecting smile of Mecasnas
to persuade himself that he is not simply a battener on
famine like Verres or a parasite of Trimalcion. Such men
are always mercenaries, even in their good works. They
decide to make a gift to a public charity, and they post¬
pone it to get the interest. The type which I am describing
is not an individual but a class of men with which the
magus is liable to come frequently in contact, especially in
our own century. Let him follow their own example by
mistrusting them, for they will be invariably his most com¬
promising friends and most dangerous enemies.
   The public exercise of divination is unbecoming at the
present period in a veritable adept, for he would be fre¬
quently driven to jugglery and feats of skill in order to
preserve his clients and astonish his public. Accredited
diviners, both male and female, have always secret spies,
who instruct them as to the private life or habits of those
who consult them. A code of signals is established between
cabinet and antechamber; an unknown client at his first
visit receives a number; a day is arranged, and he is fol¬
lowed; doorkeepers, neighbours, servants are engaged in
gossip, and details are thus arrived at which overwhelm
simple minds, and cause them to invest an impostor with
the reverence which should be reserved for true science and
genuine divination.
   The divination of events to come is possible only in the
case of those the realisation of which is in some sense con¬
tained in their cause. The soul, scrutinising by means of
the whole nervous system the circle of the astral light
which influences a man and from him receives an influence,
the soul of the diviner, we repeat, can compass by a single
intuition all the loves and hatreds which that man has

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    361

evoked about him; it can read his intentions in his thought,
foresee obstacles that he will encounter, possibly the violent
death which awaits him; but it cannot foresee his private,
voluntary, capricious determinations of the moment follow¬
ing the consultation, unless, indeed, the ruse of the diviner
itself prepares the fulfilment of the prophecy. For ex¬
ample, you say to a woman who is becoming passe, and is
anxious to secure a husband: You will be present this even¬
ing or to-morrow evening at such or such a performance,
and you will there see a man who will be to your liking.
This man will observe you, and by a curious combination
of circumstances the result will be a marriage.
   You may count on the lady going, you may count on her
seeing a man and believing that he has noticed her, you
may count on her anticipating marriage. It may not come
to that in the end, but she will not lay the blame on you,
because she would be giving up the opportunity for another
illusion; on the contrary, she will return perseveringly to
consult you.
   We have said that the astral light is the great book of
divinations; the faculty of reading therein is either natural
or acquired, and there are hence two classes of seers, the
instinctive and the initiated. For this reason, children,
uneducated people, shepherds, even idiots, have more ap¬
titude for natural divination than scholars and thinkers.
The simple herd-boy, David, was a prophet even as Solomon,
king of kabbalists and magi. The perceptions of instinct
are often as certain as those of science; the persons least
clairvoyant in the astral light are those who reason most.
Somnambulism is a state of pure instinct, and hence som¬
nambulists require to be directed by a seer of science;
sceptics and reasoners only lead them astray. Divinatory
vision operates only in the ecstatic state, to arrive at which
state, doubt and illusion must become impossible by en¬
chaining or putting to sleep thought. The instruments of
divination are hence only methods of magnetising ourselves
and of self-diversion from exterior light, so that we may

362               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


pay attention to the interior light alone. It was for this
reason that Apollonius completely enveloped himself in a
woollen mantle, and fixed his eyes on his navel in the gloom.
The magical mirror of Dupotet is kindred to the device of
Apollonius. Hydroinancy and vision in the thumb-nail,
when it has been polished and blackened, are varieties of
the magical mirror.       Perfumes and evocations stupefy
thought; water and the colour black absorb the visual rays;
a kind of dazzlement and vertigo ensue, followed by lu¬
cidity in subjects who have a natural aptitude or are suit¬
ably disposed thereto. Geomancy and cartomancy are other
means to the same end; combinations of symbols and num¬
bers, which are at once fortuitous and necessary, bear
enough resemblance to the chances of destiny for the im¬
agination to perceive realities by the pretext of such           ,
emblems. The more the interest is excited, the greater is        $
the desire to see; the fuller the confidence in the intuition,
                                       _
the more clear the vision becomes. To combine the points
of geomancy on chance or to set out the cards for trifling
is to jest like children; the lots become oracles only when
they are magnetised by intelligence and directed by faith.
   Of all oracles, the Tarot is the most astounding in its
answers, because all possible combinations of this universal
key of the kabbalah give oracles of science and of truth for
their solutions. The Tarot was the sole book of the ancient
magi; it is the primitive Bible, as we shall prove in the
following chapter, and the ancients consulted it as the first
Christians at a later date consulted the Sacred Lots, that is,
 Bible verses selected by chance and determined by thinking
of a number. Mile. Lenormand, the most celebrated of our
modern fortune-tellers, was unacquainted with the science
of the Tarot, or knew it only by derivation from Etteilla,
whose explanations are shadows cast upon a background of
light. She knew neither high magic nor the kabbalah, but
her head was filled with ill-digested erudition, and she was
 intuitive by an instinct which deceived her rarely. The
 works she left behind her are Legitimist tomfoolery, orna-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   363

mented with classical quotations, but her oracles inspired
by the presence and magnetism of those who consulted her,
were often astounding. She was a woman in whom ex¬
travagance of imagination and mental rambling were sub¬
stituted for the natural affections of her sex; she lived and
died a virgin, like the ancient druidesses of the isle of
Sayne. Had nature endowed her with beauty, she might
have easily at a remoter epoch played the part of a Melu-
sine or a Velleda.
   The more ceremonies employed in the practice of divina¬
tion, the more we excite imagination both in ourselves and
in those who consult us. The Conjuration of the Four, the
Prayer of Solomon, the magic sword to disperse phantoms,
may thus be resorted to with success; we should also evoke
the genius of the day and hour of operation, and offer him
a special perfume; next we should enter into magnetic and
intuitive correspondence with the consulting person, inquir¬
ing with what animal he is in sympathy and with what in
antipathy, and so also concerning his favourite flower or
colour. Flowers, colours, and animals connect in analogical
classification with the seven genii of the kabbalah. Those
who love blue are idealists and dreamers; lovers of red are
material and passionate; those who love yellow are fan¬
tastic and capricious; lovers of green are frequently com¬
mercial and crafty; the friends of black are influenced by
Saturn; the rose is the colour of Venus, &c. Lovers of the
horse are hard-working, noble in character, and at the same
time yielding and gentle; friends of the dog are affectionate
and faithful; those of the cat are independent and libertine.
Frank persons hold spiders in special horror; those of
haughty nature are antipathetic to the serpent; upright
and fastidious persons cannot tolerate rats and mice; the
voluptuous loathe the toad, because it is cold, solitary,
hideous, and miserable. Flowers have analogous sympathies
to those of animals and colours, and as magic is the science
of universal analogies, a single taste, one tendency, in a
given person, enables all the rest to be divined; it is an

364               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


application of the analogical anatomy of Cuvier to phe¬
nomena in the moral order.
   The physiognomy of face and body, the wrinkles on the
brow, the lines on the hands, equally furnish the magus
with precious indications, Metoposcopy and chiromancy
have become separate sciences; their observations, purely
empirical and conjectural, have been compared, examined,
and then united into a body of doctrine by Goglenius,
Belot, Romphile, Indagine, and Taisnier. The work of the
last-mentioned writer is the most important and complete;
he combines and criticises the observations and conjectures
of all the others. A modem investigator, the Chevalier
D ’Arpentigny, has imparted to chiromancy a fresh degree
of certitude by his remarks on the analogies which really
exist between the characters of persons and the form of
their hands as a whole or in detail. This new science has
been further developed and verified by an artist who is also
a man of letters, rich in originality and skill. The disciple
has surpassed the master, and our amiable and spiritual
Desbarrolles, one of those travellers with whom our great
novelist Alexandre Dumas delights to surround himself in
his cosmopolitan romances, is already cited as a veritable
magician in chiromancy.
   The consulting person should also be questioned upon
his habitual dreams; dreams are the reflection of life, both
interior and exterior. The old philosophers paid them
grdat attention; the patriarchs regarded them as certain
revelations; most religious revelations have been given in
dreams.    The monsters of perdition are nightmares of
Christianity, and as the author of Smarra has ingeniously
remarked, never could pencil or chisel have produced such
beings if they had not been beheld in sleep. We should
beware of persons whose imagination continually reflects
deformities. Temperament is, in like manner, manifested
by dreams, and as this exercises a permanent influence
upon life, it is necessary to be well acquainted therewith
if we would conjecture a destiny with certitude. Dreams

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   365

of blood, of enjoyment, and of light indicate a sanguine
temperament; those of water, mud, rain, tears, are oc¬
casioned by a more phlegmatic disposition; fire by night,
darkness, terrors, spectres, belong to the bilious and melan¬
cholic. Synesius, one of the greatest Christian bishops of
the first centuries, the disciple of that beautiful and pure
Hypatia who was massacred by fanatics after presiding
gloriously over the school of Alexandria, in the inheritance
of which school Christianity should have shared—Synesius,
lyric poet like Pindar and Callimachus, priest like Or¬
pheus, Christian like Spiridion of Tremithonte—has left us
a treatise on dreams which has been supplied with a com¬
mentary by Cardan. No one concerns themselves now with
these magnificent researches of the mind, because succes¬
sive fanaticisms have wellnigh forced the world to despair
of scientific and religious rationalism. St Paul burned
Trismegistus; Omar burned the disciples of Trismegistus
and of St Paul. O persecutors! O incendiaries! 0 scoffers!
when will ye end your work of darkness and destruction?
   One of the greatest magi of the Christian era, Trithemius,
irreproachable abbot of a Benedictine monastery, learned
theologian, and master of Cornelius Agrippa, has left
among his unappreciated and inestimable works, a treatise
entitled, De septem secundeis, id est intelligentiis sive
spiritibus orbes post Deum moventibus. It is a key of all
 prophecies new or old, a mathematical, historical, and
simple method of surpassing Isaiah and Jeremiah in the
prevision of all great events to come. The author in bold
outline sketches the philosophy of history, and divides the
existence of the entire world between the seven genii of
the kabbalah. It is the grandest and widest interpretation
ever made of those seven angels of the Apocalypse who ap¬
pear successively with trumpets and cups to pour out the
word and its realisation upon the earth. The duration of
each angelic reign is 354 years and four months, beginning
with that of Orifiel, the angel of Saturn, on the 13th of
March, for, according to Trithemius, this was the date of

3 66              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


the world’s creation; it was a period of savagery and dark¬
ness. Next came the reign of Anael, the spirit of Venus,
on the 24th of June, in the year of the world 354, when
love began to be the instructor of mankind; it created the
family, and the family led to association and the primitive
city. The first civilisers were poets inspired by love; pres¬
ently the exaltation of poetry produced religion, fanaticism,
and debauchery, culminating subsequently in the deluge.
This state of things continued till the 25th of October,
being the eighth month of the year a.m. 708, when the reign
of Zachariel, the angel of Jupiter, was inaugurated, under
whose guidance men began to acquire knowledge, and dis¬
pute the possession of lands and dwellings. It was also the
epoch of the foundation of towns and the limitation of
empires; its consequences were civilisation and war. The
need for commerce began, furthermore, to be felt, at which
time—namely, the 24th of February, a.m. 1063—was in¬
augurated the reign of Raphael, angel of Mercury, angel
of science and of the word, of intelligence and industry.
Then letters were invented, the first language being hiero¬
glyphic and universal, a monument of which has been
preserved in the book of Enoch, Cadmus, Thoth, and Pala-
medes; the kabbalistic clavicle adopted later on by Solo¬
mon, the mystical book of the Theraphim, Urim, and
Thummim, the primeval Genesis of the Zohar, and of
William Postel, the mystical wheel of Ezekiel, the rota of
the Kabbalists, the Tarot of the Magi and the Bohemians.
Then were arts invented, and navigation was attempted for
the first time; relations extended, wants multiplied, and
there followed speedily an epoch of general corruption,
preceding the universal deluge, under the reign of Samael,
angel of Mars, which was inaugurated on the 26th of June,
a.m. 1417.   After long stupefaction, the world strove to¬
wards a new birth under Gabriel, the angel of the moon,
whose reign began on the 28th of March, a.m. 1771, when
the family of Noah became multiplied, and re-peopled the
whole earth, after the confusion of Babel, until the reign of

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    367

Michael, angel of the sun, which commenced on the 24th of
February, a.m. 2126, to which epoch must be referred the
origin of the first dominations, the empire of the children of
Nimrod, the birth of sciences and religions, and the first
conflicts between despotism and liberty. Trithemius pur¬
sues this curious study throughout the ages, and at cor¬
responding epochs exhibits the recurrence of ruins; then
civilisation, bom anew by means of poetry and love; em¬
pires, reconstituted by the family, enlarged by commerce,
destroyed by war, repaired by universal and progressive
civilisation, subsequently absorbed by great empires, which
are the syntheses of history. The work of Trithemius, from
this point of view, is more comprehensive and independent
than that of Bossuet, and is a key absolute to the philosophy
of history. His exact calculations lead him to the month of
November in the year 1879, epoch of the reign of Michael
and the foundation of a new universal kingdom, prepared
by three centuries and a half of anguish, and a like period
of hope, coinciding exactly with the sixteenth, seventeenth,
eighteenth, and first part of the nineteenth centuries for the
lunar twilight and expectation, with the fourteenth, thir¬
teenth, twelfth, and second half of the eleventh centuries
 for the ordeals, the ignorance, the sufferings, and the
scourges of all nature. We see, therefore, according to this
calculation, that in 1879—that is, in twenty-four years’
time, a universal empire will be founded, and will secure
peace to the world. This empire will be political and re¬
ligious ; it will offer a solution for all problems agitated in
our own days, and will endure for 354 years and 4 months,
after which it will be succeeded by the return of the reign
of Orifiel, an epoch of silence and night. The coming uni¬
versal empire, being under the reign of the sun, will belong
to him who holds the keys of the East, which are now being
disputed by the princes of the world’s four quarters. But
intelligence and activity are the forces which rule the sun
in the superior kingdoms, and the nation which now pos¬
sesses the initiative of intelligence and life will possess

368              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


also the keys of the East, and will establish the uni¬
versal kingdom. To do this it may previously have to un¬
dergo a cross and martyrdom analogous to those of the
Man-God; but, dead or living, among nations its spirit will
prevail, and all peoples will acknowledge and follow in
four-and-twenty years the standard of France, ever vic¬
torious, or miraculously raised from the dead. Such is the
prophecy of Trithemius, confirmed by all our previsions,
and grounded in all our hopes.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   369




                     CHAPTER XXII

               THE    BOOK    OF   HERMES

We approach the end of onr work, and mnst here give the
universal key and utter the final word. The universal key
of magical works is the key of all ancient religious dogmas,
—the key of the Kabbalah and the Bible, the little key of
Solomon. Now, this clavicle, regarded as lost for centuries,
has been recovered by us, and we have been able to open
the sepulchres of the ancient world, to make the dead speak,
to behold the monuments of the past in all their splendour,
to understand the enigmas of every sphinx, and to penetrate
all sanctuaries. Among the ancients the use of this key was
permitted none but the high priests, and even its secret
was confided onty to the flower of the initiates. Now, this
was the key in. question: A hieroglyphic and numeral
alphabet, expressing by characters and numbers a series of
universal and absolute- ideas; then a scale of ten numbers,
multiplied by four symbols, and connected with twelve
figures representing the twelve signs of the zodiac, plus the
four genii of the* cardinal points.
   The symbolical tetrad, represented in tho mysteries of
Memphis and Thebes by the four forms of the sphinx—the
man, eagle, lion, and bull—correspond with the four ele¬
ments of the old world, water being signified by the cup
held by the man or aquarius*; air by the circle or nimbus
surrounding the head of the celestial eagle; fire by the wood
which nourishes it, by the tree fructifying in the heat of
earth and sun, and, finally, by the sceptre of royalty, which
the lion typifies; earth by the sword of Mithras, who each
year immolates the sacred bull, and, together with its blood,
pours forth that sap which gives increase to all fruits of
earth. Now, these four signs, with all their analogies, ex¬
plain the one word hidden in all sanctuaries, that word

370               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


which the bacchantes seemed to divine in their intoxication
when they worked themselves into frenzy for Io Evohe.
What, then, was the meaning of this mysterious term? It
was the name of the four primitive letters of the mother-
tongue : the Jod, symbol of the vine, or paternal sceptre of
Noah; the He, type of the cup of libations and also of
maternity; the Vau, which joins the two, and was depicted
in India by the great and mysterious lingam. Such was the
triple sign of the triad in the divine word; then the mother
letter appeared a second time to express the fecundity of
nature and woman, and to formulate the doctrine of uni¬
versal and progressive anologies decending from causes to
effects, and ascending from effects to causes. Moreover,
the sacred word was not pronounced; it was spelt, and read
off in four words, which are the four sacred words—Jod
He Yau He.
   The learned Gaffarel regards the teraphim of the He¬
brews, by means of which they consulted the oracles of the
urim and thummim, as the figures of the four kabbalistic
animals, which symbols, as we shall presently show, were
summed up in the sphinxes or cherubs of the ark. In con¬
nection with the usurped Teraphim of Michas, he cites a
curious passage from Philo, which is a complete revelation
as to the ancient and sacerdotal origin of our Tarots.
Gaffarel thus expresses himself: “He (Philo the Jew),
speaking of the history concealed in the before-mentioned
chapter of Judges, says that Michas made three images of
young boys and three young calves, three also of a lion, an
eagle, a dragon, and a dove, all of fine gold and silver; so
that if any one sought him to discover a secret concerning
his wife, he interrogated the dove; concerning his children,
the young boy; concerning wealth, the eagle; concerning
strength and power, the lion; concerning fecundity, the
cherub or bull; concerning length of days, the dragon.”
This revelation of Philo, though depreciated by Gaffarel, is
for us of the highest importance. Here, in fact, is our key
of the tetrad, and here also the images of the four sym-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     371

bolicial animals found in the twenty-first key of the Tarot,
that is, at the third septenary, thus repeating and sum¬
marising all the symbolism expressed by the three septen-
aries superposed; next, the antagonisim of colors expressed
by the dove and the dragon; the circle or Rota, formed by
the dragon or serpent to typify length of days; finally, the
kabbalistic divination of the entire Tarot, as practised in
later days by the Egyptian Bohemians, whose secrets were
divined and recovered imperfectly by Etteilla.
    We see in the Bible that the high priests consulted the
Lord on the golden table of the holy ark, between the
cherubs, or bull-headed and eagle-winged sphinx; that they
 consulted by the help of the Theraphim, Urim, and Thummi,
 and by the Ephod. Now, it is known that the Ephod was a
 magical square of twelve numbers and twelve words en¬
 graved on precious stones. The word Teraphim in Hebrew
 signifies hieroglyphs or figured signs; the Urim and
 Thummi were the above and beneath, the east and west, the
 yes and no, and these signs corresponded to the two pillars
 of the Temple, Jakin and Bohas. When, therefore, the
 high priest wished to consult the oracle, he drew by lot the
 Theraphim or tablets of gold, which bore the images of the
 four sacred words, and placed them by threes round the
 rational or Ephod; that is, between the two onyx stones
 which served as clasps to the little chains of the Ephod.
 The right onyx signified Gedulah, or mercy and magnifi¬
 cence ; the left referred to Geburah, and signified justice and
 anger. If, for example, the sign of the lion were found on
 the left side of the stone which bore the name of the tribe
 of Judah, the high priest would read the oracle thus: “The
 staff of the Lord is angered against Judah.’’ If the Thera¬
 phim represented the man or cup, and were also found on
 the left, near the stone of Benjamin, the high priest would
 read: 4 ‘ The mercy of the Lord is weary of the offences of
 Benjamin, which violate Him in His love. Whence He
 will pour out on him the chalice of his wrath,” etc. When
 the sovereign priesthood ceased in Israel, when all oracles

 372               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


 were silenced in the presence of the Word made man, and
 speaking by the mouth of the most popular and mildest of
 sages, when the ark was lost, the sanctuary profaned, and
 the temple destroyed, the mysteries of the Ephod and Thera-
 phim, no longer traced on gold and precious stones, were
 written, or, rather, drawn, by some learned kabbalists on
 ivory, parchment, gilt and silvered copper, and, finally, on
 simple cards, which were always suspected by the official
 Church as enclosing a dangerous key to its mysteries.
 Hence came those Tarots, the antiquity of which, revealed
,to the erudite Court de Gebelin by the science of hiero¬
 glyphs and numbers, so exercised later the doubtful per¬
 spicacity and persistent investigation of Etteilla. Court
 de Gebelin, in the eighth volume of his “ Primeval World, ”
 gives the figure of the twenty-two keys and four aces of
 the Tarot, and demonstrates their perfect analogy with all
 symbols of the highest antiquity. He subsequently en¬
 deavours to supply their explanation, and goes astray
 naturally, because he does not start from the universal
 and sacred tetragram, the Io Evohe of the Bacchanalia,
 the Jod He Yau He of the sanctuary, the pppp of the Kab¬
 balah.
    Etteilla or Alliette, preoccupied entirely by his system of
 divination and the material profit to be derived from it,
 Alliette, formerly barber, having never learned French, or
 even orthography, pretended to reform and thus appro¬
 priate the Book of Thot. In the Tarot, now become very
 scarce, which he engraved, we find the following naive ad¬
 vertisement on the twenty-eighth card—the eight of clubs:
 “Etteilla, professor of algebra and correctors (sic) of the
 modern blunders of the ancient book of Thot, lives in the
 Rue de I’Oseille, No. 48, Paris.” Etteilla would have
 certainly done better not to have corrected the blunders of
 which he speaks; his books have degraded the ancient work
 discovered by Court de Gebelin into the domain of vulgar
 magic and fortune-telling by cards. He proves nothing
 who tries to prove too much; Etteilla furnishes another
 example of this old logical axiom; at the same time, his

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    373

endeavours led him to a certain acquaintance with the
Kabbalah, as may be seen in some rare passages of his un¬
readable works. The true initiates who were Etteilla’s
contemporaries, the Rosicrucians, for example, and the
Martinists, who were in possession of the true Tarot, as a
work of Saint Martin proves, where the divisions are those
of the Tarot, and this passage of an enemy of the Rosi¬
crucians: ‘‘They pretend to the possession of a volume
from which they can learn anything that can possibly be
found in other books which now exist or may at any time
be produced. This volume is their reason, in which they
find the prototype of everything that exists by the facility
of analysing, making abstractions, forming a species of
intellectual world, and creating all possible beings. See
the philosophical, theosophical, microcosmic cards.” (Con¬
spiracy against the Catholic Religion and Sovereigns, by the
author of The Veil raised for the Curious. Paris: Crapard.
1792.) The true initiates, we repeat, who held the Tarot
secret among their greatest mysteries, carefully refrained
from protesting against the errors of Etteilla, and left him
to reveil instead of revealing the arcana of the true clavicles
of Solomon. Hence it is not without profound astonish¬
ment that we have discovered intact and still unknown this
key of all doctrines and all philosophies of the old world.
I speak of it as a key, and such it truly is, having the
circle of four decades as its ring, the scale of 22 characters
for its trunk or body, and the three degrees of the triad
for its wards; as such it was represented by Postel in his
“Key of Things Kept Secret from the Foundation of the
World.” He indicates after the following manner the oc¬
cult name of this key, which was known only to initiates:—

374              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




                         T
        0—                      — ft-


   The word may read Rota, thus signifyingthe wheel of
Ezekiel, or Tarot, and then it is synonymous with the
Azoth of Hermetic philosophers. It is a word which kab-
balistically expresses the dogmatic and natural absolute;
it is formed of the characters of the monogram of Christ,
according to the Greeks and Hebrews. The Latin R or
Greek P is found between the alpha and omega of the
Apocalypse; the sacred Tau, image of the cross, encloses
the whole word, as previously represented in our Ritual.
Without the Tarot, the magic of the ancients is a closed
book, and it is impossible to penetrate any of the great
mysteries of the Kabbalah. The Tarot alone interprets the
magic squares of Agrippa and Paracelsus, as we may satisfy
ourselves by forming these same squares with the keys of
the Tarot, and reading off the hieroglyphs thus collected.
These are the seven magical squares of the planetary genii
according to Paracelsus:—

TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  375

         Saturn.
           2 9 4
           7 T 3
           6 1       8

         Jupiter.

         6 12 12 10
         5 10 11 11
         9 6 7 12
         14 6| 4
                         1

           Mars.
     14 10 22 22 18
    20 12       7 20 ~2
       8 17     9 9          8
    12 3        9    5 26
    11 23       8    6 11

         The Sun.
    9 22      1 32 25 19
    7 ii 27 18 8                 3
   19 14 16 15 23 24
   18 20 22 21 17 13
   22 29 10 19 26 12
  36     5 35       6 12 13

         Venus.
 22 47 18 41 1       0 35         8
 25 23 47117 42 11 29
 10 6 14 9 18 36 12
  3 31 16.25 43 19 37
 38 14 32 31 26 44 20
 21 39    8 33 22 27 45
 46 15 40 19 24 03 27

376               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


                             Mercury.

                    8 52 39     5 24 61 66 11
                   49 15 14 52 52 12 10 56
                   41 43 22 14 45 19 18 48
                   33 34 35 29 20 38 39 25
                   40 6 27 59 31 30 31 33
                   17 47 55 28 25 43 42 24
                    9 51 53 12 13 51 00 16
                   64 12 15 61 61    6   7 47


                         The Moon.

                  37 70 29 70 21 62 12 14 41
                  16 28 70 30 71 12 53 14 46
                  47 20 11    7 31 72 22 35 15
                  16 48 68 40 81 32 62 25 56
                  57 17 49 29    7 66 33 65 25
                  26 58 40 56 31 42 74 34 66
                  53 27 59 10 51    2 41 75 35
                  36 68 19 60 11 65 43 44 76
                  77 28 20 69 61 12 25 60       5


   By adding each of the columns of these squares, you will
obtain invariably the characteristic number of the planet,
and, finding the explanation of this number by the hiero-
glphs of the Tarot, you proceed to seek the sense of all
the figures, whether triangular, square, or cruciform, that
you find to be formed by the numbers. The result of this
operation will be a complete and profound acquaintance
with all the allegories and mysteries concealed by the
ancients under the symbol of each planet, or rather of each
personification of the influences, celestial or human, upon
all events of life.
   We have said that the twenty-two keys of the Tarot are
the twenty-two letters of the primitive kabbalistic alphabet,

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   377

and here follows a table of the variants of this alphabet
according to divers Hebrew kabbalists.

X Being, mind, man, or God; the comprehensible object;
   unity, mother of numbers, the first substance.

   All these ideas are hieroglyphically expressed by the
figure of the Juggler. His body and arms form the letter
aleph, round his head there is a nimbus in the form of oo,
the emblem of life and the universal spirit; in front of him
are swords, cups, and pantacles, and he uplifts the miracu¬
lous rod towards heaven. He has a youthful figure and
curly hair, like Apollo or Mercury; the smile of confidence
is on his lips, and the look of intelligence in his eyes.

^ The house of God and man, the sanctuary, the law, the
    Gnosis, Kabbalah, the occult church, the duad, wife,
   mother.

   Hieroglyph of the Tarot, The Female Pope; a woman
crowned with a tiara, wearing the horns of the Moon and
Isis, her head enveloped in a mantle, the solar cross on her
breast, and holding a book on her knees, which she conceals
with her mantle. A protestant author of a pretended
history of Pope Joan has met with, and used, for good or
bad, in the interest of his thesis, two curious and ancient
figures of the female pope or sovereign priestess of the
Tarot. These two figures ascribe to her all the attributes of
Isis; in one she is carrying and caressing her son Horus;
in the other, she has long and thin hair; she is seated
between the two pillars of the duad, has a sun with four
rays on her breast, places one hand upon a book, and makes
the sign of sacerdotal esotericism with the other—that is
to say, she uplifts three fingers only, the two others being
folded to signify mystery; a veil is behind her head, and
on each side of her chair the flowers of the lotus bloom
upon the sea. I strongly commiserate the unlucky scholar
who has seen in this antique symbol nothing but a monrn
mental portrait of his pretended Pope Joan.

378                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


^ The word, the triad, plenitude, fecundity, nature, genera¬
      tion in the three worlds.

   Symbol, The Empress, a woman, winged, crowned,
seated, and uplifting a sceptre with the orb of the world at
its end; her sign is an eagle, image of the soul and of life.
This woman is the Yenus-Urania of the Greeks, and was
represented by St John in his Apocalypse as the Woman
clothed with the Sun, crowned with twelve stars, and with
the moon beneath her feet. It is the mystical quintessence
of the triad, spirituality, immortality, the queen of heaven.

  The porte or government of the easterns, initiation, power,
    the tetragram, the quaternary, the cubic stone, or its
      base.

  Hieroglyph, The Emperor, a sovereign whose body rep¬
resents a right-angled triangle, and his legs a cross, the
image of the Athanor of the philosophers.

  Indication, demonstration, instruction, law, symbolism,
    philosophy, religion.

   Hieroglyph, The Pope, or grand hierophant. In more
modern Tarots this sign is replaced by the image of Jupiter.
The grand hierophant, seated between the two pillars of
Hermes and of Solomon, makes the sign of esotericism, and
leans upon a cross with three horizontals of triangular
form. Two inferior ministers kneel before him. Having
above him the capitals of the two pillars, and below him
the two heads of the assistants, he is thus the centre of the
quinary, and represents the divine pentagram, giving its
complete meaning. As a fact, the pillars are necessity or
law, the heads liberty or action. A line may be drawn
from each pillar to each head, and two lines from each
pillar to each of the two heads. Thus a square, divided by
a cross into four triangles, is obtained, and in the middle of
this cross is the grand hierophant, we might almost say like

THE   CHARIOT   OF   HERMES,

 Seventh Key of the Tarot.

380               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


the garden spider in the centre of his web, were such a
comparison becoming to the things of truth, glory, and
light.
H Sequence, interlacement, lingam, entanglement, union,
    embrace, strife, antagonism, combination, equilibrium.
   Hieroglyph, man between Vice and Virtue. Above him
shines the sun of truth, and in this sun is love, bending his
bow and threatening Vice with his shaft. In the order of
the ten Sephiroth, this symbol corresponds to Tiphereth—
that is, to idealism and beauty. The number six represents
the antagonism of the two triads, that is, absolute negation
and absolute affirmation. It is therefore the number of
toil and liberty, and for this reason it connects also with
moral beauty and glory.
j Weapon, sword, cherub’s sword of fire, the sacred sep¬
   tenary, triumph, royalty, priesthood.
   Hieroglyph, a cubic chariot with four pillars and an azure
and starry drapery. In the chariot, between the four pil¬
lars, a victor crowned with a circle adorned with three ra¬
diant golden pentagrams. Upon his breast are three super¬
posed squares, on his shoulders the urim and thummim of
the sovereign sacrificer, represented by the two crescents of
the moon in Gedulah and Geburah; in his hand is a sceptre
surmounted by a globe, square, and triangle; his attitude is
proud and tranquil. A double sphinx or two sphinxes
joined at the lower parts are harnessed to the chariot; they
are pulling in opposite directions, but one is turning his
head so that they are looking in the same direction. The
sphinx with head turned is black, the other is white. On
the square which forms the fore part of the chariot is the
Indian lingam surmounted by the flying sphere of the
Egyptians. This hieroglyph, which we reproduce exactly,
is perhaps the most beautiful and complete of all those
which are comprised in the clavicle of the Tarot.
pj Balance, attraction and repulsion, life, terror, promise,
    and threat.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  381

  Hieroglyph, Justice with sword and balance.

O Good, horror of evil, morality, wisdom.

  Hieroglyph, a sage leaning on his staff, holding a lamp in
front of him, and completely enveloped in his cloak. The
inscription is The Hermit or Capuchin, on account of the
hood of his oriental cloak; his true name, however, is
Prudence, and he thus completes the four cardinal virtues
which seemed imperfect to Court de Gebelin and Etteilla.

' Principle, manifestation, praise, manly honour, phallus,
    virile fecundity, paternal sceptre.

   Hieroglyph, The Wheel of Fortune, that is to say, the
cosmogonical wheel of Ezekiel, with a Hermanubis ascend¬
ing on the right, a Typhon descending on the left, and a
sphinx in equilibrium above, holding a sword between his
lion’s claws—an admirable symbol, disfigured by Etteilla,
who replaced Typhon by a wolf, Hermanubis by a mouse,
and the sphinx by an ape, an allegory characteristic of
Etteilla’s Kabbalah.

3 The hand in the act of grasping and holding.

  Hieroglyph, Strength, a woman crowned with the vital
oo closes, quietly and without effort, the jaws of a raging
lion.

<■> Example, instruction, public teaching.

  Symbol, a man hanging by one foot, with his hands bound
behind his back, so that his body makes a triangle with
apex downwards, and his legs a cross above the triangle.
The gallows is in the form of a Hebrew Tau, and the two
uprights are trees, from each of which six branches have
been lopped. We have previously explained this symbol
of sacrifice and the finished work.

D The heaven of Jupiter and Mars, domination and force,
   new birth, creation and destruction

382               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


  Hieroglyph, Death, reaping crowned heads in a meadow
where men are growing.

2 The heaven of the Sun, climates, seasons, motion, changes
    of life, which is ever new yet ever the same.

   Hieroglyph, Temperance, an angel with the sign of the
sun upon her forehead, and on the breast the square and
triangle of the septenary, pours from one chalice into an¬
other the two essences which compose the elixir of life.

q The heaven of Mercury, occult, science, magic, commerce,
    eloquence, mystery, moral force.

  Hieroglyph, Tpie Devil, the goat of Mendes, or the
Baphomet of the Temple, with all his pantheistic attributes.
This is the only hieroglyph which was properly understood
and correctly interpreted by Etteilla.

y The heaven of the Moon, alterations, subversions, changes,
   failings.
  Hieroglyph, a tower struck by lightning, probably that
of Babel. Two persons, doubtless Nimrod and his false
prophet or minister, are precipitated from the summit of
the ruins. One of the personages in his fall perfectly
represents the letter gnaiin.
^ The heaven of the soul, outpourings of thought, moral in¬
    fluence of the idea on forms, immortality.

  Hieroglyph, the burning star and eternal youth.       We
have already described this symbol.

^ The elements, the visible world, the reflected light, ma¬
    terial fonns, symbolism.

  Hieroglyph, the moon, dew, a crab rising in the water
towards land, a dog and wolf barking at the moon and
chained to the base of two towers, a path lost in the
horizon and sprinkled with blood.
^ Composites, the head, apex, prince of heaven.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   383

   Hieroglyph, a radiant sun, and two naked children tak¬
ing hands in a fortified enclosure. Other Tarots substitute
a spinner unwinding destinies, and others, again, a naked
child mounted on a white horse and displaying a scarlet
standard.

   Vegetative principle, generative virtue of the earth, eter¬
    nal life.

  Hieroglyph, The Judgment. A genius sounds the trum¬
pet and the dead rise from their tombs. These persons who
are living and were dead, are a man, woman, and child—
the triad of human life.

   The sensitive principle, the flesh, eternal life.

  Hieroglyph, The Fool. A man in the garb of a fool,
wandering without aim, burdened with a wallet, full, no
doubt, of his follies and vices; his disordered clothes dis¬
cover his shame; he is being bitten by a tiger, and does
not know how to escape or defend himself.

^ The microcosm, the sum of all in all.

   Hieroglyph, Kether, or the kabbalistic crown, between
the four mysterious animals. In the middle of the crown
is Truth holding a rod in each hand.
   Such are the twenty-two keys of the Tarot, which ex¬
plain all its numbers. Thus, the juggler, or key of the
unities, explains the four aces with their quadruple pro¬
gressive signification in the three worlds and in the first
principle. So also the ace of deniers or of the circle is the
soul of the world; the ace of swords is militant intelligence;
the ace of cups is loving intelligence; the ace of clubs is
creative intelligence; they are also the principles of motion,
progress, fecundity, and power. Each number, multiplied
by a key, gives another number, which, explained in turn
by the keys, completes the philosophical and religious revela¬
tion contained in each sign. Now, each of the fifty-six
cards can be multiplied in turn by the twenty-two keys; a

384               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


series of combinations thus results, giving all the most
astonishing conclusions of revelation and of light. It is a
truly philosophical machine, which keeps the mind from
going astray while leaving its initiative and liberty; it is
mathematics applied to the absolute, the alliance of the
positive and the ideal, a lottery of thoughts as exact as
numbers, perhaps the simplest and grandest conception of
human genius.
   The mode of reading the hieroglyphs of the Tarot is to
arrange them in a square or triangle, placing equal num¬
bers in antagonism, and conciliating them by the unequal.
Four signs invariably express the absolute in a given order,
and are explained by a fifth. Hence the solution of all
magical questions is the pentagram, and all antinomies
are explained by harmonious unity. So arranged, the Tarot
is a veritable oracle, and replies to all possible questions
with more precision and infallibility than the Android of
Albertus Magnus. An imprisoned person with no other
book than the Tarot, if he knew how to use it, could in a
few years acquire universal knowledge, and would be able
to speak on all subjects with unequalled learning and inex¬
haustible eloquence. In fact, this wheel is the true key to
the Oratorical Art and the Grand Art of Raymund Lully;
it is the true secret of the transmutation of shadows into
light; it is the first and most important of all the arcana of
the great work. By means of this universal key of symbol¬
ism, all allegories of India, Egypt and Judea are illu¬
minated; the Apocalypse of St John is a kabbalistic book
the sense of which is rigorously indicated by the numbers of
the Urim, Thummim, Theraphim, and Ephod, which are
all resumed and completed by the Tarot; the old sanc¬
tuaries have no longer mysteries, and the significance of the
objects of the Hebrew cultus is for the first time compre¬
hensible. Who does not perceive in the golden table,
crowned and supported by cherubim, which covered the ark
of the covenant, the same symbols as those of the twenty-
first Tarot key? The ark was a hieroglyphical synthesis

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   385

of the whole kabbalistic dogma; it included the jod or
blossoming staff of Aaron, the he, or cup, the gomor contain¬
ing the manna, the two tables of the law—an analogous




symbol to that of the sword of justice—and the manna kept
in the gomor, four objects which interpret wonderfully the
letters of the divine tetragram. Gaffarel has learnedly
proved that the cherubim, or cherubs of the ark, were in
the likeness of bulls, but what he did not know was that,
instead of two, there were four—two at each end, as the
text expressly says—though it has been misconstrued for
the most part by commentators. The eighteenth and nine¬
teenth verses of the twenty-fifth chapter of Exodus should
read thus: “And thou shalt make two bulls or sphinxes
of beaten gold on each side of the oracle. And thou shalt
make the one looking this way and the second that way.”
The cherubs or sphinxes were, in fact, coupled by twos on
each side of the ark, and their heads were turned to the four
corners of the mercy-seat, which they covered with their
wings rounded archwise, thus overshadowing the crown of
the golden table, which they sustained upon their shoulders,
facing one another at the openings and looking at the pro¬
pitiatory (see the figure on p. 371). The ark, moreover,
had three parts or stages, representing Atziluth, Jetzirah,
and Briah—the three worlds of the kabbalah: the base of
the coffer, to which were fitted the four rings of two levers
analogous to the pillars of the temple, Jakin and Bohas;

386               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


the body of the coffer, on which the sphinxes appeared in
relief; and the cover, overshadowed by the wings. The base
represented the kingdom of salt, to use the terminology of
the adepts of Hermes; the coffer, the realm of mercury or
azoth; and the cover, the realm of sulphur or of fire. The
other objects of the cultus were not less allegorical, but
would require a special treatise to describe and explain
them.
   Saint Martin, in his Natural Table of the Correspondences
between God, Man, and the Universe, followed, as we have
said, the division of the Tarot, giving an extended mystical
commentary upon the twenty-two keys, but he carefully re¬
frained from stating whence he derived his plan, and from
revealing the hieroglyphics on which he commented. Postel
shewed similar discretion, naming! the Tarot only in a
diagram of the key to his arcana, and referring to it in the
rest of his book under the title of the Genesis of Enoch.
The personage of Enoch, author of the primeval sacred
book, is in effect identical with that of Thoth among the
Egyptians, Cadmus among the Phoenicians, the Palamedes
among the Greeks. We have obtained in an extraordinary
manner a sixteenth century medal, which is a key of the
Tarot. We scarcely know whether to state that this medal,
and the place where it was deposited, were shown us in
dream by the divine Paracelsus; in any case, the medal is
in our possession. On one side it depicts the juggler in a
German costume of the sixteenth century, holding his girdle
with one hand, and with the other the pentagram. On a
table in front of him, between an open book and a closed
purse, are ten deniers or talismans, arranged in two lines of
three each and a square of four; the feet of the table form
two pj, and those of the juggler two inverted     The obverse
side of the medal contains the letters of the alphabet, ar¬
ranged on a magical square, as follows:—

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     387


                      A B C D E
                      F Gr H I K
                      L M N 0 P
                      Q R S T Y
                       X Y Z N


   It will be observed that this alphabet has only twenty-
two letters, the V and N being duplicated, and that it is
arranged in four quinaries, with a quaternary for base and
key. The four final letters are two combinations of the
duad and the triad, and, read kabbalistically, they form the
word Azoth, by rendering to the shapes of the letters their
value in primitive Hebrew, taking N for           Z as it is in
Latin, Y for the Hebrew ^ vau, which is pronounced 0
between two vowels, or leters having the value of vowels,
and X for the primitive tau, which had precisely the same
figure. The entire Tarot is thus explained in this wonder¬
ful medal, which is worthy of Paracelsus, and we hold it at
the disposal of the curious. The letters arranged by four
times five are summed by the word^Z^, analogous to that
of        and of INRI, and containing all the mysteries of
the Kabbalah.
   The book of the Tarot, being of such high scientific im¬
portance, it is desirable that it should not be further altered.
We have examined the collection of ancient Tarots pre¬
served in the Imperial Library, and have thus collected all
the hieroglyphs, of which we have given a description. An
important work still remains to be done—the publication of
a really complete and well-executed exemplar. We shall,
perhaps, undertake the task.
  Vestiges of the Tarot are found among all nations. As
we have said, the Italian is, perhaps, the most faithful and
best preserved, but it may be further perfected by precious
indications derived from the Spanish varieties. The two of
cups, for example, in the Naibi is completely Egyptian,
showing two archaic vases with ibis handles, superposed on

388               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


a cow. A unicorn is represented in the middle of the four
of deniers; the three of cups exhibits the figure of Isis
issuing from a vase, while two ibises issue from two other
vases, one with a crown for the goddess, and one holding a
lotus, which he seems to be offering for her acceptance. The
four acres bear the image of the hieratic and sacred ser¬
pent, while in some specimens the seal of Solomon is placed
at the centre of the four of deniers, instead of the sym¬
bolical unicorn. The German Tarots have suffered great
alteration, and scarcely do more than preserve the number
of the keys, which are crowded writh grotesque or panta-
gruelian figures. We have a Chinese Tarot before us, and
the Imperial Library contains samples of others that are
similar. M. Paul Boiteau, in his remarkable work on play¬
ing-cards, has given some admirably executed specimens.
The Chinese Tarot preserves several primeval emblems; the
deniers and swords are plainly distinguishable, but it would
be less easy to discover the cups and clubs.
   It was at the epoch of the Gnostic and Manichaean heresies
that the Tarot must have been lost to the Church, at which
time also the meaning of the divine Apocalypse perished.
It was understood no longer that the seven seals of this
kabbalistic book are seven pantacles, the representation
of which we give (see p. 376), and that these pantacles
are explained by the analogies of the numbers, characters,
and figures of the Tarot. Thus the universal tradition of the
 one religion was a moment broken, darkness or doubt spread
 over the whole earth, and it seemed, in the eyes of ignorance,
 that true Catholicism, the universal revelation, had briefly
 disappeared. The explanation of the book of St John by
 the characters of the Kabbalah will be an entirely new
 revelation, though foreseen by several distinguished magi,
 one among whom, M. Augustin Chaho, thus expresses him¬
 self :—
  “The poem of the Apocalypse presupposes in the young
evangelist a complete system and traditions individually
developed by himself. It is written in the form of a vision,

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   389

and binds in a brilliant framework of poetry the whole
erudition, the whole thought of African civilisation. An
inspired bard, the author touches upon a series of ruling
events; he draws in bold outlines the history of society from
cataclysm to cataclysm, and even further still. The truths
which he reveals are prophecies brought from far and wide,
of which he is the resounding echo. He is the voice which
cries, the voice which chants the harmonies of the desert,
and prepares the paths for the light. His speech peals forth
with mastery and compels faith, for he caries among savage
nations the oracles of lao, and unveils Him who is the First-
Born of the Sun for the admiration of civilisations to come.
The theory of the four ages is found in the Apocalypse, as
it is found in the books of Zoroaster and in the Bible. The
gradual reconstruction of primeval federations, and of the
reign of God among peoples emancipated from the yoke of
tyrants and the bonds of error, are clearly foretold for the
end of the fourth age, and the renovation of the cataclysm,
exhibited at first from afar, even unto the consummation of
time. The description of the cataclysm and its duration;
the new world emerging from the waves, and spreading in
all its beauty under heaven; the great serpent, bound for
a time by an angel in the depths of the abyss; finally, the
dawn of that age to come, prophesied by the Word, who
appeared to the apostle at the beginning of his poem: ‘ His
head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow,
and his eyes were as a flame of fire; and his feet like unto
fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as
the sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand
seven stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged
sword: and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his
strength. ’ Such is Ormuz, Osiris, Chourien, the Lamb, the
Christ, the Ancient of Days, the man of the time and the
river celebrated by Daniel. He is the first and the last, who
was, who must be, alpha and omega, beginning and end.
He holds the key of mysteries in his hands; he opens the
great abyss of the central fire, where death sleeps beneath

390     TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC




            ArocALYPTic Key.

          Apocalyptic Key.
      The Seven Seals of St John.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    391

his canopy of darkness, where sleeps the great serpent await¬
ing the wakening of the ages. ’ ’
   The author connects this sublime allegory of St John
with that of Daniel, wherein the four forms of the sphinx
are applied to the chief periods of history, where the Man-
Sun, the Word-Light, consoles and instructs the seer.
   “The prophet Daniel beholds a sea tossed by the four
winds of heaven, and beasts differing one from another
come out of the depths of the ocean. The empire of all
things on earth was given them for a time, two times, and
the dividing of time. They are four who so come forth.
 The first beast, symbol of the solar race of seers, comes from
the region of Africa, resembling a lion and having eagle’s
wings; the heart of a man was given it. The second beast,
emblem of the northern conquerors, who reigned by iron
during the second age, was like unto a bear; it had three
ribs in the mouth of it between the teeth of it, images of
the three great conquering families, and they said unto it:
Arise, devour much flesh. After the apparition of the
fourth beast, there were thrones raised up, and the Ancient
of Days, the Christ of seers, the Lamb of the first age, was
manifested. His garment was of dazzling whiteness, his
head radiant; his throne, whence came forth living flames,
was borne upon burning wheels; a flame of swift fire shone
in his countenance; legions of angels or stars sparkled round
him. The judgment was set, the allegorical books were
opened. The new Christ came with the clouds of heaven
and came to the Ancient of Days, and there were given him
power, honour, and a kingdom over all peoples, tribes, and
tongues. Then Daniel came near unto one of them that
stood by, and asked him the truth of all this. And it was
answered him that the four beasts were four powers which
should reign successively over the earth.” M. Chaho pro¬
ceeds to explain a variety of images, strikingly analogous,
which are found in almost all sacred books. His observa¬
tions at this point are worthy of remark.
   “In every primitive logos, the parallel between physical

392                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


correspondences and moral relations is established on the
same roots. Each word carries its material and sensible
definition, and this living language is as perfect and true as
it is simple and natural in man the creator. Let the seer
express by the same word, slightly modified, the sun, day,
light, truth, and applying the same epithet to a white sun
and to a lamb, let him say, Lamb or Christ, instead of sun,
and sun instead of truth, light, civilisation, and there is no
allegory, but there are true correspondences seized and ex¬
pressed by inspiration. But when the children of night say
in their incoherent and barbarous dialect, sun, day, light,
truth, lamb, the wise correspondence so clearly expressed by
the primitive logos becomes effaced and disappears, and, by
simple translation, the lamb and the sun become allegorical
beings, symbols. Remark, in effect, that the word allegory
itself signifies, in Celtic definition, change of discourse, trans¬
lation. The observation we have made applies exactly to
all barbarous cosmogonical language. Seers made use of
the same inspired radical to express nourishment and in¬
struction. Is not the science of truth the nourishment of
the soul ? Thus, the scroll of papyrus, or the book, eaten by
the prophet Ezekiel; the little volume which the angel gave
as fbod to the author of the Apocalypse; the festivities of
the magical palace of Asgard, to which Gangler was in¬
vited by Har the Sublime; the miraculous multiplication of
seven small loaves narrated by the Evangelists of the
Nazarene; the living bread which Jesus-Sun gave his dis¬
ciples to eat, saying, ‘ This is my body, ’ and a host of similar
occurrences, are a repetition of the same allegory: the life
of souls who are nourished by truth—truth, which mul¬
tiplies without ever diminishing, but, on the contrary, in¬
creases in the measure that it nourishes.
   1 ‘ Exalted by a noble sentiment of patriotism, dazzled by
the idea of an immense revolution, let a revealer of hidden
things come forward and seek to popularise the discoveries of
science among gross and ignorant men, destitute of the most
simple elementary notions; let him say, for example, that the

                    TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     393

 earth revolves, and that it is shaped like an egg; what re¬
 source has the barbarian who hears him except to believe?
 Is it not plain that every proposition of this nature becomes
 for him a dogma from on high, an article of faith? And is
 not the veil of a wise allegory sufficient to make it a mythos ?
 In the schools of seers the terrestrial globe was represented
 by an egg of pasteboard or painted wood, and when the
young children were asked, ‘What is this eggV they an¬
 swered, ‘It is the earth.’ Those older children, the bar¬
barians, hearing this, repeated, after the little children of
the seers:—‘ The world is an egg. ’ But they understood
thereby the physical, material world, and the seers the geo¬
graphical, ideal, image world, created by mind and the logos.
 As a fact, the priests of Egypt represented mind, intelli¬
 gence, Kneph, with an egg placed upon his lips, to express
 clearly that the egg was here only a comparison, an image,
a mode of speech. Choumountou, the philosopher of the
 Ezour-Vedam, explains after the same manner to the fanatic
 Biache what must be understood by the golden egg of
Brahma.”
    We must not wholly despair of a period which still con¬
cerns itself with these serious and reasonable researches; we
have cited these pages of M. Chaho with great mental satis¬
faction and profound sympathy. Here is no longer the
negative and desolating criticism of Dupuis and Yolney,
but tendency towards one faith and one worship connecting
all the future with all the past; it is the exoneration of all
great men falsely accused of superstition and idolatry; it
is, finally, the justification of God Himself, that sun of in¬
telligences who is never veiled for just souls and pure
hearts.
   ‘ ‘ Great and pre-eminent is the seer, the initiate, the elect
of nature and of supreme reason,” cries the author once
more, in concluding what we have just cited. “His alone is
that faculty of imitation which is the principle of his per¬
fection, while its inspirations, swift as a lightning flash,
direct creations and discoveries. His alone is a perfect

394               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


Word of conformity, propriety, flexibility, wealth, creating
harmony of thought by physical reaction—of thought,
whereof the perceptions, still independent of language, ever
reflect nature exactly reproduced in his impressions, well
judged and well expressed in its correspondences. His
alone is light, science, truth, because imagination, confined
to its passive secondary part, never governs reason, the
natural logic which results from the comparison of ideas
which come into being, extend in the same proportion as
his needs, and because the circle of his knowledge enlarges
thus by degrees without intermixture of false judgments
and errors. His alone is a light infinitely progressive, be¬
cause the rapid multiplication of population, after terres¬
trial renovations, composes in a few centuries a new society
in all the imaginable moral and political correspondences
of its destiny; and we might add, his alone is absolute light.
The man of our time is immutable in himself; he changes
no more than nature, in which he is rooted. The social
conditions which surround him alone determine the de¬
gree of his perfection, of which the bounds are virtue, holi¬
ness of man, and his happiness in the law. ’ ’
   After such elucidations, will any one ask the utility of
the occult sciences ? Will they treat with the disdain of
mysticism and illuminism these living mathematics, these
proportions of ideas and forms, this revelation permanent
in the universal reason, this emancipation of mind, this im¬
mutable basis provided for faith, this omnipotence revealed
to will? Children in search of illusions, are you disap¬
 pointed because we offer you marvels? Once a man said
to us, “ Raise up the devil, and I will believe in you. ” We
 answered, “You ask too little; we will not make the devil
 appear but vanish from the whole world; we will chase him
 from your dreams!” The devil is ignorance, darkness,
 chaotic thought, deformity. Awake, sleeper of the middle
 ages! See you not that it is day? See you not the light
 of God filling all nature? Where now will the destroyed
 prince of perdition dare to shew himself?

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   395

   It remains for us to state our conclusions and to define
the end and application of this work in the religious and
philosophical order, and in the order of positive and ma¬
terial realisations. As regards the religious order, we have
demonstrated that the practices of religious worships can¬
not be indifferent, that the magic of religions is in their
rites, that their moral force is in the triadic hierarchy, and
that the base, principle, and synthesis of the hierarchy is
unity. We have demonstrated the universal unity and or¬
thodoxy of dogma, clothed successively with various alle¬
gorical veils, and we have followed the truth saved by
Moses from profanation in Egypt, preserved in the kab¬
balah of the prophets, emancipated by the Christian school
from the slavery of the pharisees, attracting all the poetic
and generous aspirations of Greek and Roman civilisation,
protesting against a new pharisaism more corrupt than the
first, with the great saints of the middle ages and the bold
thinkers of the Renaissance. We have exhibited, I say, that
truth always universal, always living, alone conciliating
reason and faith, science and submission; the truth of being
demonstrated by being, of harmony demonstrated by har¬
mony, of reason manifested by reason. By revealing for
the first time to the world the mysteries of magic we have
not sought to revive practices entombed beneath the ruins
of ancient civilisations, but would say to humanity in our
day that it is also called to create itself immortal and
omnipotent by its works. Liberty does not offer itself, it
must be seized, says a modern writer: it is the same with
science, for which reason to divulge absolute truth is never
useful to the vulgar. But at an epoch when the sanctuary
has been devastated and has fallen into ruins, because its
key has been thrown over the hedges to the profit of no
one, I have deemed it my duty to pick up that key, and I
offer it to him who can take it; in his turn he will be
doctor of the nations and liberator of the world. Fables
and leading-strings are needed, and will always be needed
by children, but it is not necessary that those who hold the

396               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


leading-strings should also be children, lending a ready ear
to fables. Let the most absolute science, let the highest
reason, become the possession of the chiefs of the people;
let the priestly art and the royal art take up once more the
double sceptre of antique initiations, and the world will re¬
issue from chaos. Burn no more holy images, destroy no
more temples; temples and images are necessary for man;
but drive out the merchants from the house of prayer;
let the blind no longer be leaders of the blind; reconstruct
the hierarchy of intelligence and holiness, and recognise
only those who know as the teachers of those who believe.
Our book is catholic, and if the revelations it contains are
likely to alarm the conscience of the simple, we are consoled
by the thought that they will not read them. We write
for unprejudiced men, and have no wish to flatter irreligion
any more than fanaticism. If there be anything essentially
free and inviolable in the world, it is belief. By science
and persuasion we must endeavour to lead bewrayed im¬
aginations from the absurd, but it would be investing their
errors with all the dignity and truth of the martyr to either
threaten or constrain them.
   Faith is nothing but superstition and folly if it have not
reason for its basis, and we cannot suppose that which we
do not know except by analogy with what we know. To
define what we are unacquainted with is presumptuous
ignorance; to affirm positively what one does not know is
to lie. So is faith an aspiration and a desire. So be it; I
desire it to be so; such is the last word of all professions of
faith. Faith, hope, and charity are three such inseparable
sisters that they can be taken one for another. Thus, in
religion, universal and hierarchic orthodoxy, restoration of
temples in all their splendour, re-establishment of all cere¬
monies in their primitive pomp, hierarchic instruction of
symbols, mysteries, miracles, legends for children, light for
grown men who will beware of scandalising little ones in
the symplicity of their faith; this in religion is our whole
utopia, and it is also the desire and need of humanity.

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   397

     Coming now to philosophy, our own is that of realism
and positivism. Being is by reason of the being of which
no one doubts. All exists for us by science. To know is
to be. Science and its object become identified in the
intellectual life of him who knows. To doubt is to be
ignorant. Now, a thing of which we are ignorant does not
as yet exist for us. To live intellectually is to learn.
Being developes and amplifies by science. The first con¬
quest of science, and the first result of the exact sciences,
is the sentiment of reason. The laws of nature are algebraic.
Thus, the sole reasonable faith is the adhesion of the stu¬
dent to theorems, the entire essential justice of which is
outside his knowledge, though its applications and results
are sufficiently demonstrated to his mind. Thus, the true
philosopher believes in what is, and does not admit a poster¬
iori that all is reasonable. But no more charlatanism in
philosophy, no more empiricism, no more system! The
study of being and its compared realities! A metaphysic of
nature! Then away with mysticism! No more dreams in
philosophy; philosophy is not a poesy, but the pure mathe¬
matics of realities, physical and moral. Leave unto religion
the freedom of its infinite aspirations, and let it leave in
turn to science the exact conclusions of absolute experi-
mentalism.
   Man is the son of his works; he is what he wills to be;
he is the image of the God he makes; he is the realisation
of his ideal. Should his ideal want basis, the whole edifice
of his immortality collapses. Philosophy is not the ideal,
but it serves as a foundation for the ideal. The known is
for us the measure of the unknown; by the visible we ap¬
preciate the invisible; sensations are to thoughts even as
thoughts to aspirations. Science is a celestial trigonometry;
one of the sides of the absolute triangle is the nature which
is submitted to our investigations; the second is our soul,
which embraces and reflects nature; the third is the abso¬
lute, in which our soul enlarges. No more atheism possible
henceforward, for we no longer pretend to define God.

398               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


God is for us the most perfect and best of intelligent
beings, and the ascending hierarchy of beings sufficiently
demonstrates his existence. Do not let us ask for more,
but, to be ever understanding him better, let us grow per¬
fect by ascending towards him. No more ideology; being
is being, and cannot perfectionise save according to the
real laws of being. Observe, and do not*prejudge; exercise
our faculties, do not falsify them; enlarge the domain of
life in life; behold truth in truth! Everything is possible
to him who wills only what is true! Rest in nature, study,
know, then dare; dare to will, dare to act, and be silent!
No more hatred of anyone. Everyone reaps what he sows.
The consequence of works is fatal, and to judge and chas¬
tise the wicked is for the supreme reason. He who enters
into a blind alley must retrace his steps or be broken.
Warn him gently, if he can still hear you, but human lib¬
erty must take its course. We are not the judges of one
another. Life is a battle-field. Do not pause in the fight¬
ing on account of those who fall, but avoid trampling them.
Then comes the victory, and the wounded on both sides, be¬
come brothers by suffering and before humanity, will meet
in the ambulances of the conquerors.
   Such are the consequences of the philosophical dogma of
Hermes; such has been from all time the ethic of true
adepts; such is the philosophy of the Rosicrucian inheritors
of all the ancient wisdoms; such is the secret doctrine of
those associations that are treated as subversive of the
public order, and have ever been accused of conspiring
against thrones and altars. The true adept, far from dis¬
turbing the public order, is its firmest supporter. He has
too great a respect for liberty to desire anarchy; child of
the light, he loves harmony, and knows that darkness begets
confusion. He accepts everything that is, and denies only
what is not. He wills true religion, practical, universal,
full of faith, palpable, realised in all life; he wills it to
have a wise and powerful priesthood, surrounded by all the
virtues and all the prestige of faith. He wills the universal

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   399

orthodoxy, the absolute, hierarchic, apostolic, sacramental,
incontestable, and uncontested catholicity. He wills an
experimental philosophy, real, mathematical, modest in its
conclusions, untiring in its researches, scientific in its
progress. Who, therefore, can be against us if God and
reason are with us? Does it matter if man prejudge and
slander us ? Our entire justification is in our thoughts and
our works. We come not, like CEdipus, to destroy the
sphinx of symbolism; we seek, on the contrary, to resus¬
citate it. The sphinx devours only blind interpreters; and
he who slays it has not known how to divine it properly;
it must be subdued, enchained, and compelled to follow us.
The sphinx is the living palladium of humanity, it is the
conquest of the King of Thebes; it would have been the
salvation of CEdipus, had CEdipus completely divined its
enigma!
   In the positive and material order, what must be con¬
cluded from this work? Is magic a force which science
may abandon to the boldest and wickedest? Is it a cheat
and falsehood of those who are skilled in fascinating the
ignorant and feeble ? Is the philosophical mercury the ex¬
ploitation of credulity by address? Those who have un¬
derstood us know already how to answer these questions.
In these days, magic can be no longer the art of fascina¬
tions and illusions; those only who wish to be deceived can
be deceived now. But the narrow and rash incredulity of
the last century is denied in totality by nature herself. We
are environed with prophecies and miracles; doubt once un¬
wisely denied them; now, science explains them.           No,
Monsieur le Comte de Mirville, a destroyed spirit is not
allowed to disturb the empire of God! No, things unknown
cannot be explained by things impossible! No, invisible
beings are not permitted to deceive, torment, seduce, and
even kill the living creatures of God, men, already so
ignorant, and scarce able to combat their own delusions!
Those who told you all this in your childhood, Monsieur le
Comte, have deceived you, and if you were child enough

400                TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


once to listen to them, be man enough now to disbelieve
them. Man is himself the creator of his heaven and hell,
and there are no demons except our own follies. Minds
chastised by truth are corrected by the chastisement, and
dream no more of disturbing the world. If Satan exist, he
can be only the most unfortunate, most ignorant, most
humiliated, and most impotent of beings. The existence of
a universal agent of life, of a living fire, of an astral light,
is demonstrated by facts. Magnetism enables us to under¬
stand to-day the miracles of old magic; the facts of second
sight, aspirations, sudden cures, thought-reading, are now
admitted and familiar things, even among our children.
But the tradition of the ancients has been lost, discoveries
have been regarded as new, the last word is sought about
observed phenomena, minds grow excited over meaningless
manifestations, fascinations are experienced without being
understood. We say, therefore, to table-turners: These
prodigies are not novel; you can perform even greater
wonders if you study the laws of nature. And what will
follow a new acquaintance with these powers? A new
career opened to the activity and intelligence of man, the
battle of life reorganised with arms more perfect, and the
possibility restored to the flower of intelligence^ of once
more becoming the masters of all destinies, by providing
true priests and great kings for the world to come!




      HERE ENDS THE RITUAL OF TRANSCENDENT MAGIC.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE RITUAL


THE NUCTEMERON OF APOLLONIUS OF TYANA

   The Greek text was first published after an ancient manu¬
script, by Gilbert Gautrinus, in De Yita et Morte Moysis,
Lib. III., p. 206; and subsequently reproduced by Laurent
Moshemius in his Sacred and Historico-Critical Observa¬
tions. Amsterdam, 1721. Translated and interpreted fcr
the first time by Eliphas Levi.
Nuctemeron signifies the day of the night or the night
illumined by day. It is analogous to the “Light Issuing
from Darkness,’’ which is the title of a well-known Her¬
metic work. It may also be translated The Light of Oc¬
cultism.    This monument of transcendent Assyrian magic
is sufficiently curious to make it superfluous to enlarge on
its importance. We have not merely evoked Apollonius,
we have possibly resuscitated him.

                  THE NUCTEMERON
         *

                      The First Hour.
  In unity, the demons chant the praises of God; they lose
their malice and fury.

                    The Second Hour.
  By the duad, the Zodiacal fish chant the praises of God;
the fiery serpents interlace about the caduceus, and the
lightning becomes harmonious.

                     The Third Hour.
  The serpents of the Hermetic caduceus entwine three
lines; Cerberus opens his triple jaw, and fire chants the
praises of God with the three tongues of the lightning.
                                401

402               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


                     The Fourth Hour.
  At the fourth hour the soul revisits the tombs; the magi¬
cal lamps are lighted at the four corners of the circle; it is
the time of enchantments and illusions.

                     The Fifth Hour.
  The voice of the great waters celebrates the God of the
heavenly spheres.
                      The Sixth Hour.
  The spirit believes itself immovable; it beholds the in¬
fernal monsters swarm down upon it, and does not fear.

                    The Seventh Hour.
   A fire, which imparts life to all animated beings, is di¬
rected by the will of pure men. The initiate stretches forth
his hand, and pains are assuaged.

                     The Eighth Hour.
   The stars utter speech to one another; the soul of the
suns corresponds with the exhalation of the flowers; chains
of harmony create correspondence between all natural
things.
                     The Ninth Hour.
  The number which must not be divulged.

                     The Tenth Hour.
 The key of the astronomical cycle and of the circular
movement of human life.

                    The Eleventh Hour.
  The wings of the genii move with a mysterious and deep
murmur; they fly from sphere to sphere, and bear the mes¬
sages of God from world to world.

                    The Twelfth Hour.
  The works of the light eternal are fulfilled by fire.

                     EXPLANATION
These twelve symbolical hours, analogous to the signs of

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                     403

the magical Zodiac and to the allegorical labours of Her¬
cules, represent the schedule of the works of initiation.
It is necessary therefore (1) To overcome evil passions, and,
according to the expression of the wise Hierophant, compel
the demons themselves to praise God. (2) To study the
balanced forces of nature, and know how harmony results
from the analogy of contraries; to know also the greaf
magical agent and the twofold polarisation of the universal
light. (3) To gain initiation into the triadic principle of all
theogonies and all religious symbols. (4) To know how to
overcome all phantoms of imagination, and triumph over all
illusions. (5) To understand after what manner universal
harmony is produced in the centre of the four elementary
forces. (6) To become inaccessible to fear. (7) To prac¬
tise the direction of the magnetic light.       (8) To learn
prevision of effects by the calculus of the balance of causes.
 (9) To understand the hierarchy of instruction, to respect
the mysteries of dogma, and to keep silence in presence
of the profane.     (10) To study astronomy exhaustively.
 (11) To become initiated by analogy into the laws of uni¬
versal life and intelligence. (12) To fulfil the great works
of nature by direction of the light.
   Here follow the names and attributions of the genii who
preside over the twelve hours of the Nuctemeron. By these
genii the ancient hierophants understood neither angels nor
demons, but moral forces or personified virtues.

                  Genii of the First Hour.
  Papus, physician. Sinbuck, judge. Rasphuia, necro¬
mancer. Zahun, genius of scandal. Heiglot, genius of
snowstorms. Mizkun, genius of amulets. Haven, genius
of dignity.
                         Explanation.
  We must become the physician and judge of ourselves in
order to vanquish the witchcrafts of the necromancer, con¬
jure and contemn the genius of scandal, triumph over the
opinion which freezes all enthusiasms, and confounds every-

404               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


thing in the same cold pallor, like the genius of the snow¬
storms; know, finally, the virtue of signs so as to enchain
the genius of amulets that we may reach the dignity of the
magus.
                Genii of the Second Hour.
  Sisera, genius of desire. Torvatus, genius of discord.
Nitibus, genius of the stars. Hizarbin, genius of the seas.
Sachluph, genius of plants. Baglis, genius of measure
and balance. Labezerin, genius of success.

                       Explanation.
   We must learn how to will and thus transform the genius
of desire into power; the hindrance to will is the genius of
discord, who is bound by the science of harmony. Harmony
is the genius of the stars and of the seas; we must study
the virtue of plants, and understand the laws of the balance
of measure in order to attain success.

                 Genii of the Third Hour.
  Hahabi, genius of fear. Phlogabitus, genius of adorn¬
ments. Eirneus, destroying genius of idols. Mascarun,
genius of death. Zarobi, genius of precipices. Butatar,
genius of calculations. Cahor, genius of deception.

                       Explanation.
   When you have conquered the genius of fear by the
growing force of your will, you will know that dogmas are
the sacred adornments of truth unknown to the vulgar;
but you will cast down all idols in your intelligence; you
will bind the gemus of death; you will fathom all precipices
and subject the infinite itself to the ratio of your calcula¬
tions; and thus you will ever escape the ambushes of the
genius of deception.

                Genii of the Fourth Hour.
  Phalgus, genius of judgment. Thagrinus, genius of
confusion. Eistibus, genius of divination. Pharzuph,
genius of fornication.    Sislau, genius of poisons.

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    405

Schiekron, genius of bestial love.      Aclahayr, genius of
sport.
                         Explanation.
   The power of the magus is in his judgment, which enables
him to avoid the confusion consequent on antinomy and the
antagonism of principles; he practises the divination of the
sages, but he despises the illusions of enchanters who are
the slaves of fornication, artists in poisons, ministers of
bestial love; in this way he is victorious over fatality, which
is the genius of sport.

                  Genii of the Fifth Hour.
Zeirna, genius of infirmities. Tablibik, genius of fascina¬
tion. Tacritau, genius of goetic magic. Suphlatus, genius
of the dust. Sair, genius of the stibium of the sages.
Barcus, genius of the quintessence. Camaysar, genius of
the marriage of contraries.

                        Explanation.
   Triumphing over human infirmities, the magus is no
longer the sport of fascination; he tramples on the vain
and dangerous practices of goetic magic, the whole power
of which is but dust driven before the wind; but he possesses
the stibium of the sages; he is armed with all the creative
powers of the quintessence; and he produces at will the
harmony which results from the analogy and the marriage
of contraries.

            >    Genii of the Sixth Hour.
   Tabris, genius of free will. Susabo, genius of voyages.
Eirnilus, genius of fruits. Nitika, genius of precious
stones. Haatan, genius who conceals treasures. Hatiphas,
genius of attire. Zaren, avenging genius.

                        Explanation.
  The magus is free; he is the occult king of the earth,
and he traverses it as one passing through his own domain.
In his voyages he becomes acquainted with the juices of

406               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


plants and fruits, and with the virtues of precious stones;
he compels the genius who conceals the treasures of nature to
deliver him all his secrets; he thus penetrates the mysteries
of form; understands the vestures of earth and speech; and
if he be misconstrued, if the nations are inhospitable to¬
wards him, if he pass doing good but receiving outrages,
then is he ever followed by the avenging genius.

                Genii of the Seventh Hour.
  Sialul, genius of prosperity. Sabrus, sustaining genius.
Librabis, genius of hidden gold. Mizgitari, genius of
eagles. Causub, serpent-charming genius. Salilus, genius
who sets doors open. Jazer, genius who compels love.

                        Explanation.
   The septenary expresses the victory of the magus; who
gives prosperity to men and nations; who sustains them by
his sublime instructions; who broods like the eagle; who
directs the currents of the astral fire, represented by ser¬
pents; the gates of all sanctuaries are open to him, and in
him all souls who yearn for truth repose their trust; he is
beautiful in his moral grandeur; and everywhere does he
take with him that genius by the power of which we obtain
love.
                 Genii of the Eighth Hour.
   Nantur, genius of writing. Toglas, genius of treasures.
Zalburis, genius of therapeutics. Alphun, genius of doves.
Tukiphat, genius of the schamir. Zizuph, genius of mys¬
teries. Cuniali, genius of association.

                       Explanation.
   These are the genii who obey the true magus; the doves
represent religious ideas; the schamir is an allegorical
diamond, which in magical traditions represents the stone of
the sages, or that force which nothing can resist, because it
is based on truth. The Arabs still say that the schamir,
originally given to Adam and lost by him after his fall, was

                   TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                    407

recovered by Enoch and possessed by Zoroaster; and that
Solomon subsequently received it from an angel when he
entreated wisdom from God. By means of this magical
diamond, Solomon himself dressed the stones of the temple
merely by touching them with the schamir.

                  Genii of the Ninth Hour.
  Risnuch, genius of agriculture. Suclagus, genius of fire.
Kirtabus, genius of languages. Sablil, genius who dis¬
covers thieves.   Schachlil, genius of the sun’s rays.
Colopatiron, genius who sets prisons open. Zeffar, genius
of irrevocable choice.
                         Explanation.
   This number, says Apollonius, must be passed over in
silence, because it contains the great secrets of the initiate,
the power which fructifies the earth, the mysteries of secret
fire, the universal key of languages, the second sight from
which evil-doers cannot remain concealed. The great laws
of equilibrium and of luminous motion represented by the
four animals of the Kabbalah, and in Greek mythology by
the four horses of the sun, the key of the emancipation of
bodies and souls, opening all prisons, and that power of
eternal choice which completes the creation of man and
establishes him in immortality.

                 Genii of the Tenth Hour.
  Sezarbil, devil or hostile genius. Azeuph, destroyer of
children. Armilus, genius of cupidity. Kataris, genius
of dogs or of the profane. Razanil, genius of the onyx.
Bucaphi, genius of stryges. Mastho, genius of delusive
appearances.
                        Explanation.
   Numbers end with nine, and the distincive sign of the
denary is zero, itself without value, added to unity. The
genii of the tenth hour represent all which, being nothing
in itself, receives great power from opinion, and can suffer
consequently the omnipotence of the sage. We tread here

408              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


on hot earth, and we must be permitted to omit elucidations
to the profane as to the devil, who is their master, or the
destroyer of children, who is their love, or the cupidity,
which is their god, or the dogs, to which we do not compare
them, or to the onyx, which they possess not, or to the
stryges, who are their courtesans, or to the false appear¬
ances which they take for truth. •

               Genii of the Eleventh Hour.
  ^Eglun, genius of the lightning. Zuphlas, genius of
forests. Phaldor, genius of oracles. Rosabis, genius of
metals. Aljuchas, genius of rocks. Zophas, genius of
pantacles. Halacho, genius of sympathies.

                       Explanation.
   The lightning obeys man; it becomes the vehicle of his
will, the instrument of his power, the light of his torches;
the oaks of the sacred forests utter oracles: metals change
and transmute into gold, or become talismans; rocks move
from their foundation, and, drawn by the lyre of the grand
hierophant, touched by the mysterious schamir, transform
into temples and palaces; dogmas evolve; symbols repre¬
sented by pantacles become efficacious; minds are enchained
by powerful sympathies, and obey the laws of family and
friendship.
                 Genii of the Twelfth Hour.
   Tarab, genius of extortion. Misran, genius of persecu¬
tion.  Labus, genius of inquisition. Kalab, genius of
sacred vessels. Hahab, genius of royal tables. Marnes,
genius of the discernment of spirits. Sellen, genius of the
favour of the great.
                       Explanation.
   Here now is the fate which the magi must expect, and
how their sacrifice must be consummated; for after the
conquest of life, they must know how to immolate them¬
selves in order to be reborn immortal. They will suffer
extortion; gold, pleasure, vengeance will be required of

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                   409

them, and if they fail to satisfy vulgar cupidities they will
be the objects of persecution and inquisition; yet the sacred
vessels are not profaned; they are made for royal tables,
that is, for the feasts of the understanding. By the discern¬
ment of spirits they will know how to protect themselves
from the favour of the great, and they will remain in¬
vincible in their strength and in their liberty.




     THE NUCTEMERON ACCORDING TO THE
                HEBREWS

  Extracted from the ancient Talmud termed Mischna
                     by the Jews

    The Nuctemeron of Apollonius, borrowed from Greek
 theurgy, completed and explained by the Assyrian hierarchy
 of genii, perfectly corresponds to the philosophy of numbers
 as we find it expounded in the most curious pages of the
 Talmud. Thus, the Pythagoreans go back further than
Pythagoras; thus, Genesis js a magnificent allegory, which,
under the form of narrative, conceals the secrets not only
of the creation achieved of old, but of permanent and uni-
 versal creation, the eternal generation of beings. We
read as follows in the Talmud: “God hath stretched out
the heaven like a tabernacle; He hath spread the world like
a table richly dight; and He hath created man as if He
invited a guest.’’ Listen now to the words of the King
Schlomoh: “The divine Chocmah, Wisdom, the Bride of
God, hath built a house unto herself, and hath dressed
two pillars. She hath immolated her victims, she hath
mingled her wine, she hath spread the table, and she hath
despatched her servitors.” This Wisdom, who builds her
house according to a regular and numerical architecture,
is that exact science which rules in the works of God. It is
His compass and His square. The seven pillars are the
seven typical and primordial days. The victims are natural

410               TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


forces which are propagated by undergoing a species of
death. Mingled wine is the universal fluid, the table is
the world with the waters full of fishes. The servants of
Chocmah are the souls of Adam and of Chavah (Eve).
The earth of which Adam was formed was taken from the
entire mass of the world. His head is Israel, his body the
empire of Babylon, and his limbs are the other nations of
the earth. (Here manifest the aspirations of the initiates
of Moses towards a universal oriental kingdom.)      Now,
there are twelve hours in the day of man’s creation.

                        First Hour.
  God combines the scattered fragments of earth; he kneads
them together, and forms one mass, which it is his will to
animate.
                      Explanation.
  Man is the synthesis of the created world; in him recurs
the creative unity; he is made in the image and likeness
of God.
                      Second Hour.
   God designs the form of the body; he separates it into
two sections, so that the organ may be double, for all force
and all life result from two, and it is thus the Elohim made
all things.
                         Explanation.
  Everything lives by movement, everything is maintained
by equilibrium, and harmony results from the analogy of
contraries; this law is the form of forms, the first mani¬
festation of the activity and fecundity of God.

                       'Third Hour.
  The limbs of man, obeying the law of life, manifest of
themselves and are completed by the generative organ,
which is composed of one and two, figure of the triadic
number.
                       Explanation.
  The triad issues spontaneously from the duad; the move-

                  TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  411

ment which produces two also produces three; three is the
key of numbers, for it is the first numeral synthesis; in
geometry it is the triangle, the first complete and enclosed
figure, generatrix of an infinity of triangles, whether like
or unlike.
                       Fourth Hour.
  God breathes upon the face of man and imparts to him
a soul.
                       Explanation.
  The tetrad, which geometrically gives the cross and the
square, is the perfect number; now, it is in perfection of
form that the intelligent soul manifests; according to this
revelation of the Mischna, the child would not become
animated in the mother’s womb till after the complete
formation of all its members.

                        Fifth Hour.
  Man stands upon his feet, he is weaned from earth, he
walks and goes where he will.

                       Explanation.
   The number five is that of the soul, typified by the
quintessence which results from the equilibrium of the four
elements; in the Tarot this number is represented by the
high-nriest or spiritual autocrat, type of the human will,
that high-priestess who alone decides our eternal destinies.

                       Sixth Hour.
  The animals pass before Adam, and he gives a suitable
name to each.
                     Explanation. .
   Man by toil subdues the earth and overcomes the animals;
by the manifestation of his liberty he produces his word
or speech in the environment which obeys him; herein
primordial creation is completed. God formed man on the
sixth day, but at the sixth hour of the day man fulfils the
work of God, and to some extent recreates himself, by en-

412              TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC


throning himself as king of nature, which he subjects by
his speech.
                     Seventh Hour.
 God gives Adam a companion brought forth out of the
man’s own substance.
                       Explanation.
  "When God had created man in his own image, He rested
on the seventh day, for He had given unto Himself a fruit¬
ful bride who would unceasingly work for Him; nature is
the bride of God, and God rests on her. Man, becoming
creator in his turn by means of the word, gives himself
a companion like unto himself, on whose love he may lean
henceforth; woman is the work of man; by loving her, he
makes her beautiful, and he also makes her a mother;
woman is true human nature, daughter and mother of
man, granddaughter and grandmother of God.

                      Eighth Hour.
  Adam and Eve enter the nuptial bed; they are two when
they lie down, and when they arise they are four.

                      Explanation.
  The tetrad joined to the tetrad represents form balancing
form, creation issuing from creation, the eternal equipoise
of life; seven being the number of God’s rest, the unity
which follows it signifies man, who toils and co-operates
wfith nature in the work of creation.

                      Ninth Hour.
  God imposes his law on man.

                       Explanation.
  Nine is the number of initiation, because, being composed
of three times three, it represents the divine idea and the
absolute philosophy of numbers, for which reason Apol¬
lonius says that the mysteries of the number nine are not
to be revealed.

                 TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC                  413

                       Tenth Hour.
  At the tenth hour Adam falls into sin.

                       Explanation.
   According to the kabbalist ten is the number of mater,
of which the special sign is zero; in the tree of the
sephiroth ten represents Malchuth, or exterior and material
substance; the sin of Adam is therefore materialism, and
the fruit which he plucks from the tree represents flesh
isolated from spirit, zero separated from unity, the schism
of the number ten, giving on the one side a despoiled unity
and on the other nothingness and death.

                     Eleventh Hour.
  At the eleventh hour the sinner is condemned to labour,
and to expiate his sin by suffering.

                       Explanation.
   In the Tarot, eleven represents force, which is acquired
through trials; God sends man pain as a means of salvation,
and hence he must strive and endure that he may conquer
intelligence and life.
                      Twelfth Hour.
  Man and woman undergo their sentence; the expiation
begins, and the liberator is promised.

                       Explanation.
  Such is the completion of moral birth; man is fulfilled,
for he is dedicated to the sacrifice which regenerates; the
exile of Adam is like that of CEdipus; like (Edipus he be¬
comes the father of two enemies, but the daughter of
CEdipus is the pious and virginal Antigone, while Mary
issues from the race of Adam.



                          FINIS.

Jf:

                              INDEX
            TO   “THE   RITUAL OF TRANSCENDENTAL       MAGIC”

Abraham, the Jew, 276, 277             Astral Light, a force more power¬
Abraxas, 80, 155, 236, 277               ful than steam, 13; the soul of
Abracadabra,, 209, 212                   the world, 41; manifested by
Absolute, 41, 44, 59, 159, 176, 274,     four phenomena, 53; secret of
  369                                    its direction, 54; the glass of
Achilles, 35                             vision, 62; mother of forms, 63;
Active and Passive, 38                   governed by human will, 65; the
Adam, the Human Tetragram, 37;           astral light and magnetism, 70;
  signified by Jod, 51; impression       laws which rule it, 71; the uni¬
  of his Fall on the Astral Light,       versal seducer, 72; the astral
  82; see also 91, 126, 160, 265,        light and the fire of hell, 73-74;
  412                                    the book of consciences, 74-75;
Addhanari, 175                           impression of the Fall of Adam
Adonhiram, 265                           thereon, 82; the body of the
Aeschylus, 15                            Holy Ghost, 82; transformed at
Agrippa, Cornelius, not a great          conception into human light, 84;
  magician, 10; great and unfor¬         its dual movement, 103; explains
  tunate, 23; submitted to the re¬       spirit phenomena, 106; applica¬
  ligion of his time, 47; his mis¬       tion to the Translueid, 114;
  erable death, 90, 100, 167; see        gives warning of coming in¬
  also 170, 208, 245, 273, 365.          fluences, 135: preserves impres¬
Alchemy, see Magnum Opus                 sions of all visible things, 140;
Ammonius Saccas, 7, 18                   the astral light and the doctrine
Anael, 78, 243, 366                      of signatures, 142; the soul’s
Analogy. See Hermetic Axiom,             purgation in the astral light,
  but also 172, 174, 175                 146; identical with the old ser¬
Androgyne, 14                            pent, 188; transmits the memory
Android, 323, 324, 384                   of forms, 214; how it is pro¬
Animal Magnetism, see Magnetism          jected by man, 240; the agent
Antichrist, 56                           of alchemy, 274-275; the great
Aour, 188                                book of divinations, 352-353
Apollonius, 4, 13, 30, 65, 73, 88,     Astrology, 140 et seq.
  90, 100, 117, 119, 120, 273, 293,    Athanor, 54, 68, 110, 279
  305, 401                             Atziluth, 50, 265, 385
Apocalypse, 5, 6, 43, 78, 93, 155,     Azot and Azoth, the God of the
  234, 266, 268, 384, 389                sages, 16; the word which con¬
Apuleius, 16, 17, 18, 30, 32, 122,       tains all, 17; a name of the As¬
  292, 283, 326                          tral Light, 53, 54, 99; contains
Aqua Toffana, 148, 151                   the Incommunicable Axiom, 54;
Archimedes, 29, 99, 105                  an alchemical element, 58; trans¬
Ark of the Covenant, 385                 mutation and Azoth, 166-167,
Ars Notoria, 12                          how composed, 274-275; the fire
Asch Mezareph, 152                      of the philosophers, 349; identi¬
Asiah, 50                               cal with the word Tarot, 374, see
Astral Body, not always of the          also 157, 160, 276, 237
  same sex as the physical, 84;
  dissolution at death, 114; in        Baphomet, 14, 236, 299, 307
  conformity with the condition        Belot, John, 334
  of thought, 123; means of com¬       Bereschitli, 98, 327
 munication between soul and           Bewitchment, 132, et seq., 318 et
  body, 240                              seq.
Astral Intoxication, 136               Binah, 59, 69, 92, 97

416                              INDEX
                  TO “TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC”—CONTINUED


Black Magic, 128, 215,     289, 299    Duchentau, 67, 156, 209, 243, 265
  et seq.                              Duodenary, 272
Black Sabbath, 8, 14, 73, 115, 129,    Dupuis, 22, 173, 267, 393
  270-271, 215, 302 et seq.
Blazing Star, 36                       Eagle Hieroglyph, 58, 173-174
Bodin, demonologist, 134                 369
Bohme, Jacob, 20                       Edenic Mystery, 99
Briah, 50, 268, 385                    Elagabalus, 157
Bull Hieroglyph, 58, 173, 369; see     Elder of the Kabbalah, 93
  also Cherub and Sphinx               Elementary Spirits, 58, 60, 127,
                                         222
Cadmus, 91, 386,                       Elias" 47, 283
Caduceus, 80, 112, 401                 Eliphas Levi, 65, 113
Cain and Abel, 41, 135, 266            Embryonic, 74, 115
Cainites, 187                          Emerald Table, 28, 43, 158, 275,
Cagliostro, Count, 90, 127, 149,         348
  240, 256                             Enchiridion, 254, 314
Cardan, Jerome, 7, 100, 144, 145,      Enoch, 5, 43, 78, 142, 273, 386
  252, 256, 273                        Epaminondas, 7
Cartomancy, 327                        Equilibrium, 75, 83, 141, 172, 206,
Cato, 7                                  209, 243, 320, 410
Cazotte, Jacques, 90, 148, 220         Eros and Anteros, 40, 243
Chateaubriand, 103                     Ether, 53
Cherub, 79, 266; see Sphinx and        Etteilla, 98, 110, 112, 170, 371,
  Bull                                   372
Chesed, 49, 50, 59, 91, 97, 301        Eve, 17, 37, 51, 160
Chiromancy, 143,                       Evocations, 287, 308
Chochmah, 59, 69, 92, 97, 410          Extreme Unction, 387
Christ, 46, 82, 191,                   Ezekiel, 5, 6, 10, 22, 56, 98, 155,
Clavicles of Solomon, 242                158, 248, 257, 266, 327, 366, 374
Convulsionaries, 106
Cortices, 47, 61                       Fabre d’Olivet, 188
Cross, 53, 57, 68, 189, 228, 233,      Faith, basis of, 158; reason and
  270                                    faith, 172; professions of faith,
Cynocephaius, 80                         166; faith as aspiration and de¬
                                         sire, 396
Dante, 18
                                       Fascination, 296
Death, as change, 31; always pre¬
                                       Faust, 21, 31
  ceded by sleep, 70-71; no death
                                       Fifty Gates, 98
  for the sage, 163; its terrors the
                                       First Cause, 46, 49, 52
  daughters of ignorance, 182;
                                       First Matter, 274, 351
  there is no death, 280
                                       Fixed and Volatile, 58, 109, 350
Dionysious the Areopagite, 7, 18
TlpQpnTfpQ   97
                                       Flamel, Nicholas, 108, 168, 201,
                                         275, 266, 269
Devil, 93,’ 128, 152, 299, 308; see
                                       Fohi, 38, 45
  also Satan and Lucifer
                                       Four Ages, 59
Diaphane, 34, 64, 84
                                       Four Elements, 57
Divination, 88, 166, et seq., 229,
  359                               Gabriel, 78, 243
Divine Names, 94                    Gaffarel, 98, 142, 328, 334, 370, 385
Dragon, 80; see Serpent             Galatinus 20
Dreams, 62, 64, 127-128             Gaudfridi, 125
Duad, 38, 41, 42, 51, 301, 401, Gebelin, Court de, 98, 110, 112, 218
  409                                 372

                                INDEX                                 417
              TO "TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC”—CONTINUED

Geburah, 49, 50, 59, 91, 97, 301,      Hiram, 194
  371                                  Hod, 97
Gematria, 98, 217                      Holy Spirit, 42, 46, 82
Genesis of Enoch, 18; see Tarot.       Homer, 15, 16
Geomancy, 362                          Hyle, 50, 236
Gilles de Laval, 316
Girard, Father, 125-126, 130,          Imagination, 35, 60 126, 229, 362,
Gnosis, 37, 39, 50, 233                  363
God, the Azot of the Sages, 16;        Immortality, 56
  necessity and liberty in God, 40;    Incommunicable Axiom, 53
  divine unity and triplicity, 41,     Initiation, 88, 260
  45; tetradic name of God, 51;        Inri, 52, 54, 160
  secret of God, 55; essential idea    Insufflation, 355
  of God, 58; God and faith, 159;      Intelligible Worlds, 44
  160; how God is defined, 174;
  the works of God, 175; God and       Jacob and the angel, 40
  miracles, 352.                       Jacques de Molay, 9
Grand Grimoire, 151                    Jakin and Bolias, 38, 75, 158, 174,
Grandier, Urban, 23, 85, 124, 130,       268, 371, 386
  149                                  Jesod, 95
Great Arcanum, partly divined by       Jettatura, 152
  Aedipus, 16; the secret of direct¬   Jetzirah, 50, 268, 385
  ing the Astral Light, 53; on         Jod, 38, 40, 51, 96, 97
  what it depends, ib.; character¬     Jod He Vau He, 37, 52, 77, 93,
                                         370; see also Tetragram
  istics of, 57; occult name of,
  167; symbolical representation       Julian the Apostate, 7, 22, 30, 47,
                                         103, 189, 211, 277, 305
  of, 167; the astral movement
                                       Jupiter (the planet), 80, 144, 244,
  and the Great Arcanum, 174;
                                         245, 257
  first principles of, 206; revela¬
  tion of, 275; royalty of its pos¬    Kabbalah, symbols containing its
  sessor, 347; the Great Arcanum        secrets, 5; reconciliation of rea¬
  and the “Manual” of Paracel¬          son and faith through the Kab¬
  sus, 348; see also 238                balah, 6; Dante and the Kab¬
  “Manual” of Paracelsus, 348;          balah, 18; its admirable doc¬
  see also 238                          trine, 19; elements of, 20; liter¬
Great Magic Agent, see Astral           ature of, ib.; Enoch, father of
  Light                                 the Kabbalah, 43; fundamental
Great Work, see Magnum Opus             principle of, 49* key of, 50; sole
Grimoire of Honorius, 314               dogma of, 52, 137; kabbalistic
Gyges, King of, 294                     elements, 58, 59; the kabbalistic
                                        pentagram, 66; kabbalistic equi¬
Hermanubis, 40, 300, 305, 351           librium, 75; kabbalistic angelol-
Hermes, 5, 14, 28, 30, 34, 42, 43,      ogy, 78; the Kabbalah and the
  53, 88, 91, 108, 109, 157, 203,       primeval book, 91; kabbalistic
  273, 348                              groundwork of       religion  and
Hermetic Axiom, the sole doctrine       science, 92; kabbalistic Sephi-
  of magic, 35; trinity and unity       roth, 93; The Tarot and Kab¬
  of, 37, 44; the sole dogma of         balah, 95-98; kabbalistic pneu-
 universal religion, 56; the Her¬       matology, 126; kabbalistic sym¬
 metic Axiom and divination,. 88;       bolism, 142; the Kabbalah and
 proves the reality of evocations,      the law of nature, 161; the Kab¬
  213; consequences of, 398; see        balah and the key of occult sci¬
 also 53, 108, 210, 268                 ence, 177; Lucifer in the Kab-

 418                              INDEX
               TO “TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC”—CONTINUED


   balah, 183; magnetism and the Magnetism, 64, 67, 70, 71, 207,
   Kabbalah,      207;    kabbalistic     239, 296, 356, 357, 400
   scapegoat, 215; the practical Magnum Opus, the doctrine under¬
   Kabbalah, 217; the Kabbalah            lying alchemical symbols, 3; al¬
   and the apocalypse, 268; the          chemical elements, 57; definition
   sacred book of the Kabbalah,           of the great work, 108; prophets
   276; the four beasts of, 278          of alchemy, 109 y necessary in¬
Kether, 49, 59, 69, 92, 96               struments, 110; alchemical sun
Khunrath, Henry, 100, 109, 255           and moon, 159; alchemical name
   277, 279                              of the Great Arcanum, 167; pov¬
Kircher, Father, 2                       erty the protection of the Mag¬
                                         num Opus, 198; secrets of, 274;
Labarum, 270-271                         the Magnum Opus a magical
Lamennais, Abbe, 27                      operation, 278; mandragore of
Lavater, 245                             the alchemists, 323; definition of
Liberty, 76, 88, 109                     the stone, 347; alchemical gold,
Lingam, 59, 80                           349
Lion hieroglyph, 58, 173, 369         Malchuth, 49, 50, 91, 92, 97, 413
Logos, 43, 74, 81, 218; see Word Man Hieroglyph, 57, 347
Loudon, Devils of, 124                Mandragore, 323
Love, 17                              Manes,   3
Lucifer, burning sceptre of, 17; a Maniehaeanism, 302
  name of the Great Magical Mars (planet), 77, 144, 244, 245,
  Agent, 53, 72-73; the kabbalistic     258
  Lucifer, 173-83; the gnostic Mary the Egyptian, 109
  Lucifer, 185; signature of, 189; Medicine, occult, 350 et seq.
  restitution of, 234                 Mendes, 32, 233
Lucifuge, 73                          Mercavah, 98
Lully, Raymond, 10, 90, 100, 108, Mercury, the element, 57, 274, 276.
  201, 275, 276, 279, 348, 384          347; the planet, 77, 79, 243, 245,
Lycanthropy, 122                        258
                                      Mesmer, 13, 101
Macrocosm, 36, 40, 44, 68             Metempsychosis,    294
Maeroprosopus, 58                     Michael, 40, 78, 82, 243, 328, 367
Magi, Three, 5, 233                   Microcosm,   36, 68, 70, 208
Magic, its early history, 3, 4; sci¬ Microprosopus, 30, 57, 231
  ence the basis of, 5; the Church Minerva Mundi, 109
  and magic, 7; power and reality Miracles, 198, 352
  of, 11; alone imparts true sci¬ Mirville, Comte de, 130, 134, 236,
  ence, 28; divine and infernal         313, 399
 magic, 29; differs from mysti¬       Monad,   40, 45, 46, 401
 cism, 81; the sacerdotal and roy¬ Moon, 78, 144, 237, 245, 257, 331
 al art, 88; operation of, 201;         et seq.
 ceremonial magic, 211; see also Mopses, 306, 307
  Black Magic                         Moses, 10, 14, 18, 21, 27, 69, 90,
Magical Instruments, 211, 252 ct        188, 266
 seq.                                 Mysteries,  81, 111, 25
Magic Chain, 101, 270 et seq.
                                      Necromancy, 115, 115 et seq., 283
Magic Rod, 70                           et seq.
Magic Squares, 374, 375-377           Netsah, 92, 92, 100
Magnes, interior, 136, 347
Magnesia, 99, 108                     Ob, 188
Magnetic Fluid, 53                    Od, 53, 188, 275

                                    INDEX                           419
               TO “TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC”—CONTINUED


(Edipus, 14, 16, 17, 399             Raphael, 78, 243, 366
Ophites, 187                         Redeemer, 81
Orifiel, 78, 243, 365                Regnuin Dei, 28
Orpheus, 3, 4, 7, 14, 30, 90, 109    Religion, 86, 205, 260, 395
Osiris, 30, 52                       Respiration, 83
Pacts, 13                            Resurrection, 176
Pandora, 17                          Revolution of Souls, Book of, 20,
Pantacles, 247, 265                    48, 74, 113
Paracelsus, accused of insanity, 23; Romance of the Rose, 18
  submitted to the religion of his Rota, 54, 96, 370; see Tarot
  time, 47; an innovator in magic, Rousseau, 5, 102
  67; talismans of, 82; his philos¬
                                     Saint-Martin, 6, 30, 89, 215, 373,
  ophy of intuition, 84; the labours
                                       386
  which overcame him, 90; his sex
                                     Salt in alchemy, 57, 274, 276, 348
  suspected, 100; his doctrine of
                                     Salvator Rosa, 8
  phantoms, 125; his marvels of
                                     Samael, 78, 243, 362
  healing, 136; his discovery of
                                     Sanctum Regnum, 28, 77
  magnetism, ib.) last of the great
                                     Satan, 40, 82, 94, 139, 176, 289,
  practical astrologers, 142; his
                                       325
  doctrine of signatures, 143; his
                                     Saturn (planet), 78, 79, 144, 244,
  strife with nature, 209; his pre¬    245 257
  scription of ceremonial magic,
                                     Schrcepffer, 128, 149, 214, 256
  258; his sympathetic medicine, Seal of Solomon, 44, 47, 68, 195,
  322; his doctrine of the interior    203, 216, 217, 255, 388
  magues, 347; his appearance in Sepher Jetzirah, 20, 158, 220
  dream to Eliphas Levi, 386; see Sepher-Toldos-Jeschu, 111
  also 35, 170, 243, 247, 273        Sephiroth, 93, 98
Pentagram, 61, 66, 68, 110, 194, Septenary, 77, 79, 171, 242 et seq.
  208, 216, 231 et seq. 249          Serpent, 72, 130, 166, 187, 236
Pentateuch, 19                       Sidereal Body, see Astral Body
Peter of Apono, 295                  Solomon, 10, 50, 142,
Phallus, 37, 38, 96                  Somnambulism, 63, 64, 114, 115,
Philosophical Stone, 12; see Mag¬      229, 240
  num Opus                           Sorcery, 29, 86, 148
Philtres, 338 et seq.                Soul of the Earth, 53
Picus de Mirandola, 20, 312          Soul of the World, see Great Magi¬
Pistorius, 20                          cal Agent
Plato, 7, 14, 190, 299               Sphinx, 3, 10, 14, 16, 32, 79, 155,
Pleroma, 50                            266, 369
Plotinus, 273, 305                   Spirit, see Pneumatology
Pneumatology, 47, 126, 146           Spiritism, 105, 221, 272
Porta, J. B., 147, 292               Stauros, 52
Postel, William, 6, 18, 20, 54, 78, St John, 27, 43, 49, 78, 155, 193,
  96, 142, 366                         218, 234, 266
Potable gold, 162                    Stone of the Philosophers, 157,
Powder of projection, 347              159; see Magnum Opus
Priapus, 32                          St Paul, 21, 86
Prometheus, 17, 257                  Stryges, 4
Psyche, 16, 17, 50, 189, 190         Sublimation, 348
Pythagoras, 3, 14, 19, 32, 153, 155, Suffering, 186
  257, 263, 265, 266, 409            Sulphur of Alchemy, 57, 274, 276,
Quadrature of the Circle, 33           347
Quintessence, 274                    Sun, 77, 80, 257

    420                                INDEX
                         TO “TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC”—CONTINUED


    Superstition, 154                      Tree of Knowledge, 9, 42
>   Supreme Being, 38                      Trevisan, Bernard, 109
    Swedenborg, 6, 7, 47, 62, 72, 90,      Triad, 38, 42, 44, 52, 79, 80, 411
      221                                  Trimalcyon, 103, 360
    Symbolism, 190                         Trinity, 45, 46
    Synesius, 7, 18, 273                   Triphonius, 9
                                           Trithemius, 78, 145, 213, 242, 365,
    Talisman, 79, 229, 242 et seq. 247       367
    Talmud, 19, 20, 39, 409                Tsehoudy, Baron, 348
    Tarot, perhaps anterior to Enoch,      Tycho Brahe, 67, 156, 242, 265
      5; its first symbol, 30, 166; du-
                                           Uncreated will, 49
      adic emblem of, 43; its symbol
                                           Universal medicine, 12, 156
      of the Sanctum Begnum, 77;
      its connection -with the Apoca¬      Valentine Basil, 109, 157, 277, 338
      lypse, 78; the primitive book,       Vampires, 121
      89; the Tarot considered kab-        Venus (planet), 77, 79, 144, 244,
      balistieally, 94-98; its symbol of     257
      the Magnum Opus, 110; mean¬          Verbum Inenarrabile, 79
      ing of its seventeenth symbol,       Villars, Abbe de, 148
      147; the most perfect instru¬        Virgin Mary, 144, 249
      ment of divination, 169, 170:        Visions, 69,* 76, 115, 157
      meaning of the eighth key, 257;      Volney, 22, 177, 267, 398
      the keystone of occult science,      Voltaire, 19, 27, 103, 168, 258, 268,
      277; its baphometie symbol, 299;       271
      the Italian variety, 325; corre¬     Vulgate, 49
      spondences with the lunar days,
                                           Will, 234, 248, 270
      330-334; the nineteenth emblem,
                                           Word, 6, 19, 35, 45, 51, 52, 63, 91,
      347; the most astounding of all
                                            104, 182, 185, 218, 234
      oracles, 362; the Tarot as the
                                           Wronski, 50
      Book of Hermes, 347-388; the
      eleventh symbol, 413; see also       Zachariel, 78, 366
      17        14‘>                       Zadkiel, 243
    Tau/52/llO, 112, 232, 236              Zohar, 20, 48, 144, 220, 231, 241
    Templars, 22, 236, 207                 Zoroaster, 3, 14, 41, 267, 302
    Temurah, 98, 217
    Terrestrial Paradise, 10, 268
    Tetrad, 42, 51, 59, 79, 80, 411, 412   Copyrighted and published ex¬
    Tetragram, 17, 51, 52, 81, 215           clusively in the United States by
    Theraphim, 98, 370                       de Laurence, Scott & Co., 350
    Tiphereth, 59, 92                        Dearborn      St., Chicago,   Ill.
    Translueid, 32, 114, 230                 U. S. A.




            1    »   0




